Albert Cheng (00:00:00):
Growth as the job is to connect users to the value of your product. Growth sometimes gets this reputation that it's just pure metrics hacking.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:08):
You've worked at three of the most successful consumer subscription products in the world. What do you think is the biggest missing piece that people don't get about building a successful consumer subscription product?

Albert Cheng (00:00:18):
User retention is gold for consumer subscription companies. If you don't retain your users, then a lot of the onus is on getting them to pay on day one.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:26):
Noam Levinsky, he said that I need to ask you about the biggest monetization win that you found at Grammarly.

Albert Cheng (00:00:31):
The lived product experience for most of the free users was that Grammarly was just a product to fix your spelling and grammar because those were the free suggestions. What if we actually sampled a number of different paid suggestions and interspersed them to free users across their writing? All of a sudden, people were seeing Grammarly as a much more powerful tool than they were before.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:50):
What's the most counterintuitive lesson you've learned about building teams?

Albert Cheng (00:00:54):
I saw some of the highest performers just being people that had very high agency, had that clock speed, had that energy, but they didn't necessarily need to have deep experience on that matter. Sometimes experience could be a crutch, especially in this world where the grounds are shifting so fast with AI. A lot of your learned habits actually need to be intentionally discarded.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:13):
Today my guest is Albert Cheng. Albert is known as one of the top consumer growth minds in the world. He led growth and monetization at three of the most successful and beloved consumer products in the world, Duolingo, Grammarly, and now Chess.com. Earlier in his career at YouTube, he worked on streaming and gaming features used by over 20 million people.

(00:01:32):
His unique approach to growth blends marketing, data, strategy, and product management, and in our conversation, we cover a lot of ground, including his explore and exploit framework to find growth opportunities. His biggest and most interesting growth wins at Duolingo, Grammarly and Chess.com, how he uses AI to accelerate his growth work, what he's come to realize about the power of brand and community in your growth work, his top experimentation, best practices, why his goal at every company is to run 1,000 experiments a year and so much more.

(00:02:02):
A huge thank you to Erik Allebest, Noam Levinsky, and Jorge Mazal for suggesting topics for this conversation. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube, it helps tremendously. Also, if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get 15 incredible products for free for an entire year, including Lovable, Replit, Bolt, n8n, Linear, Superhuman, Descript, Wispr Flow, Gamma, Perplexity, Warp, Granola, Magic Patterns, Raycast, ChatPRD and Mobbin.

(00:02:33):
Head on over to lennysnewsletter.com and click Product Pass. With that, I bring you Albert Chain, my podcast guest tonight love talking about craft and taste and agency and product market fit. You know what we don't love talking about? SOC 2. That's where Vanta comes in. Vanta helps companies of all sizes get complying fast and stay that way with industry-leading AI automation and continuous monitoring. Whether you're a startup, your first SOC 2 or ISO 27001 or an enterprise managing vendor risk, Vanta's trust management platform makes it quicker, easier, and more scalable.

(00:03:08):
Vanta also helps you complete security questionnaires up to five times faster so that you could win bigger deals sooner. The result, according to a recent IDC study, Vanta customers slashed over $500,000 a year and are three times more productive. Establishing trust isn't optional. Vanta makes it automatic. Get $1,000 off at Vanta.com/lenny. This episode is brought to you by Jira Product Discovery. The hardest part of building products isn't actually building products, it's everything else.

(00:03:41):
It's proving that the work matters, managing stakeholders trying to plan ahead. Most teams spend more time reacting than learning, chasing updates, justifying roadmaps, and constantly unblocking work to keep things moving. Jira Product Discovery puts you back in control. With Jira Product Discovery, you can capture insights and prioritize high impact ideas.

(00:04:01):
It's flexible so it adapts to the way your team works and helps you build a roadmap that drives alignment, not questions. And because it's built on Jira, you can track ideas from strategy to delivery all in one place, less chasing, more time to think, learn and build the right thing. Get Jira Product Discovery for free at Atlassian.com/lenny, that's Atlassian.com/lenny. Albert, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Albert Cheng (00:04:33):
Thanks for having me, Lenny. Excited to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:35):
I'm even more excited to have you here. So as I do for every podcast conversation, I reached out to a bunch of people that you've worked with that know you well to find out what to ask you about and what topics to spend time on. Jorge Mazal, who is famous in my world for writing, what was for the longest time, the most popular newsletter post on my newsletter, it's actually people have usurped it now, but it was stuck there for a long time. So here's what he wrote. "It is a mystery to me how Albert is able to do what he does. I am actually eager to listen to this episode and learn from him."

Albert Cheng (00:05:10):
That is super nice. Thank you, Jorge. I've learned so much from him. I'm the type of weird person that likes to wake up before their kids and pull up a bunch of browser tabs and look at experiments. So it was perfect that Jorge brought me into the growth world at Duolingo, learned a ton of best practices, and he's just a great guy. Thanks, Jorge.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:27):
We're already getting into these tactics. I love it. Let me just give a little framing on what I want to do with this conversation. What I want to try to do is to help people learn tools and mental models for finding growth opportunities for their own products and essentially learn the growth mentality that you bring into the companies and products that you work on.

(00:05:48):
What I want to start with is to give us a little insight into how you became what you became. There's an interesting pattern I found across a bunch of recent guests, which is many people were very good at piano when they were younger and were very serious piano players. For example, Head of ChatGPT, Nick Turley was almost going to become professional jazz pianist. You were very serious as a piano player earlier in your career. How did you go from pianist to one of the top growth minds in the world briefly?

Albert Cheng (00:06:18):
Well, that's very flattering, but I appreciate it. Yeah, I grew up playing a lot of piano. My parents were immigrants from Taiwan and I was the oldest kid that they had, and so I definitely felt that strong encouragement, if you will, to learn a bunch of things, take them seriously, study hard, and so I did. And my parents, even though they weren't musically proficient, they had a deep love for classical music.

(00:06:45):
So I was the stereotypical baby that would listen to Mozart, I guess when I was sleeping type of thing. And I still vividly remember we had this upright Yamaha piano, and at the very top of the piano we had this countdown clock from 90 minutes. Literally every single day of my childhood, just practice really, really consistently.

(00:07:04):
At first, I really was irritated by that thing, but as I grew older, I started to appreciate music quite a bit more. But anyway, I think what really accelerated my interest and abilities in piano was I feel like I hit the lottery. I had perfect pitch, and so I was able to quickly understand whether I was playing the right stuff or the wrong stuff and just pick up music pretty rapidly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:29):
What does perfect pitch even mean? Does that mean which note is playing?

Albert Cheng (00:07:29):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:29):
Okay.

Albert Cheng (00:07:34):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:34):
Wow.

Albert Cheng (00:07:35):
So I could listen to a song and then just a very, very clear understanding of which note I'm supposed to start with and if I'm playing something wrong. So it's very helpful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:35):
Unfair.

Albert Cheng (00:07:44):
It's unfair. Definitely. So anyway, yeah, I got quite good as a teenager in high school and even considered studying at a music conservatory. My intrinsic motivation for music wasn't necessarily as strong at that point, and so I decided to go to engineering school instead, but that would've been an incredibly different career. And to your original point around the relationship between music and growth, I didn't really reflect on this until recently.

(00:08:12):
I have a four-year-old and I'm starting to teach him how to bang on the keys a little bit, but a couple things stand out. One is that I think music and growth, they both rely on this just consistent repetition. You're constantly making mistakes. You have this super tight feedback loop. You have to get really resilient to just making mistakes all the time. And you know that the way of learning is through those mistakes. So that's a thing that I learned very early, and the second thing that occurred to me is that they both have this structural underpinning to them.

(00:08:45):
With growth, you have a growth model, you have metrics, you have experiments, you have channels, things like that. But you also need on a day-to-day basis to have creativity, you got to come up with interesting solutions or hypotheses to test. And the same is true on the music side. You have music theory of scales and stuff, but to create beautiful music, you need that passion, that emotion, that flow. So I think that's the beautiful combination between the two.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:09):
Fun fact, my wife bought me piano/singing lessons for Father's Day recently, and I've gotten really into this stuff. So I'm learning how to play very basic piano now and learning to identify notes and hit notes with my voice.

Albert Cheng (00:09:24):
Nice.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:25):
What a weird new thing.

Albert Cheng (00:09:25):
Could be your next act.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:26):
It could be. I could go the reverse, I could become a professional piano player. Oh man. No, it's so fun, so hard though. I'm just like, my fingers are like, how do you do four freaking keys at once? I'm just like "What is going on here?" Okay, so let's get into the meat of it. I want to talk about growth.

(00:09:42):
There's a very specific framework that as we were chatting that I think would be really helpful for people to hear and learn from you. You call it explore and exploit. I think there's a bunch of different ways to think about this. Talk about this framework and how that informs the way you think about growth.

Albert Cheng (00:09:56):
Yeah, I initially came up or heard with, heard about explore and exploit through my engineering partner at Grammarly, Nermal, and I think he actually had taken some reforged classes. So maybe the original inventor of it might be Brian Balfour, who I know has been on your pod. But anyway, it's a great concept.

(00:10:13):
The gist of it is that when you're in exploratory mode, think of it as finding the right mountain to climb. And then when you're in exploitation mode, it's like focusing your resources on climbing that mountain effectively. And certain companies, I think the warning is to basically spend too much of your time on one end of the spectrum. If you do too much exploration, you can have your team feel a little bit too scattershot, just trying a hundred different random ideas.

(00:10:40):
What's the through line? What's the strategy? How do you pattern match successes across them? And if you do too much in exploitation, which is often the MO of growth teams, it can lead to this saturation and stagnation where you're just locally maximizing a thing. And even though this principle of explore and exploit, it's typically thought of as a macro thing. I like to work with my teams more on the insight level. So I'll give you a concrete example.

(00:11:07):
So I work at chess.com and one of our priorities is to encourage chess players to improve, to learn and improve. So one of the PMs that we have, Dylan, he works on all the learning features. The most used learning feature in our product is called game review. So you play a game of chess, after the game is over, we have this virtual coach that teaches you about your worst moves, best moves, et cetera. And his job is to improve user engagement and retention.

(00:11:34):
And so he's in this exploratory phase trying to figure out how do I drive more of that type of activity? And what he observes is that 80% of people that review their games actually do so after a win. And that's really counterintuitive to when we initially built the feature. We thought that people would want to use it after losses or to see their mistakes such they could work on their mistakes. That turned out not to be the truth when it came to the human psychology and the actual data of it. And so we made some changes in the product experience.

(00:12:04):
When you lose a game now as opposed to surfacing your blunders and your horrible stuff that you did, we flip it on its head and so we show you your brilliant moves, your best moves, and we have coach say something encouraging, "Losing, just part of learning, keep it up." That type of thing. That change alone was pretty dramatic for us.

(00:12:22):
It grew game reviews by 25%, subscriptions by 20%, user retention by a lot as well. So that was fantastic, but the point is that it doesn't just stop there. You have to take that insight, share it broadly across the company. Now, adjacent product managers like the PM working on puzzles can now think about, "Okay, how do I audit these cold patterns in my product and think about making them more positive?"

(00:12:48):
I can change the success rating, I could tweak some copy, change the color of some buttons, and so you now can take this experiment win and expand it out 10X across your organization and that's the kind of exploitation phase of it. So when done right, you can oscillate between the two until you saturate out of exploitation mode and then you encourage the teams to brainstorm and get more creative again.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:11):
Amazing. Okay, so there's a lot here to follow up on. One is the core piece of advice when you find something that works really well, find ways to build on that learning. One is here's an insight, it can apply to other parts of the product. "Hey teams, here's something we learned unexpected. Maybe this can help you. Also, just keep find more, run more experiments in the same zone." I imagine is a part of that.

Albert Cheng (00:13:34):
Yeah, exactly right. In my experience, the typical win rate, and I hate to use that term for experiments, is often something like 30 to 50%. Usually you're trying a bunch of things, a lot of hypotheses turn out not to be true, consumer products are very unpredictable like that, but when you do find a thing that breaks through the noise, and it could actually be a hugely losing experiment too, those are also super valuable.

(00:13:58):
Surfacing those across the company, the original PM running that experiment doesn't necessarily need to be the person that figures out what you should do for all the other parts of your product experience, but the onus is on them to clearly articulate what their hypothesis is, what they found such that then as a growth leader, I can encourage people to swarm around that and try a bunch of different ideas such that the success rate is up and the impact is up. So it's just oscillating back and forth between the two. That is the magic bullet.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:30):
I think another takeaway here/something that I think about when I hear what you're saying is there's often a lot more wins in an area than people expect that you can continue to find wins and growth in something for a long time.

Albert Cheng (00:14:46):
Exactly right. Yes. At the end of the day, users, I think within a company sometimes you can have this siloed approach where you break apart the product experience in 50 different ways and distribute them across different teams, and you assume that users interact with each of the different features with a different mentality, but oftentimes that's actually not necessarily the case. And so sometimes, you can surface an insight that's more human psychology based that can resonate across the entire product experience. And so I think when you can find that, you can double down.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:19):
People hearing this might feel like, "Okay, yes, find big wins and then find more." Is there something you find that helps you figure out when to explore versus when to exploit when you've exploited too far? Just like any heuristics or I don't know, ways of helping people guide them along this process of exploring and exploiting?

Albert Cheng (00:15:41):
One thing that I try to focus on at a company of our scale of a chess.com, right? We're running roughly 250 experiments a year. So we're not the highest in the industry, but we run a decent volume. And so when that happens, I invest in these experiment explorer tools and we can talk about AI as well as another way to uncover and pick out these nuggets of wisdom, but basically, these explorer tools can allow me to look across the spectrum of experiments that are going on.

(00:16:08):
Try to figure out if there are patterns between the hypotheses and the learnings that are happening. And if I'm starting to see more and more experiments that are not statistically significant, that may be a signal to me to say, "Okay, we might've tried to exploit a little bit too far. There might not be as much juice to squeeze. Hey guys, let's get back to the table and brainstorm and be a little bit more divergent with our thinking."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:34):
Well, let me follow this thread on AI and how you're using AI to help you figure this out. That is very cool. Talk about that.

Albert Cheng (00:16:40):
I think one of the latest things that we've been tinkering around with is this text to SQL capability. It's actually pretty powerful. We have this data request Slack channel where for the longest time, and this is still true today, people will toss in all sorts of just one-off questions. How many subscribers do we have in South Africa? Or how long did somebody play puzzles last month or something?

(00:17:07):
And these ad hoc questions, they often take a lot of human time to just go in and a data analyst needs to prioritize it and find time to go run the query. And yes, you can invest in self-serve tooling to improve at this, but also I found that AI is quite good at doing that first pass answer as well. And so we're working on training some of these Slack bots to essentially be the first party provider of a lot of these answers, which makes the company as a whole lot more data informed, I guess.

(00:17:39):
And I think what's also kind of interesting is that just human nature is that if you have a question that you feel like you might be a bit embarrassed to ask or you don't want to bother someone, you just don't ask the question. And so by the nature of having these tools, you get actually a pretty large explosion of questions being asked. And I think you see this in ChatGPT too, right? It's like just having a thing that you can converse with that you feel comfortable in makes a huge difference.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:03):
Okay, this is extremely cool. So is this something you build basically it's a Slack bot that gives you the SQL query or does it actually do the analysis for you?

Albert Cheng (00:18:12):
No, it does the analysis. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:13):
Whoa, so cool. Okay. Is this something you guys are going to release or is this just like somebody, you guys should just build this at every company?

Albert Cheng (00:18:20):
We should. It's a good idea.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:21):
Okay. Okay. Well, there's an episode where everyone in the comments is like, "Open source this." So we'll see if that happens again. That is very cool. Are there other examples of that kind of stuff that you've done or seen?

Albert Cheng (00:18:32):
An adjacent example is a lot of the product managers, we're tinkering around with all sorts of different prototyping tools right now. It's just like go from an idea to a representative solution. Today, there's a lot of humans involved in taking an idea, writing up a spec, doing a review, doing design, et cetera. I'm sure you've interviewed plenty of people that have talked about this specific problem.

(00:18:52):
And so for us, we've invested a bit in at least carving out the main screens of our product experience, things like our onboarding flow, our home screen, our chessboard as an example, and building essentially AI prototypes of those using tools like a V0 or a Lovable. And when you have those foundational pieces, you can then share them with the rest of the company and they can use that as a starting point and then they can try to put their ideas on top of that and then they become a lot more discussable and hopefully testable relatively soon.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:25):
What's in your AI stack along those lines?

Albert Cheng (00:19:27):
The PMs are mostly using V0. The designers love Figmas, they're using Figma Make. The engineers are using a combination of tools right now. So Cursor, Cloud Code, GitHub, Copilot. Marketing teams use all sorts of tools for translation, subtitles, content adaptations, et cetera. Customers support uses Intercom then. So there's quite a lot of tools that are used across the company.

(00:19:50):
I would say though that something that is annoying to me is that we haven't yet figured out the bridging from the tinkering to the workflow quite as seamlessly as I would like. And so each sub-function, even though the common I guess wisdom now is that AI is going to strip away these functional titles. It is true that based on your experience, you may gravitate to using a type of tool more. And if that tool isn't as interoperable with some of the other tools that you need to pass down the chain to actually ship it into production, at least at our scale.

(00:20:24):
I think for smaller startups, sure, PMs should just go ship it, but for us, we are still doing some handoffs between functions. I expect that to change over time and we are investing in some of design system components and MCPs and stuff to make it a little bit easier. But yeah, it's an investment and it takes time to smooth things out.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:42):
I want to come back to this topic of how things have changed and how you work as a product person, as a growth person across the companies you've been at. But first of all, I want to talk about another example of finding growth wins and monetization wins. Noam Levinsky, who is Chief Product Officer at Grammarly, you worked with him for a while while you were at Grammarly. He said that I need to ask you about the biggest monetization win that you found at Grammarly and how you discovered the opportunity.

Albert Cheng (00:21:10):
I had the pleasure of working with Noam and his product team at Grammarly. Some context first for those that don't use Grammarly. So Grammarly is an AI-powered writing assistant. And so typically, people will use it as a Chrome extension or a downloadable desktop client. And basically what it does is it overlays your writing with a bunch of different-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:28):
I use it. I'm a big fan. I use it-

Albert Cheng (00:21:30):
Correction, so you're a big fan.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:30):
... And it saves my life.

Albert Cheng (00:21:32):
Fantastic. Glad to hear that. Grammarly is a freemium business model, which means that over 90% of our users are on the free service and the rest of it pay for subscriptions essentially, right? And so one of the teams, they work on subscriber conversion, PM there is Kayla, that team is great and their job is to figure out the free to paid subscription path.

(00:21:54):
And so one of the realizations, one, is that we weren't actually tracking the events that well for the types of essentially suggestions that people were getting and how often were users seeing paywalls and stuff like that. That's kind of step number one. We have to put that instrumentation in. Step number two is that, "Hey, we noticed, actually first let me explain some of the logic."

(00:22:18):
So as a free user, you basically get these underlines across your writing and if you accept all of them, then you see the paywall and that encourages you to subscribe for more nuanced features. As a free user, the main things you get are spelling, grammar, they're basically correctness things. And as a paid user you get that, how do you improve your tone to be more empathetic? How do you improve your writing to be more clear?

(00:22:40):
How can you rewrite entire sentences, that type of thing. And so the observed behavior from all that tracking and data was that actually a very small percentage of our free users was deciding to accept all of their suggestions. They were more picking and choosing as they go, and I wonder if your experience is kind of similar too.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:59):
Definitely, yeah. I'm always like, "Wait, stop rewriting everything." Just like this part is wrong. I will fix it. Yeah, I'm very much a pick and choose.

Albert Cheng (00:23:07):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:07):
Correction person.

Albert Cheng (00:23:08):
And then the second thing, which is I think equally if not more interesting is that I was at this company during this generative AI transformation, which is obviously still going on. And quite frankly, both the company brand as well as the lived product experience for most of the free users was that Grammarly was just a product to fix your spelling and grammar because those were the free suggestions we were showing people.

(00:23:34):
And so we decided to flip that on its head entirely and we said, "Okay, what if we actually sampled a number of different paid suggestions and interspersed them to free users across their writing?" Such that they were intermingled and we would provide a limited taste of what the paid offering had to provide. And on the surface, even though it's rational, the concern is that if we give too much of this away, then will people want to subscribe?

(00:23:58):
And we found completely that was not the case all of a sudden, people were seeing Grammarly as a much more powerful tool than they were before and our upgrade rates nearly doubled just through this change. And so I think this is interesting, just modernization learning that especially if you work on a freemium product, try to have your free product be a reflection of everything that your product can offer you. Obviously to an extent there's some costs involved with some of the paid features and things like that, but it generally will pay for itself if you're able to put your best foot forward and go do that. So that really worked well for us there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:36):
I think this is what converted me to being a paid Grammarly subscriber. Wow, what a genius move. So essentially, it's here's a bunch of improvements, but you get three, I think max, and then it's like, "Okay, now you get upgrade."

Albert Cheng (00:24:51):
It's basically a reverse free trial but in real time while you're writing as opposed to a time-based one. So we adopted some patterns that are in the industry, but molded it to Grammarly's specific use case.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:04):
Right. I was going to ask, so it's not like a full trial, it's like a capped trial where you get a certain number of things and then you run out and then they get refreshed. I think once a day or something like that is what I found.

Albert Cheng (00:25:16):
Yeah, you got it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:18):
Yeah. Grammarly is the best/most devious at their upsells. I'm always just like, "God damn it, I'm so close to seeing an improvement, I just have to upgrade." And it's right there, it's right there where my mouse is.

Albert Cheng (00:25:32):
Yeah, well, I'm not proud of being devious, but.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:33):
In really getting me to buy the thing. Good job. What was it? Kayla? Okay, nice job Kayla. It's very effective. I love that. Okay, so in terms of the free trial, I don't know, is there anything there of just, there's always this question of freemium, give things away and then there's pro account, there's like trial versus time. Some features are limited. I don't know, do you have for consumer subscription products like here's the way to go?

Albert Cheng (00:26:00):
Yeah, I think first of all, why do freemium subscription in the first place is a common question that I've joined all these companies that are freemium subscription. What do I like about it I guess? Well one, I think it ties really nicely to mission orientation of a lot of these companies. It's often like you want to spread the product as wide as possible because that's why the founders built the thing, right?

(00:26:22):
You're trying to improve education with Duolingo or Grammarly or Chess.com, these are meant to be widespread products with a really wide value proposition that fits globally. And so obviously, the lowest friction to that is going to be a free product. So that alone is part of it. Another part of it is that a lot of these products primarily grow through word of mouth and especially if you can build network effects in the product, like Duolingo has a bunch of social features or with Grammarly, they have a bit of a B2C2B play as well.

(00:26:54):
So you see Grammarly being used by teams and by companies and whatnot, and even if users are on the free plan, they still provide quite a lot of value in making sure that Grammarly can be purchased by a coworker or by a team member or whatever. So I think these things are usually why I lean toward make sure that the core value proposition that you're providing users is free and is permanently free and then you layer on a sampling or a taste of some of the premium features that are on top of it. That's usually the sweet spot that I've seen.

(00:27:26):
As to the trials, reverse trials type of thing, I think it largely depends. I think if you have especially a B2B feature where you may have some lock-in, reverse trials can be super powerful. You just want to get people in there. You don't need to ask for their credit card because they're using your CRM or they're investing quite a lot of time in building out material and content. And so by the time that window drops, you actually feel, "Oh man, I probably should keep this and start paying." I think for a lot of consumer products it's a little bit harder for that to work. And so I've typically seen more just normal free trials be the norm.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:03):
Let me follow this thread of just consumer subscription products. I feel like this is the category that every indie developer dreams of building a product in because it's easy to build. Cool, I'll build an app, I add a paywall, and then they realize this is a lot harder than I thought. From a perspective of distribution and CAx and growth like that, is that the biggest missing piece that people don't get about building a successful consumer subscription product?

Albert Cheng (00:28:31):
Yeah, user retention is gold for consumer subscription companies. If you don't retain your users, then a lot of the onus is on getting them to pay on day one, that's super hard. Then you're dealing with totally different business models where you're paying for users, you're trying to aggressively upsell them before they hit any habitual usage patterns with your product.

(00:28:53):
A lot of apps naturally do that because that's how they break the mold and get their first users to do it, but I don't know, I've been fortunate to join companies after that initial phase, but especially take Duolingo and Chess.com, these are organic word of mouth driven businesses and in both ways, they grew the market from a much smaller market and as opposed to it being a very competitive space where you're competing and taking market share from others and bidding for higher terms and stuff like that. So I don't know, there's something to that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:26):
So what I'm hearing here is you need to find a way to grow through word of mouth for this to have any chance of success and also retention needs to be very high. Do you have a heuristic of what retention needs to be for you to have a chance building a successful consumer subscription business?

Albert Cheng (00:29:42):
I think consumer companies tend to track essentially two main types of user retention. There's more of the new user, one, D1, D7, et cetera. I think when you have your D one retention somewhere around the 30 or 40% mark, that's quite solid I think for a consumer app. If it's much lower than that, then sometimes I might question the intent of the user or the ability for that, you to I guess acquire just mathematically acquire enough users such that you can grow a big enough daily active user base.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:14):
That's surprisingly low.

Albert Cheng (00:30:16):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:17):
So it feels achievable in theory.

Albert Cheng (00:30:18):
It's achievable. It's achievable in theory, but there are so many options out there in the market and people are feeling a lot of app and product bloat.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:26):
And so just to be clear, you're saying 20 to 30% of people come back the next day?

Albert Cheng (00:30:30):
Yeah, 30 to 40.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:30):
30 to 40.

Albert Cheng (00:30:32):
40%. I think you're an okay place. I think even more importantly, and you mentioned Jorge to kick this off, but he wrote that very, very popular article about the growth model and how current user retention rate was the biggest thing for them. And I think especially if you have a product that has daily frequency, that's actually the retention that matters the most is that of your existing user base that has developed a habitual pattern, how sticky is your product? And it's that retention rate that really compounds and builds that daily habit.

(00:31:04):
So over time, especially when companies mature a little bit, you actually focus most of your energy on the existing user retention mechanics. You find that that's a much, much bigger lever. One exception is that Grammarly was a different type of product and that you install it and you don't proactively open it every day. So that was interesting to me because I assumed that you should always just focus on existing user retention, but for a product like Grammarly, it's actually the activation installation aha moment that's really, really critical and will carry the user for a very, very long time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:37):
That makes sense. Yeah, the stats would show someone's a daily active user because they're typing things and that's not an accurate step for Grammarly. The other interesting trend I've noticed across successful consumer subscription products is they always start very scrappy and very cost-efficient and spend efficient because I think it's because it takes them a long time to find something that's working and they're surviving on that margin of retention to growth cost essentially.

Albert Cheng (00:31:37):
Yeah, that's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:06):
Yeah, and the retention piece, that's such a good point. My newsletter is very much along these lines. It's just like how many people are joining every day, how many people are leaving? And it's a difficult treadmill to be on because people, they want to save money, they want to spend on Netflix and things like that. So as amazing as you are, people are always going to leave. So the trick is how do you find more people coming than going?

Albert Cheng (00:32:26):
Yeah, and I think just to take Chess.com example, I think probably 80% of our daily or weekly active users, I'll check the numbers, but something like that would be a current user or an existing user and then a new and a reactivated or resurrected user. Those are actually about similar size for a company of our sale. So even though there's a lot of attention on that new user experience, it's actually pretty interesting that the components of your active user base are actually not heavily weighed in the new user set after you mature to a certain degree.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:00):
Can you explain that a little bit more?

Albert Cheng (00:33:01):
Yes. So after some period of time, you stack up a lot of inactive users in your product and you also stack up sporadic users, people that may not have a daily habit, but they will use it once or twice a week or once or twice a month type of thing. And so eventually that math adds up where you have, let's say hundreds of millions of dormant users that are coming back and it's actually worth spending some time making sure that that resurrected, for lack of a better word, experience inside the product is really excellent and that you find novel ways to try to bring them back.

(00:33:38):
Duolingo as an example, they did a good job of using social notifications. And so if people would use contact sync or something, you might get a push notification that one of your best friends just started using Duolingo and that might encourage you to come back and resurrect into the product. And whether you resurrected in the product, it might be the case that your proficiency of the language you were learning, you were learning French three years ago, but now you for forgot most of it. And so when you open the app again, it encourages you to essentially replace yourself, do another placement test and put you in the right spot. And so some of these types of mechanics for a more mature company can lead to pretty good ROI guess is what I'm trying to say.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:19):
Got it. Essentially, so many people have already tried in the past that to grow, you need to resurrect people that have been there. And so thinking through, it's almost like a user experience for resurrected users.

Albert Cheng (00:34:34):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:35):
Okay. Let's zoom out a little bit. You've worked at three of the most successful consumer subscription products in the world. What is the difference between how these three operate? I think there's many ways to be successful. It feels like these companies are very different. What's the gist of each of these, how they operate?

Albert Cheng (00:34:53):
Well, first of all, there's obviously a lot of similarities, but I'll just focus my answer on the differences. So I think Duolingo, what struck me most working there is they're very particular, they have an approach of product development that is infused across everyone in the company. And they actually wrote a playbook about this. It's called the Green Machine if you look it up. That was one of my most successful tweets ever really.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:15):
I just tweeted something about Duolingo just released their playbook and I screenshotted the owl's butt and screened like a page and it was like 5,000 likes.

Albert Cheng (00:35:26):
That's hilarious.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:26):
Yeah. So yeah, keep going. Sorry.

Albert Cheng (00:35:29):
But yeah, the ethos of the company. They hire a lot of intelligent, energetic people out of college basically, and they give them a lot of amazing experimentation, tooling, and they care a lot about the clock speed of the company. So it's a lot of creativity, a lot of ideation.

(00:35:46):
The product experience of dual legal actually changes multiple times per day for each user, which is pretty shocking. And so I'd never worked in a place like that before, but it really struck me about how consistently the company operated and they had specs and processes for doing each of those steps in their product development cycle and they were really, really tight about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:08):
Okay, so that's still lingo.

Albert Cheng (00:36:09):
Yeah, that's still lingo. Grammarly. This is an interesting company because they started as a paid product oriented at students. Then they expanded into more of a freemium model tailored to everyone gradually focusing more on the professional base. And then as they accumulate a lot more professionals, they realize, "Hey, there's patterns." We're seeing that a bunch of marketing teams or a bunch of sales teams or a bunch of customer support teams or whatever, particular functions within particular companies were really adopting Grammarly at scale.

(00:36:41):
And so they were able to then layer on much more of a managed enterprisey motion. And while I was there, I was focused on the consumer self-serve motion, but they weren't siloed. They were intermixed with each other. And so a big part of my job was not just to grow the self-serve revenue and self-serve active users, but it was also how do you uncover the right teams, the right functions, the right companies for demand gen and sales to go reach out to?

(00:37:12):
So that was a very interesting, it's a product-led sales work, and it's really fascinating thing for me to learn. And then on top of that, with all the transformation going on with generative AI, and even recently with them acquiring CODA and Superhuman and becoming more of a productivity suite, the company is just evolving pretty rapidly. It's a really exciting thing for me to be a part of and to see from the sidelines, but that just made it at its core of a different growth job than Duolingo for sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:40):
Essentially a B2B business versus a very consumer business?

Albert Cheng (00:37:43):
Yeah, and a lot more meaningful strategic decisions as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:44):
Mm-hmm.

Albert Cheng (00:37:47):
And then the core product team also, I'm used to in growth, laying out the entire user journey that a user go through acquisition, activation, engagement, so on and so forth. And typically, growth teams, if they're well-resourced, they can do enough to move each one of these various levers. And it's just a matter of the sequencing of them and what you want to prioritize first. But Grammarly was unique in that the core product experience itself was what drove repeated activity.

(00:38:18):
It's that I previously mentioned that current user retention thing, what most drives that is the frequency and the quality of the suggestions that you get every day. And so it was an interesting learning in that I staffed up a growth team, tried to work on this metric, and then I realized actually I'm just getting in the way. This is really a thing that the core product team most influences. Let me have a conversation with the core product leader and then shift that over to them. So yeah, just a super interesting experience.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:45):
And then Chess.com.

Albert Cheng (00:38:47):
The thing that's most unique about chess.com is that they're super fanatical about chess.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:54):
Makes sense.

Albert Cheng (00:38:55):
Crazy. You shouldn't be surprised. Obviously the name of the company is like this, but they've always hired people from around the world. The company's always been globally remote. They just hire people that love chess. They play all day, they watch the streams. Our Slack is always blowing up with people's chess moves and games and whatnot. I think I want to say this a little bit delicately, like Duolingo, even though the product they're providing is around language learning, I think the original ethos of how to start the company was really around motivation.

(00:39:29):
The hardest thing to its habits, it's how do you build that daily habit? And I actually in many ways see language learning as their first vehicle. And what they have a superpower in is that, again, the motivation, the habits, et cetera. So that's Duolingo, and Grammarly actually similarly. People know them for the spelling and grammar corrections, but what's really unique about them is they're integrated across tons and tons and tons of applications.

(00:39:55):
There's not many products that work like that, that's really unique. And so now if you hear Shishir, their new CEO talk about the AI super highway and all that type of stuff, they can now use that technology to provide a lot more than just grammar writing. And so my point is just that Chess is about chess 100%. It's in the ethos. People are crazy passionate. That just means we're always dogfooding the product. There's just an amazing energy in the company to just use the product all the time, come up with ideas, and I love that environment. I think that's fun for me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:28):
That is so cool. What I love about what you're saying is there's no right or wrong answer. All of these companies are killing it. I think Duolingo is worth like $10 billion, something like that, and keeps growing. I'll look it up in a second. And Grammarly is worth a ton, and then Chess.com is doing super well. So I think that's a really interesting takeaway here is you can succeed in a lot of different ways.

Albert Cheng (00:40:51):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:52):
What's really cool about Duolingo, I was just thinking as you were talking, is yeah, it's just interesting that this very structured, methodical way of building is working so well because you could listen to that and be like, "Oh, I don't want to work." This is rigid way. But the fact that it is killing, it tells us this actually works really well. If you find something that works, lead into it.

Albert Cheng (00:41:11):
Yeah, that's right. Yeah, the structure is rigid, but the ideas are the farthest away from rigid as possible. You have seen their, I don't know, Superbowl commercials, they're memes, gamification, tactics. It's a super fun creative environment. So rigid is the farthest possible word to use, but what I just mean is they're consistent. They have for everything, and their product reviews are 10 or 15 minutes. It's just people go in and out. So it's just this kind of a surreal environment about how rapidly and consistently they work.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:42):
Awesome. They're worth $12 billion, and they were much higher actually, not too long ago. They're coming down a little bit. So speaking of Duolingo, when people think Duolingo, they think of the brand and the owl and the success they had on TikTok and things like that. I'm curious to get your take on as a very growth-oriented person watching that work and your take on growth, experimentation data versus marketing, viral TikTok videos, mascots, things like that.

Albert Cheng (00:42:09):
Yeah, I used to think it was versus, but now I realize that they combine really well. It could be rocket fuel for your growth. Yeah, being a product person. I joined a lot of these companies literally on the home screen on my phone, and I like using them. And I consider myself someone that's not easily swayed by ads or TV commercials telling me what to buy.

(00:42:28):
So I always had an element of skepticism on the marketing side for much of my career. But then, yeah, you join a place like Duolingo and you see how Duo the owl has developed a personality through the push notifications and the product experience, and then seeing the marketing team leverage that personality in their TikTok and in their YouTube and all throughout social media and just feed into those memes. And then we would track back in the product experience, how did you hear about us?

(00:42:58):
And put all those channels in there. And some days, it would be like, holy, it's bringing in 20, 30% of our new users and any given day. So those two things really go hand in hand, and that feeling has only been reinforced by Chess.com over the last five years. The first 15-ish years of this company was really under the radar. 800 million people play chess around the world, but most of that is over the board.

(00:43:25):
Until recently, there wasn't actually that much online, but five years ago, everything changed. You had the pandemic, you had Queen's Gambit, you had a lot of YouTube and Twitch streamers, you had a bunch of kids playing it in school, et cetera. And so it's really the combination of those two things that make it take off. And it's like the growth experimentation is more the slow and steady or fast and steady, I should say, approach where you're just continually iterating, you're making the product experience better, but then every so often, there's a big wave that comes in. You can quadruple your registrations overnight and you'd be a fool not to take advantage of that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:03):
I was actually speaking at Chess.com and playing chess. I was at a coffee shop this weekend. There's a family, a dad and mom and a daughter ordering, and the dad's sitting at the table and he's just on his phone, just opened up Chess.com secretly and just plain while he is waiting. Oh man.

Albert Cheng (00:44:18):
I will not admit or deny that I've done that before.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:22):
But if I can think of anything more wholesome, I can't. That's an amazing thing to be doing while you're just sitting.

Albert Cheng (00:44:32):
My 4-year-old can actually set up the pieces, which is pretty great. So he enjoys the game quite a bit.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:36):
Oh man, this 4-year-old already a pianist, playing chess.

Albert Cheng (00:44:39):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:40):
What a stud. This episode is brought to you by Miro. Every day, new headlines are scaring us about all the ways that AI is coming for our jobs, creating a lot of anxiety and fear, but a recent survey for Miro tells a different story. 76% of people believe that AI can benefit their role, but over 50% of people struggle to know when to use it. Enter Miro's Innovation Workspace, an intelligent platform that brings people and AI together in a shared space to get great work done.

(00:45:08):
Miro has been empowering teams to transform bold ideas into the next big thing for over a decade. Today, they're at the forefront of bringing products to market even faster by unleashing the combined power of AI and human potential. Just of this podcast often share Miro templates. I use it all the time to brainstorm ideas with my team. Teams especially can work with Miro AI to turn to unstructured data, like sticky notes or screenshots into usable diagrams, product briefs, data tables, and prototypes in minutes.

(00:45:37):
You don't have to be an AI master or to toggle yet another tool. The work you're already doing in Miro's canvas is the prompt. Help your teams get great work done with Miro. Check it out at miro.com/lenny, that's M-I-R-O.com/lenny. Okay, you talked about AI a little bit here and there.

(00:45:55):
I want to follow that thread. As a growth person, imagine AI informs chess.com in a lot of ways, so there's kind of two buckets here. How is AI changing the product, say chess and other places you've worked? And then how is AI impacting your work as a growth person? So pick one or both buckets and share there.

Albert Cheng (00:46:13):
Yeah, I'll tackle them in sequence. I'll start with the chess one just because I have maybe a slightly unique take on that one. So chess and AI, they've been intertwined for almost a century. Some of the early computing pioneers, they just figured, "Yeah, chess is an interesting game. We can test machine intelligence and write some algorithms or not." And then fast-forward to 1997, and you had IBM, they had their DeepBlue application who actually beat the world champion back then, which was Garry Kasparov.

(00:46:43):
And that was a huge moment of shock and reckoning of like, "Oh man, is AI going to take over? Humans are, we're going to have jobs and all this stuff." And this is 30 years ago, and thankfully we're all still here and more people are playing chess than ever. And so the game of chess and chess.com specifically have learned how to augment, I guess the human playing experience with the power of chess engines, which are definitely a powerful form of AI. It's not LLMs to be clear, but there's engines like Stockfish these days that are just dramatically better than the top grand masters in the world.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:22):
Is that where we're at? I remember when it beat humans and now it's just dramatically better.

Albert Cheng (00:47:26):
It's dramatically better.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:28):
Wow.

Albert Cheng (00:47:28):
Yeah, I think there's a rating system that compares relative skill level and an average chess player somewhere like a thousand, maybe 1,500 on the high end, a top grandmaster like Magnus Carlsen, it's like a 2,800 and then Stockfish and similar engines are like 3,600.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:45):
Wow.

Albert Cheng (00:47:45):
And so to put that in comparison, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:48):
At least it's not 10,000 or a million. I don't even know if that's possible.

Albert Cheng (00:47:51):
No, it's not 10,000. But it's similar to if the chess engine was playing without a major piece like a rook or something, they would still be competitive against the best players.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:59):
And this is the Elo score? Is that the term?

Albert Cheng (00:48:00):
Yeah, the Elo score, Elo rating.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:01):
Magnus is what you said about 2,800, and then the Stockfish is would you say 3,600?

Albert Cheng (00:48:04):
Yeah, and really it's because computing power is so amazing and there's so many techniques for how to do deep evaluation on specific chess lines. They can calculate tens of millions per second. So it's not realistic for a human to compete against that. But yet, watching some of these chess engines played has opened up a lot of creativity, new strategies, new lines, new appreciation for the game. And our chess.com approach is that we can bring this technology for every user.

(00:48:36):
Even people that have never moved a piece before. I talked earlier about that game review product, that's exactly what this does. So behind the scenes, we're running chess engines to basically spit out evaluations for every move that you make. And then we translate that and make that approachable to the user using their native language and plain approachable style, and even with audio and things like that as well. And that part of it, the personality, the speech back to the user, that part is LLMs.

(00:49:07):
And so I guess my point is that, again, chess and AI have been intertwined forever, but for us, what's most important is that we keep the customer at the North Star of it. We're not just applying LLMs just because the new hot thing, you've got to apply the right technology for the right feature to provide value to the user. And so we try not to ever lose sight of that and let hype get us too carried away.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:31):
It's just really surprising. I think people would not have expected AI and cannot beat every human alive ever. And chess is at an all-time high. People want to keep playing and are playing more and more than ever played, not unexpected.

Albert Cheng (00:49:46):
Interestingly, LLMs themselves are quite bad at playing chess. They hallucinate moves, they look at patterns. They're very good at pattern recognition, but not so good at going super, super, super deep on a specific chest thing. And if you've even tried to create or look at chessboard images on ChatGPT, a lot of them have the wrong number of squares. They're not set up properly, and so I don't want to be too dismissive.

(00:50:09):
I'm sure it's going to get much stronger at reasoning. And actually, Google recently sponsored a tournament where all the top LLMs played a tournament against each other. So that was pretty fun to watch. They're improving, but chess is specifically a game that having a trained deep, deep computing engine is just going to be much, much, much more powerful than LLMs.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:30):
And not to go down this track too far, but AlphaZero famous for beating the Top Go player. Was that trained specifically for Go? Obviously not in LLM, but that was a Go specific model.

Albert Cheng (00:50:42):
Yeah. My understanding is that the one, that documentary is incredible, by the way. I don't know if you've watched AlphaGo, it's amazing how they took something so technically deep and made it so emotional and human. But I think that's the crux of how we feel, I guess, about AIs and the products that we build, actually. But to your point, my understanding is that the way AlphaZero is primarily trained is that it just plays a bunch of games against itself. And so through the neural network, it just gets smarter every time. And because it can have that repetition times a billion or a trillion, I don't know exactly what number, but it's going to get pretty damn good.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:19):
Okay. Let's go back on track to where we were going. So this was how AI is impacting chess.com. How is AI changing just the work of a growth person?

Albert Cheng (00:51:30):
I like to describe growth as the job is to connect users to the value of your product. And in order to do that, what I like to do is think about that user journey again, and essentially, staff teams that are oriented around each element of that user journey. And those teams have specific metric goals, they have roadmaps, et cetera. And then they go run against them.

(00:51:52):
So that's how it's structured. AI, I think can be applied to speed up some elements of that essentially experiment cycle that you get through. So one example is in product discovery. As opposed to core product, which tends to have longer timeframes, and you might do thorough user research or market research. It's more foundational, more for first principles, et cetera. Growth is a little bit less like that.

(00:52:18):
It's like you're running a lot of experiments and the output of any given experiment is the input to your next idea. And so historically, I don't even mean historically, but just a few months ago, we were operating in a, that's history, I suppose, but there would be a lot of manual writing of these analysis docs. You'd have to read them, you'd have to understand what insight you want to grab from them and then write another spec to translate that idea. That's still happening to some degree, but I think that's a spot where even tools like ChatGPT are super helpful.

(00:52:56):
You can just plug in like an analysis that another person wrote and just have it summarized for you and give you advice on ideas to go try. And so that ideation, that research cycle was much, much faster. I talked a little bit about prototyping also just becoming much, much faster than before. We have not yet gotten to the point where product managers themselves are actually shipping the code into production, but it's dramatically shortened the amount of time it takes to conceive of especially a bolder idea that you might have.

(00:53:27):
And so when I talked earlier about explore and exploit, a lot of the explore was harder to do, but now it's a little bit easier to do. You can take a broader concept and visualize it, and when you can visualize it, send it around the team, get people to click around it, that makes a world of difference. So those are just a couple examples that come to mind.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:47):
Awesome. I want to go back to this phrase right at the beginning of this answer that you shared that I think is really helpful that you see growth as simply your job is to connect users to the value of your product.

Albert Cheng (00:53:58):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:59):
Can you speak more to that? Because I think that's such a nice way clarifying what is growth's role?

Albert Cheng (00:54:03):
Yeah, it resonates deeply with me because I feel like growth sometimes gets this reputation I guess that it's just pure metrics hacking, like we're cold people that just are trying to move a particular metric up and we're going to do whatever it can to throw walls and pay walls and add friction in all these spots. And even though that could theoretically work at a micro level on a specific feature or a specific metric, I think what's most healthy for a company, and I want to work at durable companies is to think about the user holistically.

(00:54:42):
And when you take that framing of connecting users to the value of your product, that value can change for a user over time, and that also lines up really nicely to the journey. What someone that's not even a user yet needs to understand about the value proposition is super different than what a habitual user of three plus years might need. And so the teams working on them should think from that perspective and then from there, then ladder into specific problems to solve hypotheses, et cetera.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:15):
Following that thread a little bit more, people listening to this are imagining, "How do I get better at experimentation? How do I run more experiments? How do we do this better?" What are two or three tips and best practices that you think people need to hear maybe are not totally aware of when they think about getting better at experimentation on our teams?

Albert Cheng (00:55:36):
I think the first thing is just start somewhere. I just read this Atlassian state of product report and it was like 40% of product teams basically don't run experimentation at all. And there may be some good reasons for it. It could be philosophical or maybe you're more B2B oriented or whatever. So I get it, but I think for a lot of, especially if you work on a consumer product that has some degree of scale, some degree of frequency with your product, you can collect enough data.

(00:56:05):
And also I have found I can pattern match all day long. I've worked a lot of companies, right? But I'm wrong all the time. And I think consumer behavior can be very fickle and especially when you work at a company, you become a power user naturally. So sometimes you may forget what the actual user experience is for a brand new user, and so you leave a lot of opportunities on the table if you don't even try to experiment.

(00:56:27):
So I just encourage taking that first step, just run an A/B test, find a third-party tool or something that you can integrate quickly or even just work with your engineers to spin something up. Just get in the practice of crawl then walk then run type of thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:40):
Do you have a favorite tool, by the way? Just to throw out? Is there a go-to tool for you?

Albert Cheng (00:56:44):
We used Statsig at Grammarly and I saw that they recently got acquired, so that was exciting news. Duolingo and Chess.com both have an in-house experimentation approach.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:54):
Sweet.

Albert Cheng (00:56:55):
Pros and cons to either. Obviously Duolingo is an experimentation machine, and so it's been a huge accelerant to have our own thing specifically tailored to be excellent at that. But no, I typically don't encourage companies to build experimentation in-house from day one. At a certain scale it can make sense. And some of these companies, they were started 15 years ago when these tools weren't out. So it was just something they had to do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:22):
Something that you mentioned to me at Chess.com, your goal is to run a thousand experiments a year. You said you were at 250. Talk about just that as a North Star.

Albert Cheng (00:57:32):
Yeah, so part of having team members that are fanatical about Chess is that the company can get pretty far just building for themselves, building for the community, and not actually being very experimentation and data oriented. The problem with that is that you can have relatively lumpy growth. And so part of the excitement of me joining the company was to help smooth that out and bring in that experimentation mindset.

(00:57:56):
So prior to 2023, the company practically didn't experiment at all. Last year they did about 50, this year they're on pace for about 250. And then next year we have that ambitious target of a thousand. Did I make it up? Yes, absolutely, I made it up, but it's still a target and a thing for the teams to think about and a thousand experiments by itself. If you just did that but you didn't learn, you didn't make an impact, that's kind of a waste of time.

(00:58:25):
The whole point of setting a goal is that you can have conversations about what would need to be true to actually hit that goal, and so that leads to insights. Actually we need not just product management or engineering to be running these experiments. We can experiment with lifecycle marketing, changing copy of push notifications and emails. We can experiment with app store screenshots and keywords and stuff like that. We have all sorts of content marketing teams, et cetera. We could have engineering enable no code for specific screens.

(00:58:58):
Think about our home screen or our pricing screen where we might want to do a lot of just tests that are configurable without engineering support. We might want to just track our progress and look at it from time to time and make sure that we have the right observability around this. So anyway, that's the stuff that really matters as opposed to the hitting that goal itself. So don't tell the team, but I don't actually care that much if we actually hit a thousand, but I think if we get pretty close and we accomplish some of these things, we'll be in really good shape.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:27):
Okay, we'll make sure none of them watch this. I think chess.com is in, this is just such a cool example of a culture shifting dramatically from zero experiments to sounds like two years later, a thousand, which is three a day. There's many teams running experiments in parallel, but that's a lot. What has helped you most shift that culture? Is it just the CEO being like, "This is the way we're going to go." What have you learned about helping shift to culture from No, we're not doing experiments to a thousand experiments a year.

Albert Cheng (00:59:58):
Yeah, definitely a lot of credit to the CEO and co-founders like Erik and Danny, they're amazing. It's not their intuitive way of thinking about growing companies, but their mental flexibility and encouragement to evolve and add this as a tool for the company has been awesome, and they've been on the front lines preaching product-led growth and experimentation just as much as I have.

(01:00:20):
So I'm glad that you brought that up because I think that is critically important for me, joining a company to not be at odds with the co-founders and the existing approach of the company. I think that's absolutely, absolutely critical. I think I started this podcast with the example of the game review and the positivity and how that was shared. I think those types of things are really what motivate people. They need to see this working in practice.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:45):
Wins.

Albert Cheng (01:00:46):
Yeah, you need wins, you got to celebrate them. People feel good about the learning. It's applied across the board. Who's not going to be energized by that, I think, right? So you can't just set goals in a vacuum and create it from top, right? People have to see it working and when it works, the metrics move and you learn faster and you ship faster, and that's a great environment to be part of.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:07):
What was the first experiment you guys ran? Do you remember?

Albert Cheng (01:01:10):
I don't know, before my time actually.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:13):
Okay. Okay. Got it. So they're already going down this track before they brought you in?

Albert Cheng (01:01:17):
They had run some.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:19):
Okay, sweet. Are there any other key lessons that you think people need to know to be successful running experiments at scale?

Albert Cheng (01:01:30):
The system matters just as much as any given experiment, probably even more, right? I think starting with a growth model, so you have an understanding of how your company grows in the first place and which channels you're going to leverage is critical. You need to make sure that you are instrumenting your product in and out. Otherwise, you're going to run experiments and have wonky results.

(01:01:53):
I won't name which company, but I was part of a company that had an in-house experimentation tool. It's about three months into the company, we're running some experiments and we realized that user retention was actually configured backwards. So all positive results were negative results.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:09):
Geez.

Albert Cheng (01:02:10):
So that was kind of embarrassing and that will never happen again.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:13):
You just go through and undo all those experiments and just drive up retention.

Albert Cheng (01:02:17):
It's kind of weird. We're seeing people use the features a lot more. Why is user retention going negative? So I have plenty of horror stories around that type of stuff, but yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:25):
Oh my God. On the flip side of horror stories, you've shared a bunch of cool examples of experiment wins. Is there another that comes to mind of one you're really proud of or that was really trajectory changing either at Duolingo or Grammarly or Chess?

Albert Cheng (01:02:38):
So I already shared one of Chess.com and one of Grammarly. I could talk a bit about Duolingo as well. Duolingo and you had Jackson on the podcast, right? Where you talked about the streaks.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:38):
Yes, talked about the streaks.

Albert Cheng (01:02:52):
So I also don't want to steal his thunder because I was going to think about that, but the amount of learning through commitment and putting streaks on a calendar and just getting people started as opposed to achieving some large milestone, that was huge. I think we did something interesting. We spun up a virality team and virality is this really amorphous thing to me.

(01:03:16):
I think it's really hard to generate virality in your product, but Duolingo is a product that is shared quite a bit. And so we invested actually in some time to essentially add screenshot tracking for a brief period of time in the app just so we could find out the hotspots of where users were doing screenshots. And you see this in other apps too, it's not necessarily some horrible thing, but we did this for some period of time and we were able to basically articulate and say, "Okay, streak milestones is the obvious one."

(01:03:46):
Really funny challenges that you get in the Duolingo experience is also super highly shared. Advancing in the top three of a leaderboard is another thing. Anyway, so you can find these different moments where that's the case. And then we staffed those moments with illustrators and animators and created these really delightful experiences around them, and that worked amazingly well.

(01:04:06):
So as opposed to going against I guess human intuition and trying to get them to share stuff that they otherwise wouldn't on the margins want to share, lean into it more, actually grab the moments where users are already organically screenshotting and make those much, much, much better. And you can 5X or 10X and drive a lot of growth that way too. So that's not so much an experiment, it's more a core product thing, but it just resonated with me that that was interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:33):
Well, it connects to your explore and exploit methodology. Just find or explore where things are happening and then try to exploit in a nice positive way.

Albert Cheng (01:04:41):
You got it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:42):
Speaking of that, you mentioned this with Duolingo is just very good at habit formation and motivation behavior. It feels like chess is good at this too. You've worked at both these companies. What have you learned about how to motivate people? How to create habits?

Albert Cheng (01:04:57):
Again, Duolingo would not have started without this insight from day one. They aim to focus on motivation and build a lot of these tactics. Jorge actually had this model of gamification patterns having essentially three pillars to it. You have the core loop, you have the metagame, and then you have the profile. And so we actually thought about it that way too, where your core loop is your lesson that you go through. You do a lesson, you get some rewards, you extend your streak, and then the next day you get a push notification.

(01:05:29):
It's the core loop of the product and making that really tight is super important because people need a habit to stick to. Then you need a metagame, which for Duolingo is the path, but it's also the leaderboard achievements. It's long-term things that you're going to strive to such that you have long-term, I guess, motivation to continue doing the thing. And then the profile is also critical because you build up a profile over time.

(01:05:51):
It's a reflection of your investment inside the product experience. And so when you nail those three things, you can end up with a long-term learning journey that can be quite successful. And then to flip over to the Chess.com side, what we see is that over 75% of our new users, they classify themselves as like, "I'm completely new to chess." Or, "I'm a beginner." And unfortunately, if you're new to chess and you're a beginner, you're not going to have that fun of a time playing live games, and we see this in the data. It's like less than a third of those users actually win their first game. And when you lose a game, user retention is 10% worse than when you win a game.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:29):
That's not so bad, but at scale, that's bad.

Albert Cheng (01:06:31):
Yeah, and it could be worse. That's true. And so typically what a lot of mobile games will do is they'll just create a super simplified version of the game. It's harder for us to do at chess, and so without changing the rules of that, I think that's, I don't know, it's just very eye-opening to me when you're trying to learn something, whether that be language learning or chess or whatever, usually those first steps are fraught with a lot of self-doubt and reinforcement that you're not good at the thing. And so it pays to be very intentional to craft experiences that guide the user around that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:09):
Well, I can't help but ask, is there anything that helped that along?

Albert Cheng (01:07:12):
Yeah, so something we're experimenting right now is just like purely if you say that you're new to chess, we're going to craft a more delightful learn how to play experience as opposed to dropping into a live game, that's an example. Another is hiding your ratings for the first five times such that you're not seeing your rating plummet. So there's a lot of tips and tricks you can do.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:29):
I'm just imagining a little guide that's like, "Here's how you win."

Albert Cheng (01:07:32):
Yeah, or play against a coach, play against a friend, play against a bot. There's a bunch of different avenues you could take.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:38):
Well, what I'd love is play against someone real and here's where you should move. Just like, "Hey, here's we're going to help you win."

Albert Cheng (01:07:45):
Like a hint in real-time?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:46):
Yeah, yeah, yeah.

Albert Cheng (01:07:47):
I don't want to be playing with you then.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:50):
Okay. Let me ask you a couple more questions. One is just zooming out a little bit, what's the most counterintuitive lesson you've learned about building products or building teams across the many companies you've worked at?

Albert Cheng (01:08:03):
Yeah, I've talked a lot about products. So maybe I'll flip to the team side for a bit. I think the standard way to hire and build a team is you fill out a JD, it's got a whole bunch of different characteristics that you're looking for. You typically will find a short list of companies that are kind of similar to yours, and then you try to hire for that, right? I think that's the typical default path that a lot of companies take.

(01:08:27):
And I was really struck by my experience working at some smaller startups or take Duolingo as an example, where over and over and over, I saw some of the highest performers just being people that had very high agency, had that clock speed, had that energy. Yes, they cared about the mission, but they didn't necessarily need to have deep experience on that matter. And in fact, sometimes that experience could be a crutch in certain ways, especially in this world where the grounds are shifting so fast with AI, a lot of your learned habits actually need to be intentionally discarded.

(01:09:01):
You need to have a beginner's mind on this type of stuff. So I think this is more true than ever, looking for people that respond and move quickly and think just faster and move faster. I think the fastest speed of learning, those types of companies are the ones that I want to bet on. I think those will end up surviving and thriving.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:25):
So just to double click on this idea of high agency is very trending these days of just higher high agency people. To unpack that a little bit, you mentioned a few of these traits, so let's just help people see what you see. So one is clock speed, just they think fast, they move fast, they learn fast. What else? What else do you look for that helps you see that there are high agency people?

Albert Cheng (01:09:49):
Yeah, a lot of it actually happens outside of the interview process interestingly. So a lot of it is the types of questions they asked, "Have they actually tried your product and gone deep into it?" A lot of it is, it's the references, it's the communication that they have to even set up your interview, it's the energy they bring into the conversation.

(01:10:09):
You can actually pick up a lot of soft signals on some of these traits over time. You've got to pick up on some of these patterns. I don't know that I'm perfect at it, but I've learned to balance those things quite a bit more than I did in the past when I would just purely read from my questions and my rubric and not care about anything else.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:27):
Yeah, there's like a vibes component to it. This is also support for the work trial way of interviewing versus just a talk interview where you have them actually work with you for a week or whatever.

Albert Cheng (01:10:36):
That's a great point.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:38):
Okay. One other question I wanted to ask you. You've worked at a bunch of different sizes of companies from startup to Grammarly, I don't know, you call it a big company, bigger company. Duolingo, I don't know how big is Duolingo?

Albert Cheng (01:10:50):
There are about a thousand people.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:50):
Okay, cool.

Albert Cheng (01:10:53):
But I worked at Google too to start my career.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:55):
Oh, right, okay. What have you learned about just the size of company that makes you happy? What have you learned about just helping other people that you talk to decide what size of company is good for them?

Albert Cheng (01:11:05):
I definitely believe that everyone has a company stage that they shine best at. I've personally gone through this journey of big tech to tiny, tiny, tiny startup, then landed in the middle, which I consider my own goal lock zone. I talked earlier about what actually gives me personally a lot of energy is seeing across a company's efforts, but also the company being small enough that I can get into the details, I can work with the specific teams.

(01:11:33):
I can read experiment results, I can look at the pixels. And so I find that the balance of those two things tends to fit best with medium-sized companies, but that's me, right? I think at big companies like a Google, you're dealing with immense scale, which is interesting by itself. You learn a lot of best practices from your peers. They have all the tools and functions that you would possibly want to go learn from, but they can tend to move slower and it's harder to ship things and get them out the door, which eventually drove me nuts a little bit.

(01:12:06):
On the flip end of the spectrum, these tiny startups, they move incredibly fast, but I grew all my gray hair from those tiny startups because no one knows about your company, and so you're recruiting people one by one. You're trying to get users one by one. So yeah, you can learn fast and ship a lot of things, but if you're trying to make a big impact on the world, it can be actually pretty grueling to do so at really, really, really small startups.

(01:12:29):
Now, some of them do hyperscale and make it out, and obviously, I am not one to trash that because the path that I tried for quite a while. But for me, I really like the zone where I can contribute at scale, but also execute at a pace that's more on the daily and weekly scale as opposed to monthly and quarterly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:50):
And when you say medium, what size of company is that roughly?

Albert Cheng (01:12:53):
Yeah, so these companies that we've talked about in the podcast are about 500 to a thousand people. Typically, these companies who have been around let's say 10 to 20 years. They're durable, ideally profitable, have a good leadership team, but there's still a lot of dimensions to go figure out. A lot of them are in key inflection points, so they're certainly not stagnant. You need to find a place that's dynamic too.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:17):
Interesting, 10 to 20 years old, I don't know if that's a, not many people would feel like that's where I want to be. I love that you found a number of companies like that that you enjoyed working at. The last question, and this is going to be taking us to a recurring segment on the podcast that I call Failed Corner.

(01:13:35):
People hear all these stories of all these experiments and all these companies that worked at, they're all killing it up into the right. In reality, you've touched on this, a lot of things don't work out great. So can you share a story when something went wrong, when you failed and what that taught you?

Albert Cheng (01:13:50):
First of all, in the growth world, you're failing all the time. So I'm not going to pick a specific growth story because those don't actually hit my ego too much. But earlier in my career I did a lot of core product work. I worked for this startup called Chariot. I don't know if you ever lived in San Francisco, but.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:05):
Yes, it was like the bus super thing.

Albert Cheng (01:14:06):
The blue commuter shuttles, like 15-person shuttles, they would essentially drive from various neighborhoods into downtown San Francisco. It's a commuting use case across between the public bus system and an Uber and Lyft. So I was there for some time. I led product there and the core service was really loved by its users. It was reliable and fast and affordable enough, but we got pretty interested in this idea that maybe we can improve utilization, maybe we can make the service a little bit more innovative if we offer dynamic routes more similar to Uber and Lyft.

(01:14:46):
How could the drivers are driving these fixed routes? But if they have spare time, they can go out of their way, go pick up somebody at their house or something and keep going. So we tried this, we called the chair direct, really interesting attempt, but I learned a lot of lessons there because ultimately it didn't work out. One lesson is like this was kind of a solution searching for a problem. You never just purely want to chase A, it wouldn't it be nice if we did this as opposed to this is our user and this is the problem that we're solving, this is why it's going to delight them, et cetera, that's one.

(01:15:20):
Second is you got to consider, especially in these more marketplace type businesses, there's more than just one end user and we focus so much of our attention on the writer app without realizing, oh yeah, the drivers are carrying a lot of the brunt of this experience and our operations team is as well. And so when the drivers are confused or disgruntled, that can lead to a challenging overall experience for the product. So that's definitely another one.

(01:15:50):
And the third one is we did a lot of actually PR, prior to the service going out just to get the word out. And PR has its time in place, but I think doing it before you have validation that customers definitely want, the thing is quite risky and it can lead to a lot of sun cost once you get it out because you need to see it through, you want to see it succeed. So yeah, this is a decade ago, honestly, I had a great time at that company, but I still remember that vividly because it contained three or more key lessons that carried forward as I have built many products since then.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:28):
Yeah, it feels like you went to the complete other end run experiments of everything before you tell anyone about it.

Albert Cheng (01:16:33):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:34):
Yeah, I remember the chariot bus showing up at the Airbnb office and people getting, I'm like, "What the hell is this?"

Albert Cheng (01:16:39):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:40):
Very cool. I didn't know you worked there. Albert, we've covered so much ground everything I was hoping we'd cover. Is there anything else that you wanted to cover, anything else you want to leave listeners with before we get to a very exciting lightning round?

Albert Cheng (01:16:56):
No, this is great. I hope it was useful for your listeners. I will say over the last few days, as I was prepping for this, I was honestly a little bit anxious about do I have enough deep independent frameworks that I need to come up with? But just being authentic to my actual experience at these companies, a lot of my lessons learned have been off of the backs of other people that have tried similar things and have succeeded or failed.

(01:17:21):
And I think what's important is that you have that your mental sponge. You can try a bunch of different things, you can absorb them and then put them in practice right away, discard the things that don't work and evolve them for yourself and for the company's needs. And so I don't know, I think that was just a realization that I had as I was thinking through this podcast, and I think that's partly why I haven't done too much public speaking.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:45):
I know exactly what you mean. When I left Airbnb, I was just like, and that was the first time I ever took a break in my career of 30 years of just working straight in school. I was just like, what have I actually learned? I've never just sat down and thought about, here's the thing I've learned. And that led me to writing this medium post that did really well what I learned at Airbnb, and then that basically led to what I do now. So there's a lot of power and I love that this is the excuse to make you think through what have I learned concretely that I can share.

Albert Cheng (01:18:17):
That's right. Thank you for that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:18):
Yeah, and so at the beginning of this podcast, before I started recording, I always like to ask guests, what is your goal? What do you want to get out of this conversation? And usually, it's like we're hiring. We want to make sure people know about our company or we want to get the users. And your answer is just, I just want to give back things I've learned, which I love.

Albert Cheng (01:18:36):
That's it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:37):
And you've done that. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got five questions for you. Are you ready?

Albert Cheng (01:18:44):
I'm ready.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:45):
What are two or three books that you find yourself recommending most to other people?

Albert Cheng (01:18:51):
Yeah, so the truth of it is I have a, not just the four-year-old, but I also have a one-year-old. So most of the books that I'm reading these days are kids' books, trying to make them laugh in all.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:00):
Wait, any favorite kids books? Because I have three or two year olds already.

Albert Cheng (01:19:03):
Well, you said that you started singing. There's a book called Snuggle Puppy that has a song in it that just makes my daughter crack up.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:11):
Oh my God.

Albert Cheng (01:19:11):
That is heartwarming for me. But no, a book that I recommended recently at work is Ogilvy on Advertising. Do you know this book?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:21):
I don't know the book. I've seen these tenants of marketing or whatever.

Albert Cheng (01:19:23):
Yeah, it's interesting. So it's 40 years old, but it's just packed with a bunch of different practical examples about copy and creative that work in, these are old school ads, but he took a very experimentation-oriented approach to just try a lot of things.

(01:19:38):
I think in the book, it makes a good reminder that what ultimately matters is to compel your users to some action for him as buying a product, right? It's not about just creating clever ads or sexy creatives, it's to do things that compel that action. I think that's very true for many of our product and life cycle teams. And so I shared that around as an interesting recommendation.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:02):
Is there a movie or TV show? Sorry, were you going to share another book?

Albert Cheng (01:20:08):
Yeah, actually.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:10):
Oh yes, please.

Albert Cheng (01:20:11):
Our co-founder at Chess.com, his name's Danny Rensch, and he is quite well known in the chess circles. He's releasing a memoir called Dark Squares, and it is super fascinating. He grew up in an abusive cult and was a chess prodigy. And so it is just this unbelievable story and I'm about halfway through it, it's a reminder that sometimes the people that you work with, you don't realize how deep their pasts go, but this is something else, and I think it should be out by the time this podcast releases.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:45):
And it's called Dark Squares?

Albert Cheng (01:20:46):
Dark Squares.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:47):
Which is a reference to the chess board and also I imagine the difficult past.

Albert Cheng (01:20:52):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:53):
Wow. How cool. Okay. Are there movie or TV shows you really enjoyed that you've recently watched?

Albert Cheng (01:21:00):
These days it's football season, so I'm consumed by all the hot takes of my favorite teams that I love and the teams I love to hate as well, so.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:11):
Who's your team?

Albert Cheng (01:21:13):
The 49ers. I have season tickets and I go all the time. We had a rough season last year, so hoping to turn around.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:20):
Okay, very cool. Okay. Is there a product you've recently discovered that you really love?

Albert Cheng (01:21:25):
Yeah, so last 20 years of my life roughly, I've moved around a lot, but I've always been within walking distance of a coffee shop. It's just like a ritual that I go and get coffee and it starts my day, right? Two years ago, I bought a house and for the first time ever in my life I'm like not buy a coffee shop, and I was so depressed about this for a little while.

(01:21:45):
So my favorite product is the bread bowl barista, and it just starts my day off. I like making horrible latte art with it, and I think it's just a reminder. I don't know. The products that most impact me, I guess are the ones that I use all the time, and it's a daily habit-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:05):
And have the most caffeine.

Albert Cheng (01:22:06):
Then the most caffeine. You got it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:08):
Amazing. Do you have a favorite life motto that you find yourself using in work or in life?

Albert Cheng (01:22:14):
As I was thinking about my piano stories, I also remember that my mom used to have a quote. She just said, "Nothing is more important than your reputation." And she used to say this, and I think the charitable understanding of this is that a lot of the small decisions that you make each day, how do you treat people? How do you show up? What's your character, et cetera. They can compound and they open doors for you in many surprising and amazing ways.

(01:22:41):
A lot of these companies that have actually joined have come through relatively light connections. And even just being on this podcast, I think I've seen a number of folks that I've worked with before beyond the show. And so I think doing the right thing, building a good reputation, they can carry you a long way. And the flip side of that is reputations are fragile too, right? So if you do the wrong thing, take a long time to repair that. So I don't know, it just stuck with me my entire life. I thought that was an interesting life motto.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:13):
Last question. You work at Chess.com, how's your chess?

Albert Cheng (01:23:16):
Terrible compared to serious, serious players, but quite compared to the casual ones, yeah. My yellow rating is about 1,800 for a rabbit games.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:25):
It sounds really-

Albert Cheng (01:23:27):
And about 1,500 for blitz. Yeah, but I play many times every day.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:31):
Blitz is like fast chess?

Albert Cheng (01:23:32):
Blitz is like faster chess, three minute games. Rapid is more like a 10-minute game, which is still pretty fast.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:38):
And you say you play multiple times a day? Do they make time? Is this like-

Albert Cheng (01:23:42):
They do.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:44):
Okay. At Patagonia, there's a famous book, the founder wrote called Let My People Go Surfing, and the rule at Patagonia is you can go surfing if the waves are great. Is that how it works at Chess.com?

Albert Cheng (01:23:53):
Absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:54):
Okay.

Albert Cheng (01:23:55):
Chess is always fun. So we play all the time and they even have chess coaches on staff.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:59):
Staff, just like you can book to do?

Albert Cheng (01:24:01):
You can book. So I get bi-weekly lessons and it's helping me improve.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:04):
Wow. Okay. This is going to drive a lot of hiring for you guys. Saved it for the end. Albert, this was awesome. Thank you so much for doing this. Thanks so much for giving back and sharing all these stories. Two final questions, work and folks find you if they want to follow up on some of this stuff, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Albert Cheng (01:24:22):
Yeah, thanks for having me. This was great. You can find me on LinkedIn or Twitter. Not a super active poster, but I read it all the time. If there's something that I said today that resonates with you and you just want to get in touch, trade notes, feel free to reach out.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:36):
And can they play with you on, can they find you on Chess.com to play?

Albert Cheng (01:24:39):
They can.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:40):
Okay. Do you want to share your username or you don't want that?

Albert Cheng (01:24:44):
I am happy to.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:45):
No. Okay.

Albert Cheng (01:24:45):
I just mentioned that I'm a 49ers fan, so my username is Go9ers, so.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:49):
Wow.

Albert Cheng (01:24:50):
I'm sure I'll get a lot of game requests now.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:52):
Here we go. Here we go. 1,800. Okay. Albert, thank you so much for being here.

Albert Cheng (01:24:56):
Yeah, thank you so much.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:58):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Annie Duke (00:00:00):
It's so incredibly necessary in improving decision quality to take what's implicit and make it explicit. It's not that intuition is crap, your intuition is sometimes right. If you don't make it explicit, then you don't get to find out when it's wrong.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:12):
When you look at companies that have read your book, what do you find are the brainwashing tactics that really stick?

Annie Duke (00:00:16):
People generally think the purpose of a meeting is for three things, discover, discuss, decide. The only thing that's ever supposed to happen in a meeting is the discussion part.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:25):
Something that comes up in product a lot is this idea of pre-mortems.

Annie Duke (00:00:28):
So a pre-mortem, it's great only if you set up kill criteria. Commit to actions that you're going to take if you see those signals.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:35):
You have a very interesting framework for how to think about decision quality when the outcome is very long-term.

Annie Duke (00:00:40):
There is no such thing as a long feedback loop. And the way you choose to shorten the feedback loop is to say, what are the things that are correlated with the outcome that I eventually desire?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:53):
Today, my guest is Annie Duke. Annie is the author of the bestselling book Thinking in Bets, and also her more recent book Quit: The Power of Knowing When to Walk Away. She's also a special partner at First Round Capital, which we spent some time on and is incredibly fascinating. Prior to this part of her career, she was a professional poker player. She's won over $4 million in tournaments, including winning a World Series of Poker Bracelet, and she's the only woman who's won the World Series of Poker Tournament of Champions and the National Poker Heads-Up Championship. Currently, she spends her time helping companies make better decisions. In our conversation, we cover the many lessons that she's learned from her friend Daniel Kahneman, who recently passed away. What simple change she's found has the most impact in a company's ability to make better decisions, how to make better quick decisions when the feedback loop is very long, and also why she doesn't actually believe in long feedback loops, how she changed the way that the partners at First Round Capital make decisions, which is incredibly interesting.

(00:01:51):
Plus, why when you're thinking about quitting, that probably means you've already waited too long and you should have quit a while ago. I learned a ton from this conversation and this is definitely going to change the way I think about a lot of things. With that, I bring you Annie Duke after a short word from our sponsors. And if you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. This episode is brought to you by Vanta. When it comes to ensuring your company has top-notch security practices, things get complicated fast.

(00:02:27):
Now you can assess risk, secure the trust of your customers, and automate compliance for SOC 2, ISO 27001, HIPAA and more with a single platform, Vanta. Vanta's market-leading trust management platform helps you continuously monitor compliance alongside reporting and tracking risk. Plus, you can save hours by completing security questionnaires with Vanta AI. Join thousands of global companies that use Vanta to automate evidence collection, unify risk management, and streamline security reviews. Get $1,000 off Vanta when you go to vanta.com/lenny. That's vanta.com/lenny.

(00:03:11):
This episode is brought to you by UserTesting. Get fast feedback from real people throughout the development process so that you can build the right thing the first time. Companies are being asked to do more with less. They need to move more quickly while building experiences that meet changing customer expectations, all while minimizing risk and costly rework. With UserTesting, you have a trusted partner who provides user research teams with the skills, tools, and data to be able to articulate the value of user research to the business so that you can make an impact and build the best experiences with confidence. Get started today at usertesting.com/lenny. Annie, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Annie Duke (00:03:58):
Thank you so much for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:59):
It's my pleasure. I was telling a bunch of people that you were coming on this podcast and every single one of them was so excited that we were doing this, so I'm quite excited that this is happening. I want to start with a question about Daniel Kahneman. I know you two were very close. You did a podcast together. I know you grew to be good friends over the past few years. Sadly, he passed away about a week ago at this point.

Annie Duke (00:04:21):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:21):
I'm curious, what are some lasting lessons that you took away from your time with him? Maybe one or two things that stick with you and you think will stick with you?

Annie Duke (00:04:31):
It's hard for me to describe properly how humble this man was, and it seems so impossible because his influence was so huge and his intellect was so huge and his insight was so change-making in the areas that he worked. But he was so humble, he really wanted to hear what you thought. He said, "I don't know a lot", he would change his mind. It's funny, I got asked in a class that I was teaching about thinking fast and slow and someone was talking about how there's a lot of studies in there that didn't end up replicating.

(00:05:19):
And what I've seen from a lot of other people in the field who really where their work is defined by some line of work that didn't replicate, where they're really arguing against the fact that it doesn't replicate. Just trying to justify or say, "But no", or this and that. This real lack of open-mindedness to the idea that you know what? Maybe it turns out not to be true and that should be okay. But the thing about Danny was when you talked about it, he was the first one to tell you, "I wish priming wasn't in the book. It doesn't replicate." He was just so open-minded to the idea that he knows what he knows now, but he knows that he doesn't know everything.

(00:06:06):
Another thing that people don't know about him outside of academics I think are that he was one of the pioneers in something called an adversarial collaboration. So one of his favorite things, and he in some ways invented it, was find someone who really disagrees with you and then write a paper with them and try to figure out with them what's the study that would resolve the issue. So an example of that was Danny did work on happiness as it relates to wealth. Kahneman and a collaborator, Angus Deaton, they published a result that got a lot of press about the relationship between money and happiness, and the idea was money doesn't buy happiness beyond $75,000. So that got published in 2010. I'm sure if you ran that exact same study, it would be more than $75,000 now because it would adjust for inflation. But it was like the idea being once your basic needs are met and you're not that worried about paying rent and so on and so forth, it's not going to have that big of an effect.

(00:07:09):
But then a decade later, Matthew Killingsworth said, "That's not true that actually money and happiness are correlated through all the income levels. The more money you have, the more happy you tend to be." Okay, so this is a classic example where people will tear each other down sometimes and that guy's wrong and whatever. And instead, it was Kahneman's like, "All right, let's do it together." And they joined forces along with Barb Mellers to basically try to resolve that issue. He was just always seeking out, it was just like everything was like, why am I wrong? And he was eager and he was excited and he wanted to...

(00:07:56):
I remember having a lunch with him where I realized after the lunch that the whole lunch was him asking me questions about my work. Why is he asking me questions about my work? Right? He's Danny Kahneman. But he was just so curious about other people and he just made time for everybody. He just loved the people around him so much. And I think that in the end, it's hard to believe, but I just think that that dwarfs his body of work, which is spectacular. But he as a human being was just so spectacular. And I do think you hear all the time about people who are so incredibly brilliant. It's the brilliant but asshole thing, and it was just so the opposite with him. He was so kind.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:51):
That's amazing. And it feels like there's probably a strong correlation between people that are curious, always looking for how they're wrong, and finding time to spend it with people to debate and discuss and ask. Feels like there's going to be a strong correlation with that and finding really interesting insights uncovering new things.

Annie Duke (00:09:10):
Yeah, yeah, yeah. [inaudible 00:09:12].

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:11):
Well, thank you. Thank you for sharing all that. I wish I had known him. Let's talk about decision-making. So there's two areas I want to spend time on. As one would not be surprised, decision-making and quitting. And I know that you've been on a lot of podcasts. I imagine many listeners have read your book or have heard a lot about the stuff that you teach. I'm going to try to come at this from a bunch of different directions and do it a little differently. First of all, I know you're a parent. As last I heard, you have four kids. I just had a kid, he's almost 10 months now.

Annie Duke (00:09:43):
Oh, congratulations.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:44):
Thank you. I'm curious, what your frameworks you find most helpful in parenting and in raising your kids that have stuck with you there?

Annie Duke (00:09:53):
Well, let me just first off say I get a lot of people who are pregnant who come and ask me for my advice about parenting. And I'll tell you the two pieces of advice I give people. The first is this, there's all sorts of parenting books, there's all sorts of styles. A book needs to sell, so they need to sell you something new or different or whatever, okay. But the only thing that matters really is that your kids know you love them, really know deep in their bones, know you love them.

(00:10:32):
And we can argue breastfeeding versus not breastfeeding or co-sleeping versus not co-sleeping or attachment parenting or sleep training, we can talk about all that stuff, right? Do you homeschool? Do you send them to private school? Do you send them [inaudible 00:10:49]? We can have lots of [inaudible 00:10:51], but it all dwarfs in comparison to your children know that you would lay down in the street in the front of a bus if it meant that they would be alive and happy. That's the number one thing I say. Number two is at some point, you will drop your baby on its head. So I bet this has happened to you already.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:18):
Well, yeah. Sort of. Okay.

Annie Duke (00:11:18):
Sort of, right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:18):
Keep coming.

Annie Duke (00:11:20):
So here's the thing about babies, is babies can't move. And so you get very used to as a mom or a dad or you're sitting on the couch and you're folding laundry and your baby is right here next to you and your baby can't move. And then one day without warning, your baby can roll over. And you think it's fine because you put a pillow there or something, but you turn your back for a second because you're like whatever and then your baby falls on its head. It happened with every single one of my children. And they don't fall that far and whatever, but they're totally fine and you're not a bad parent. And it's just this, there are things you don't know and stuff's going to happen and it's not going to be perfect. And every little thing isn't going to have some lasting impression on your child because at some point, you will drop your baby on its head and you will not mean to, you didn't intend to.

(00:12:21):
But in my case, it was always like, oh my gosh, my baby can roll over. I did not think that was going to happen today. And gosh, by the time I got to the fourth one, it's like I'm chasing after one baby to try to get the diaper on and this and that, so then the other baby hits its head. So I think there's just a lesson in that which is like it's a small thing, don't sweat it and don't get mad at yourself because you made a mistake. It's like the mistake would be, oh, I realize my baby could roll over now. So now you should make sure that you're taking extra precautions about your baby rolling over off the couch. But it's really just a funny way for me to say your baby's going to hit its head or walk into a coffee table or get cut or whatever. It's like they're very resilient and you didn't do anything wrong as a parent, so don't beat yourself up about that. And then I do actually have one other thing I say.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:20):
Yeah, go for it.

Annie Duke (00:13:21):
Be having four, you have very little, you have no influence whatsoever basically on what your child's personality is. What you can do as a parent is make sure they say please and thank you. So what I find with parents of one is particularly if that one is very well-behaved, they think they're a great parent and they may be. That would be resulting. They may be, but once you have four, what you realize is like, oh, my parenting really didn't have anything to do with it. But my children do say please and thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:01):
This is really valuable, good advice. I need to hear this. My wife is going to need to hear this, too. She's always worried about the soft spot on our kid's head and getting hit into some things.

Annie Duke (00:14:09):
No, it'll be fine.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:10):
Okay, great.

Annie Duke (00:14:11):
It's actually it's part of why it's there. Really, your baby will be fine. I mean, that's the thing. We used to cart babies around in the wilderness, we were living in case. We're fine, we're built for it. We're built for a much rougher world than the world that babies actually grow up in now. I will say my oldest child when she was in high school, just for whatever reason, she had no interest whatsoever in alcohol or drugs or anything like that. And I remember just feeling so smug about how well I had raised this child and how great she was, and oh, these other parents who clearly weren't doing a good job. I mean, I didn't really but because it's hard not to. And then my next child went through high school and I was like, [inaudible 00:15:02]. That's just a temperament thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:11):
It's a good example of resulting in action.

Annie Duke (00:15:08):
It is a good example of resulting, but all my kids have turned out fine and they're all very different, but yeah. But as far as decision-making is concerned, which is a totally different thing, I'll actually quote Danny Kahneman on this one. Nothing is as important as it seems when you're thinking about it, that's a really important one. One of the things that I used to try to do with my kids all the time was mental time travel, which is actually a very good decision tool. So they would be really upset about something and it could be something that happened at school or it could be like they were grounded for something or whatever.

(00:15:46):
And the thing is when you're in the moment, it just feels like so big. And the thing that I used to say and they say all the time now is this is going to be so great for you when you're 40 at Thanksgiving. You're going to be able to tell these stories to your children and it's going to be the best, like you should be thanking me so that you can talk about your crazy mother at the Thanksgiving table. And it allowed them to get some time and space from it to realize this is going to be funny at some point.

(00:16:19):
At some point, it's going to be a hilarious story that you tell people. No matter how horrible it seems now, it's going to be a hilarious story at some point when you're older. And it sounds like a fun thing I was doing with them, but it's actually a really good decision-making tool for us in general, right? Look, there are absolutely things that 20 years from now are going to matter, for sure. But most things, no. If you think about most things that ever happen to you, like you're 21 and your girlfriend breaks up with you or whatever and you just think it's the end of the world and you're never going to recover and all these things, but if you could get yourself like, well, how do I really think I'm going to think about this in 10 years? Am I still going to be heartbroken in 10 years?

(00:17:03):
Probably not. And I think that we need to get that perspective of time so that we can get out of the moment because in the moment it just feels so important and the feelings are so big. And it's like the focusing effect on this second and the feelings you're feeling right now are so huge that we forget the scope of time. And I think that that's absolutely one of the best things you can do with your kids, and you can do it in small ways too, right? You can choose to play this video game or you can choose to study for your task. A week from now when you get that test back, how do you think you're going to feel about those two choices? Right?

(00:17:43):
So that was a tool that I used a ton and it's just generally an amazing decision-making tool, just generally for people. It's one that I happen to use with my kids all the time. And then I would say that the other one was using the word nevertheless, which is this is a great leadership skill, the word nevertheless. So let's say my child got caught doing something wrong. I don't know, I found a bag of red solo cups in my backyard that they forgot to throw out after a weekend that I was away. That's hypothetical. So I'm grounding them and it's a lot of argument back, right? So they think this is a debate and they're giving me all of their input and their opinions on why it's unfair and all the other kids do it and the other parents don't get mad and whatever, whatever the argument is. You have to have the balance between them feeling heard, which I think is incredibly important that your children feel heard, and following through on what you know or believe is right.

(00:18:56):
So it's I hear you. Nevertheless, you're grounded for two weeks. I hear what you're saying and I understand. Nevertheless, this is what's going to happen. And obviously, the words that you can use for that might be different. You have so much more authority obviously over your children than you do in other places. But in the workplace, this is very good because employees gripe all the time at decisions that you make in leadership because they think they're right and they want their way. And to have the ability to say, I heard you and your input, trust me, was incorporated into the decision, nevertheless, this is the path we're going to take. Right or wrong, that's what we're going to do. So I think there's a lot of things that basically you can say. These are good things to do with kids, but they're actually just generally really good decision strategies.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:47):
I'm taking notes on all these things. These are going to be extremely useful.

Annie Duke (00:19:51):
Nevertheless is a really good one with children.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:53):
It connects to something Dr. Becky teaches, if you know her, of telling someone, "I believe you." When your kid says something and they're upset about something, start with I believe you.

Annie Duke (00:20:03):
Nevertheless.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:03):
And here's nevertheless, exactly. Fair enough. I think we're going to start having to pivot this podcast to a parenting podcast because there's so much stuff here, but I'm going to try to resist. So we've been talking about decision-making and frameworks and things like that. Something I wanted to ask you is how much better can someone get at making better decisions? So for example, say someone listens to all of your podcasts, reads your book, studies it intensely. What's the delta you find in somebody being able to make a better decision? And where [inaudible 00:20:35] comes from is Daniel Kahneman of all people. People ask him, "Do you just live such a optimal life now that you know all of these biases we have and all these mental errors we make?" And he's like, "No, I can't..." I think he said famously, "I don't, actually. I can't use these in practice. This is just stuff that I have learned, but it doesn't actually impact my day to day." So I'm curious just how much better can someone get? What kind of delta have you found in terms of making decisions?

Annie Duke (00:20:59):
Okay, so it depends on whether you actually do the things. I mean, I think that that's what the issue is. I think Kahneman did some work way back that started him on this journey. That was basically work on hiring and it was taking it from completely unstructured Lenny, saying, "I just know a great product manager when I see one", whatever that means, to me going to Lenny and saying, "Okay, I understand that you think that you see a great product manager you know one when you see one", but can you explain to me what that means? In the abstract, what are the things that you're looking for in someone that you want to fill that role? And we can then excavate that, right? And make what is implicit because you're applying some implicit model to how you're thinking about the person that you're interviewing and how they map onto the role that they're going to be, but let's make that explicit.

(00:22:04):
So we can make that explicit, we can turn it into a decision rubric, we can create a structured interview process out of that. And then what he found was after you've gone through that process, if you then use your intuition after having done that, not before, that then you actually can really drastically improve your hit rate on hiring. And in that case, it was from about a 50% hit rate to 65. So that's pretty huge, so that's a really big difference. The problem is nobody does it. So I can tell you that most of the conversations that I had with Danny that were about my work in particular were just him saying, "How do you get anybody to do it?" Now that's not to say that I would be better at that than him, it's that he didn't do my job, right? So he was an academic doing research and so on and so forth, I'm living in companies embedding for years.

(00:23:02):
I've been with one client for five years, one client for four years, one client for four years also, almost four years, three and a half years. And then I just took on a new client who I've been with for six months, and that's my whole client roster because I stay with them so long. So if you do it, the answer is quite a bit. Like at least in terms of Danny's work in relation to something pretty noisy like hiring, you went from 50% hit rate to 65% hit rate, which is huge. It's enormous. The problem is that the way that you can make decisions in order to be better at them is not supernatural to the way that humans make decisions.

(00:23:47):
I think we think a lot more highly of our intuition than we really ought to. We think very highly of our ability to notice things in the moment and act rationally toward them in a way that really we ought not to. We tend to think that we have insight that other people don't have when actually the other people probably have more insight into our situation than we do. So I think the answer is a lot with a big if, with an if you can get people to do it. And I think that's where the issue comes in. Now, the good news is that you can then reverse that and say if I'm willing to do it, think about what an edge I'm going to have over people who aren't willing to do it, right?

(00:24:36):
So we can think there's people who don't know about it, there's people who do know about it but don't do it, and then there's people who do know about it, but do do it. And it's that last group that's so tiny. So the answer is I think a lot, but nobody does it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:54):
So maybe following that thread, when you look at companies that you've worked with or companies that have read your book and really dove in and started to implement some of your piece of advice to make better decisions, if you could look back at the ones that had an impact, what do you find are the mental models or frameworks or tactics that really stick that most often have an impact and the biggest impact?

Annie Duke (00:25:18):
I think the one that's easiest to implement is this. And it's so easy, and I just wish more people would do it. The best way to get somebody's opinion is independently of other people's opinions, independently asynchronously. So the way that I put is I want people to stop talking to each other so much. When we think about what did people generally think the purpose of a meeting is, they think it's for three things. Discovery, which is I want to discover what your opinions are, what your judgments are of something, right? So I want to find out what you think about something. So for example, if we're in product development and we're trying to figure out a timeline, we're trying to develop a product roadmap and we're trying to figure out how long it's going to take to release certain features or something like that, we all come into a room and we start yelling it out together.

(00:26:29):
It's so bad for decision-making, I can't even tell you. There's cross influence, the loudest person in the room tends to then have an outsized influence on the decision, the most confident person in the room tends to have an outsized influence on the decision. And that's great if the most confident person is also right, but the problem is that's not always so. And so that's the discovery piece, right? And we tend to do that in a group. And then there's discussion, which is I've now discovered the way that Lenny is modeling this problem or what his judgments are about certain things or his forecasts are, his estimates are. And now, we're going to discuss those ideas and we're going to discuss your ideas in comparison to my ideas, and that's going to happen in the group setting. And then there's also now, we're going to decide in the group setting. So we're going to make some set of decisions about say what the roadmap is going to look like.

(00:27:26):
Here's the thing that I think is the easiest to change, is to realize the only thing that's ever supposed to happen in a meeting is the discussion part. So we should absolutely be coming together as human beings to discuss everybody's judgments and opinions and the way they're modeling the problem and their forecasts. In particular, it's really good to come in and discuss the places where people are different. So you've been in many meetings, I'm sure about 80% of the time is double clicking. Oh, I agree. And I want to now we've literally just used different words to say the exact same thing because I'm in agreement.

(00:28:07):
If we can focus the discussion on places that people disagree, we're much better off. But so now we can take this, discover, discuss, decide. So I'm saying discuss is only supposed to happen in the meeting, that's the only thing that's supposed to happen in the meeting. So what's happening with the other stuff, the discover and the decide? Well, and this is the thing that I think I actually have been able to get people to do is discover what people think before you get in a room independently of each other. So how would you do that? Well, let's imagine that you're going to have a meeting about the product roadmap.

(00:28:43):
So you would say to yourself in this meeting, what are the opinions that I need to get from the people in the room? It could be a brainstorm. What are all the different features that we could develop? So it could be a brainstorm. Fine. Write to them independently and say, "Hey, free for off. Just come up with all the different features that you think would be reasonable for us to consider developing and then give me a forced rank from best to worst of your own ideas with some three to five sentence rationale as to why you have these things in this order." And so I could do that, but maybe we already have a list. I can send that out for a forced rank to everybody. Okay, so here's the final list of things we're really considering. Prioritize those for me, just force rank them. And then again, give me a rationale.

(00:29:32):
Give me a little bit of free writing as to why you think this should be, that you have these things in this order. Maybe we've decided now on what our top five priorities are. Great. I could, before the meeting, send the top five priorities out. "Hey, we've decided on this stuff." For each thing, I'd like to understand what you think a reasonable timeline is, how many sprints it's going to take, so on, so forth, right? So we can ask for that type of information so that we can start making estimates because that's going to affect budget and what we're going back to the board with and so on so forth. But regardless, just figure out what is the thing that we're going to be discussing in this meeting? And I'm going to send it out to everybody independently and I'm going to say, "Don't reply all, just send it back to me independently."

(00:30:14):
If it's a repeated decision, you can actually create a rubric that lives on Airtable or Coda or Google Sheets or whatever, I don't really care. And people can input their decisions there where they can't see anybody else's decision. So with Google, you can use Google Forms in order to do it, and then it dumps into a spreadsheet that only you can see. That's a great way to do it. So anyway, so you do that and now you can now see everybody's opinions that you then now send out to the group and say, "Everybody, look this over before we come in and discuss." So notice you're still working as a group, but you're working as a group where you're not in the same room together and talking at the same time. And there's a word for that, which is nominal group. So it's a group that at that moment is working independently and asynchronously of each other.

(00:31:03):
So if you can get people to do that, and I do have companies where I don't consult with them, but I've just come in and talked to them briefly or whatever that do actually implement that piece of it. That is a huge piece of it, that's ginormous. And then you do the same thing for deciding. So the decision should not be made in a room, it's made either. I love the one decision maker model, but not everybody's down with that. But you can have a vote forum where people go vote in private about the way they're leaning.

(00:31:39):
You can do a variety of things with that, but just don't do it. Don't do it in the meeting. And then just the last thing that I'll add, which is a muscle that you really have to exercise, is I think it's really important to understand that the word alignment in terms of we're all aligned as a group, right? The word alignment is stupid and it shouldn't be used. And I know I'm saying that very harshly, but it's true. It's dumb because it doesn't exist. You have 10 people in a room and they're all really different people with different opinions, and they're never going to come out of the room agreeing with each other. And it's really bad if the expectation is that they're supposed to, and it's really bad for a few reasons. One is it isn't reality, and that I don't like coming out of things without reality actually kicking.

(00:32:38):
So it's not reality. People don't actually agree, they're not actually aligned on the decision. That's just the thing that makes you feel better, right? So I think that that's problem number one. But problem number two is that if the goal is alignment, if the goal is agreement, then the meeting becomes coercive and you never want that. So the way that I'm supposed to talk about my ideas is to convey why I believe what I do, not to convince anybody that I'm right because if I'm working to convince people that I'm right, it becomes coercive and that's horrible. So you have to get comfortable with walking out of the room. This is the nevertheless. Walking out of the room understanding that once you have that discussion, it's not that Lenny, your opinion might change. It could, right? I could say my thing and it could be just so damn brilliant that you change your mind somewhat, right?

(00:33:37):
So you come maybe you're like, "Oh, I'm thinking about this differently and actually", but maybe you don't and you still believe a thing that's very different than me. And leadership has to say, "That's fine. I've heard both of you and I know that this isn't going Annie's way. Nevertheless, trying to think about what all of our goals are, this is what the decision is going to be and it's totally fine that you ended up not agreeing with each other because it's reality. And what it allows me to do is get a better sense of what the space of decisions is." So those things I have been able to get people to do and they're actually quite impactful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:17):
Imagine a place where you can find all your potential customers and get your message in front of them in a cost-efficient way. If you're a B2B business, that place exists, and it's called LinkedIn. LinkedIn Ads allows you to build the right relationships, drive results, and reach your customers in a respectful environment. Two of my portfolio companies, Webflow and Census, are LinkedIn success stories. Census had a 10X increase in pipeline with the LinkedIn startup team. For Webflow, after ramping up on LinkedIn in Q4, they had the highest marketing source revenue quarter to date. With LinkedIn Ads, you'll have direct access to and can build relationships with decision-makers, including 950 million members, 180 million senior execs and over 10 million C-level executives. You'll be able to drive results with targeting and measurement tools built specifically for B2B. In tech, LinkedIn generated two to five X higher return on ad spend than any other social media platforms.

(00:35:14):
Audiences on LinkedIn have two times the buying power of the average web audience, and you'll work with a partner who respects the B2B world you operate in. Make B2B marketing everything it can be and get $100 credit on your next campaign. Just go to linkedin.com/podlenny to claim your credit. That's linkedin.com/podlenny. Terms and conditions apply. There's an implication here you touched on a bit that there's a DRI essentially, there's one decision maker. Sometimes people start to feel like, "Oh, my voice isn't heard. I don't have a lot of say, I can't be part of this decision." And you talked a bunch about just how to make people feel included, you get feedback along the way. But any advice there if you try to move to this model of making people feel like, "Okay, I actually have impact on where this goes"?

Annie Duke (00:35:58):
Yeah. So here's the really wonderful thing about moving from a coercive model to really, I guess you could say a model of curiosity, right? You want to be curious, not coercive, which means that the way that people in the meeting are talking about what their opinions are is in the mode of conveying information, not trying to convince anybody. So once we move away from that coercive model, and when I say coercive, I'm not saying anybody is purposely trying to set up a culture of coercion. Sometimes that's true, but for the most part, everybody's trying to do a good job and nobody's trying to set up a culture of coercion. But as soon as you say, "Are we all in agreement? Are we all in alignment?" And as soon as you're allowing people, and I'm sure you've been in these meetings, right? If you allow people to interrupt, if you allow people to say this, "I think you're wrong", "I disagree", "Here's why", those are all very coercive things to have happen.

(00:37:12):
Interrupting someone is silencing them. Saying, "You're wrong", well now, you become tribal and people aren't going to be open-minded and they're going to stake their ground and it's all really bad. So let's move away from that. Number one, that's already going to help. But when we think about the way that meetings normally happen, again, there's all this crosstalk and some people aren't speaking and some people are and so on, so forth. And then of course, not everybody feels equally heard. But when you work as a nominal group, let's talk about something as simple as we're going to make a forecast of how long it's going to take to launch this product feature. Okay. So I'm going to send out to everybody, what's your point estimate? What's your lower bound? What's your upper bound in terms of timeline?

(00:38:02):
And you could do it in some way, like how many sprints do you think is going to take whatever language you want to use? Now, everybody independently now gives their forecast with a rationale for why they believe that. And then you come into the room and you run a discussion where everybody's getting to say what their estimate was and why they believe that, and people are getting to ask questions. "I have a question" always is a clarification, it's just I don't understand. And as the leadership, the way that you would do it is, let me give you an example from a real one because that'll be easy. I did one of these discussions for a question about remote work, like what did the company want in terms of remote versus hybrid and that kind of thing. And so there was a lot of disagreement about whether whatever the policy was, it should be consistent across functions. Lots of disagreement.

(00:39:01):
So let's take somebody who was on the, no, it shouldn't be consistent across functions. So they now say why they believe it shouldn't be consistent across functions and they say things like, "Well, different functions have different requirements, right?" So there's some functions that have to be in the office, like if you're IT as an example, but there's other functions which are more collaborative and creative and whatnot where it makes sense for people to be in the office, whereas engineers doesn't really matter, right? So there's different needs of different functions in terms of how much they need to be in the same space. So I'm not agreeing or disagreeing with this, I'm just saying what somebody said. So now as a facilitator, I never say, "Oh, I agree." What I say is I just want to make sure I understood what you said and I reflect it back.

(00:39:57):
So I say, "So what I heard you say is that not all functions are created equal in terms of how well they work remotely or how well they work in person or what the flexibility might be. So what you're saying is there're functions that have to be in person. Period. And then other functions where that collaborative element being in the same office would be more important versus some functions where being remote is totally fine. Is that what you meant?" And then they have the ability to say, "Yes, that is what I meant" or, "Actually, I meant something slightly different. Let me say what that is", and then I reflect that back. Okay, so literally you're just going around, you're calling on people to do that, and then you're reflecting back what they say without offering your own opinion. I don't know, Lenny. Tell me how someone doesn't feel heard in that situation.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:48):
Yeah. Absolutely. I would feel so good if somebody just clarified and made it clear they know exactly what I'm saying, even if the decision doesn't end up the way I want.

Annie Duke (00:40:57):
Right, so that's the thing. And then what actually ends up happening is that the people in the room feel more, the psychological term would be endowed, more endowed to the decision. In other words, they feel like they have ownership over the decision. And whatever the decision is, they generally will see their selves reflected in it because they were heard. And they also will generally understand that nobody, no one really ends up with exactly every single thing that they wanted to see in the decision because they also get to see the true spread of opinions on the team. And what you see in that situation is that there's lots and lots and lots and lots of disagreement, which you don't see if you talk in a group. It narrows the space, right?

(00:41:48):
So for example, particularly if you're senior, if you say, "I think this is going to take three months to launch" and I was thinking four weeks, you're never going to hear four weeks from me, ever. But if we get those opinions independently, you will actually hear that I think it's going to take four weeks. You may tend to be more right there being more senior, but I may have something interesting to say. You should hear what I have to say. And this also allows me to learn from you, too. But because I haven't heard your opinion first, then I'm not going to conform my opinion to yours. So it actually spreads the surface area of disagreement that you see on the team, which then makes people feel much better about the decision not being exactly what they want because they recognize like, "Oh, this is actually a hard problem. People really disagree on this stuff."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:41):
Amazing. I think this is going to be really helpful to a lot of people. Just to close the thread on this little summary maybe is core advice here is brainstorm separately. So I guess first, there's discover, discuss, decide. To discover ideas completely independently, basically brainstorms. You're a big advocate of brainstorming independently, sitting on your own, thinking through ideas. And then bringing people together to discuss all the things they've come up with and especially where they disagree. And then ideally having one person that makes a decision once she or he has taken all the input.

Annie Duke (00:43:12):
Yeah, you can have one person. I mean, I work with people where it's like a partnership and there's six people who are going to vote, but they still do it independently. They go to a forum. So I don't know what your vote is. And all six people don't have to agree. I mean, I just think it's really important that once you get above an end of one, you shouldn't necessarily expect the people to agree, which I think is just really important. And this is good for more than just brainstorming. It's for forecasting, any kind of project planning, budgeting. Yeah, I mean, we do this, for example, at First Round, we have a structured forum for evaluating a company in terms of whether you should invest in it because there are facts and then there are the way that you model those facts in. So it's a lot, what are the investor's opinion of the founder and the product and that kind of thing.

(00:44:06):
And we just have structure around how we're eliciting those opinions, which is really helpful. The other thing that I'll just add to what you said is that you can actually be in the same room together and still discover information independently. So this will happen on the fly all the time where people are talking and they start talking. Something comes up, like someone suggests some new feature or something like that, and then people start saying, "Yeah, but that's going to take..." And you go, "Stop. Okay, everybody take out a piece of paper." So you can still get that same independence on the fly as well as doing it in advance. But yes, that was a very nice summary.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:49):
If this is just the one thing people take away from this conversation already, I think that could have a big impact. Speaking of First Round, one, we actually just had Todd Jackson on the podcast talking about-

Annie Duke (00:44:59):
Love Todd.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:59):
... love Todd, talking about product market fit. That episode will have come out before this episode. Also, so I asked Brett Berson, your colleague at First Round, what to ask you.

Annie Duke (00:45:00):
Oh, okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:08):
Yeah, yeah. By the way, your title of First Round is amazing, special partner. I've never seen that before.

Annie Duke (00:45:15):
I am. It's a title just for me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:17):
Oh, my God.

Annie Duke (00:45:17):
I adore Brett Berson.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:19):
Me, too.

Annie Duke (00:45:19):
So I'm interested, I'm interested in what he said you should ask me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:23):
Nothing too spicy, it's along the lines of what you talked about. So you said that you have a very interesting framework for how to think about decision quality in the short term when the outcome is very long term. For example, investing. Also, many decisions we make in business, things you need to decide now that you only find out years from now. Can you talk about your advice there and your insights here?

Annie Duke (00:45:43):
Oh my gosh, I'm so happy that that's the question that he asked.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:45):
Yep, I see.

Annie Duke (00:45:47):
Okay, so can I give a tiny bit of background to this?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:49):
Absolutely.

Annie Duke (00:45:50):
So prior to talking to First Round, I have another client too who, they're amazing, Renegade Partners at Roseanne Wincek and Renata Quintini. They're incredible. Before finally hooking up with them, and they work at different stages, First Round is C, obviously. Renegade is more like A B, tiny bit of dabble in C. But before running into them, I talked to quite a few venture firms who are interested in talking to me post-Thinking in Bets having come out, so this would be 2018. And there was a theme, there was a theme across them all. The first one was, well, the kind of decision-making you're talking about we don't need to do because we just know a good founder when we see one. So that is a sentence that came out of many people's mouths. And as I just said to you, okay, I have no doubt, but don't you want [inaudible 00:46:52] make that explicit?

(00:46:53):
There's all sorts of great things that come from making it explicit, not just in terms of the increase in decision quality in the moment, but it actually allows you to close feedback loops much better. So that was one thing that I found quite surprising. But the one that I really found very interesting was being told, "Well, what you're talking about doesn't apply because our feedback loops are a decade." And in poker, you got an answer right away. You won or lost the hand right away. So the way that you're thinking about decision-making doesn't really apply, until I met First Round and then Renegade where they actually heard what I had to say because I gave the same answer to everybody. So we'll just put aside that wouldn't you want to make that explicit. The first thing that I would say is, oh, poker is much noisier than you think because when I win a hand, I have no idea why.

(00:47:50):
So I do actually have to wait a long time because I have to play many, many, many hands before I actually know, do I actually have an edge? Because I actually don't know very much. On one hand, for one thing, I almost never see my opponent's card, so I'm left in a dust of uncertainty. But separately from that, the main thing that I said was, how could you possibly think that the feedback loop is 10 years? And this is what I think really caught First Round's eye because when I was talking to Josh Kopelman about it, he said, "Well, what do you mean? We don't get an exit for 10 years." And I said, "Oh, I'm sorry, do you invest? And then you go to sleep like Rip Van Winkle? And then you wake up 10 years later and you go, 'Hey, how'd that go?' Or are there all sorts of things that happen in between?" The simplest thing, the simplest thing is does it fund at Series A?

(00:48:46):
And the little pushback that I would get there is, but we're not investing for Series A. And I say, "Well, I know that", but have you ever had a company that exited for more than a billion dollars that did not fund at Series A? And the answer is no. And I'm like, okay. So it sounds like that's necessary. Might not be sufficient, but it's necessary. And it's certainly a signal that is actually more highly correlated with exiting out well than the investment at C. And then, oh, right, you have series B. And that's separate from all the other things that you can look at, like what you talked to Todd Jackson about. Is it achieving product market fit? We know that eventually for it to be successful, it's going to have to achieve product market fit, right? So you can look at what's happening with that, just general things about traction, what's happening with net new ARR, ability to retain top talent churn.

(00:49:55):
I mean, there's so many different things that you can look at, all of which are things that you know must happen in order for the big thing to happen. Okay, so what that means is that this is the big, I'm going to make a bold statement here. There is no such thing as a long feedback loop. You can make a decision about how long the feedback loop is. That is your choice to live in a long feedback loop, and you can choose to shorten the feedback loop. And the way you choose to shorten the feedback loop is to say, what are the things that are necessary but not sufficient? That's one thing, for getting a good exit, or what are the things that are correlated with the outcome that I eventually desire? And what that means is that when you're at the decision point, right? Like in First Round's case, I'm going to invest in a company.

(00:50:51):
What you have to understand is that you are making a prediction about how the world is going to unfold, how the future is going to unfold. And those things that you're predicting. You can track, and you can track them back to the decision and you can do it pretty darn fast, mind you. I mean, think about being in 2021. There were companies that were raising in A six months after seed. Today, it's a little more 16 months-ish. But even so, let's just say that that was the only thing that you decided to do. I'm going to forecast the probability that this company's going to fund at Series A. And then obviously, those companies start to fund or not fund at Series A and you're finding that out in 16 months. Here's my question for you, Lenny. Is 16 months shorter than 10 years?

(00:51:38):
So it's probably why he said to ask me that question because I just really do. I mean, I have a very strong opinion about this. The feedback loop is as long as you choose it to be. And if I take that back to some of the things that I heard early on when I was talking to people, what I would say is that I think that there is a certain amount of psychological safety in allowing the feedback loop to stay long because really of two main factors. One is that, look, if I was early into Uber and now I'm a celebrity investor or something, I don't really want to know if I'm good or not. Do I? Right? I don't really want the world to know that. I mean, if I'm good, that's great. But it feels like they already believe that I'm good because I happen to be early into Uber.

(00:52:47):
So since people already think I'm good, I'm just losing to that decision, psychologically speaking. Not investment quality speaking, but psychologically speaking. Okay, so here's the problem though. Why was I early into Uber? Did I have an insight into a real pain point in a developing market, blah, blah, blah? Or did my buddy start Uber and I was like, "Sure, I'll give you some money?" Right? I mean, obviously, I'm talking about the extremes here, but we don't actually know what the decision quality was, right? All we know is that you had a good result and given that you had a good result and people think very highly of you, what are you going to gain? Right? So it's so nice to just let that feedback loop sit there and allow people to have the opinion of you. That is really nice, feels good, right? And not actually find out the answer because why would I want to?

(00:53:51):
Unless you're really super focused on decision quality, then you would want to do that. So that's part of the psychological safety. And what that goes to is, the real core of it is that it's very, very difficult for human beings to deal with feeling wrong in the moment, even if it helps them in the long run. It's just hard. And the tighter the feedback loop, the more that you risk finding out you are wrong in the short run. Now that helps you to learn and improve your decision-making if you're focused on it and you're good at it, right? That's going to help you. And then in the long run, you're actually going to do better. But human beings are notoriously good at trading off the long run just to feel good in the short run. That's why we're all eating chocolate and cupcakes and stuff that we know is bad for us because it feels good.

(00:54:45):
And so much of our decision-making is trying to advance this positive self-narrative and the idea that yeah, we're going to have a more positive narrative ourselves in five years if we do some stuff. Most of us are like, "No, I don't really want to make that trade. I'd rather just feel good now", and I can use the fact that we are living in power law, under the influence of power law. I can use that to just confirm a lot of things that I wish to believe that are true of me. And if you take that away from me and you take the uncertainty away from me, it's going to be really hard. And I will tell you that's what I love about both Renegade and First Round is that they're just like, I want to know. It would be such a horror for me to think that I was making good decisions when I actually wasn't. And that's what really matters to me and I think that it's just so special.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:47):
Hearing all this makes me want to be an LP in First Round. Not that they would let me in there, but just knowing that you're in there futzing with everything and the way they're thinking is really inspiring. I'm curious if you could share an example of anything that they tweaked as a result of this analysis that you did and how they evaluate.

Annie Duke (00:56:05):
Well, first of all, let me just say they didn't really record a lot about their decisions when I first came in. They voted and they had a record of the vote so they knew who said yes and who said no, but they didn't have a lot of other information. So the first thing that happened was just that. Okay, what do we really think is the way that you would model whether you should invest or not invest in? Very broadly, you would say you're reading the market, the team, the founder, the product broadly. We're going to make sure that those opinions aren't just like it's good or it's bad, but it's on a scale of one to seven so that we can actually get some precision and some spread among the partners in terms of, say, strength of market. We're going to make sure that we have shared definitions of those things, which you'd be surprised people don't.

(00:57:00):
So when I am thinking about market and market quality, I might be thinking about something very different than you. So we want to make sure that we have a shared definition of that, and that's reflected in something that we would call mediating judgments, which are judgments that you make related to market prior to actually judging what you think of the market in general. So you could think of something like competitive landscape, so you would judge that. So that turns into what these mediating judgments are, which is basically an implied definition.

(00:57:30):
So you create that, and then you also think about what are the forecasts that are important. One thing that you already know is you're going to forecast the probability the company funds at Series A. So that was a huge change, just a very different way of making decisions. What we've been able to do with that now because I've been there for five years is we now can actually look, say the partnership as a whole, and look at these ratings that they're making of the component pieces of parts of how they're modeling, like what makes a good investment, these forecasts that they're making.

(00:58:03):
And we actually know how these companies have now unfolded. So in the simplest sense, we know whether hundreds of companies have funded at Series A or not. And now, we can actually look and say, how good are the partners at actually forecasting this thing? Right? Are they random? Are they better than random? And we actually know that and we can feed that back to them so that they can understand their own accuracy around these pieces of the decision because the fact is that whatever a seed investor says to you, whether that company is going to fund at Series A is part of their decision. It's included in the decision. So they're making that forecast whether they make the forecast explicitly or not. So what we're saying over at First Round is let's make it explicit because you're doing it implicitly anyway, and then we can actually start to look at your accuracy.

(00:58:58):
We can now feed that back to you and let you know how accurate you are, which will then help you to become more accurate, right? We can also look, because we know in any given vintage what are the best companies or what are the worst companies. Remember, we're having people do these ratings on a scale of one to seven of say the quality of the market, and we can look across the partnership and say, "Look, Lenny, when you think the market is great, how does that map onto how well the company is doing in the future? When you say the market is terrible, how well does that map onto how that company is doing, how that company ends up doing in the future?" And I can come to you and I can say, "Oh, Lenny, by the way, your judgments about market are amazing."

(00:59:47):
You know a good market when you see one and it's really mapping on in a great way onto how that company unfolds, but you're not so great with founder, or maybe you're great across the board, or maybe you're not. So we can now start to give people, we can give the partners insight into their own decision-making, not only to allow them to improve the decision-making, but also to allow them to understand not to over index on certain things that maybe aren't as predictive as an example for them. We also can change the rubric based on the evidence now.

(01:00:22):
So the first version of the rubric is always taking the intuitions of the partners and making those explicit, but then we can start to loop those back together and understand, well, maybe this thing that the partners thought was important actually isn't predictive across any partner. For example, we can start to develop the rubric based on the data. These were all things that weren't possible because prior to that, if I had come in and said, "Well, let's look at decision quality", how would I do that? I mean, I have no idea why people were... I just know whether they said yes or no. And so it's very difficult to them to start to do some really serious refining of the decisions if I don't have that information.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:08):
I desperately want to know which partner it makes the best decisions. I know you're not going to share them.

Annie Duke (01:01:13):
No, I'm not going to. The partnership as a whole is excellent as we know. And this is what I will tell you is that all partners have strengths and all partners have weaknesses, and they're not perfectly overlapping, which is wonderful, right? I mean, that's one of the things. It's like what's really wonderful, and I think it shows the power of why would you have more than one person having input into a decision, is some people are very strong on rating a particular aspect of market, or some people are very strong on rating a particular aspect of the founder. There's overlap and then there's things where Todd is uniquely great at something, or Josh is uniquely great at something, or Bill is uniquely great at something. So that's a wonderful thing about it is that everybody has strengths and everybody has weaknesses and they're not perfectly overlapping. So this is where you can see getting that spread of opinions and really understanding, breaking that decision down into its component parts really shows you the value of diverse opinions as input into a decision.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:21):
I could talk about this thread forever. Maybe let me just ask one more question just because I'm super curious. Is there anything surprising that stands out, that came out of this analysis so far? Just like, oh wow, maybe market isn't as important as we thought or this person is amazing at-

Annie Duke (01:02:34):
Yes. So I think just generally speaking, when you're creating the initial decision rubric, there are things that people are really pounding the table about that they think is especially important in making a decision. And one of the things that we found is that sometimes their intuition was absolutely right. The thing that they were pounding the table about is incredibly predictive, not just for them but other partners. But sometimes it's not at all predictive, and these are equal table-pounding situations. So let's say you're pounding the table about something, sometimes the thing you're pounding at the table about is predictive for you and for all the other partners that it's actually quite predictive about how the company does. But sometimes when you're really pounding the table about something, it's not just that it's not predictive for the other partners, it's not predictive for you.

(01:03:33):
And I think that what's really important to understand about this, and this is why it's so incredibly necessary in improving decision quality to take what's implicit and make it explicit, is that our intuition is sometimes right and sometimes wrong. It's not that intuition is crap and your intuition is just completely wrong, I mean obviously, that can't be true. We would die, right? So your intuition is sometimes right, but it's also sometimes wrong. And if you don't make it explicit, then you don't get to find out when it's wrong.

(01:04:07):
You don't get to find out when it's off base, and that's a disaster. So that's the thing that I think is really interesting is that you have equal vehement and confidence that this particular factor is really important. And sometimes it is and sometimes it isn't. And it's so surprising because we're talking about people who are true experts who are great, and I think that we all just have intuition about intuition, right? You just intuit that if they're so amazing, clearly their intuition about what's important would have to be good, but not necessarily. That's the thing, not necessarily. Yeah, I think that was probably the most exciting thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:56):
Keeping it mysterious, but I still appreciate you sharing.

Annie Duke (01:04:59):
Well, I have to keep it mysterious.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:02):
Yes, I understand.

Annie Duke (01:05:03):
I can't give away the trade secrets.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:06):
I wanted to touch on a different framework that I've heard a lot of companies actually using, and something that comes up in product a lot is this idea of pre-mortems, which is essentially think ahead of time what might go wrong. Can you talk about this? Because I think that it's something that's easy to implement, really powerful, and a lot of people are actually doing this.

Annie Duke (01:05:25):
Yes, okay. So a pre-mortem is great, but only if you attach a pre-commitment with it. So I just want to be super clear about that. What you find with pre-mortems, this actually work. I actually did this work with Maurice Schweitzer and Linnea Gandhi, who are both at Penn. Then when you have people do pre-mortems, it generally doesn't actually change their plan very much or it changed their behavior. So I think that we have the feeling that if you do a pre-mortem and you think what are the ways that things might go wrong, that that's going to change your plan, but probably not unless you're specifically using it for that purpose and you say, "Okay, we're going to do this, but let's think about how we might change our plan in light of this information." But I think what's actually more important than that is what a pre-mortem allows you to do is to set up kill criteria.

(01:06:18):
So kill criteria are just a set of signals that you might see that would tell you that it's time to pivot or stop because once we actually launch something, we're very, very slow to decide to quit. I'm sure that everybody has felt that way before. Things go on way too long, even like they're over budget and you've blown the timeline. And when you finally shut it down, you realize you should have done it a lot earlier. And this is true across the board because of a variety of biases. The most well-known, and probably the biggest influence is something called sunk cost, which is that feeling, but then I'll have wasted all the time and effort that I've put into this already. So it's taking into account what you've put in in the past and deciding whether to continue on in the future. So what we want to do is actually just get better at that thing. So understanding that when you've gotten to the pre-mortem process, you probably are going to launch it, like it's probably going to be the case.

(01:07:22):
Use the pre-mortem to set up kill criteria. So I'll give you an example from a sales team that I worked with. Basically, I sent them out a prompt, all the IC is a prompt that was, imagine that you got a lead through an RFP or RFI and you worked on it for six months. And now, it's six months later and the deal is dead. Looking back, you realized they were early signals that that was going to be the case, what were they. So this is a pre-mortem. What are the things that you saw that would tell you that this was going to go south? And they came up with all sorts of ideas. Notice this doesn't mean they're not going to start off pursuing the lead, right? But they saw, they came up with all sorts of signals. So I'll just give you three of them.

(01:08:12):
The RFP RFI was clearly written with a competitor in mind, so they felt that was a very bad signal that was probably going to go badly. Another one was the customer didn't want to demo, they only wanted to talk about price. Obviously, that's quite bad. And another one was after the first few meetings, they couldn't get a decision maker in the room, right? So it was a much longer list than this, but those are three. So for each of those, that now becomes a kill criteria if I see this thing and now you attach an action with it. So in the case of price, they actually just said, "We should kill it." If they literally don't want to demo and they're only asking about price, they're just trying to beat up somebody else on price like we're a box-checking exercise. So there, they just said, "We're going to kill it. We're not going to pursue the deal anymore."

(01:08:59):
So this is great because salespeople will pursue deals forever and leadership is like, "Well, why did you stop pursuing that deal?" And they get in trouble for it. So this is going to help with that problem, right? In the case of the RFP RFI was written with a competitor in mind, they have an action associated with that as well, which is ask them directly if they're working with a competitor and how far down the road they are, depending on the answer you would kill or pursue. In the case of we couldn't get a decision maker in the room, offer up executive alignment at the next meeting. And if they say sure, great. And if they say no, kill.

(01:09:35):
So that's actually what I feel is the best use of a pre-mortem is to say, I'm going to try to figure out what those signals are along the way that things are going badly. And now instead of just hoping that when I see those signals, I actually act rationally, which is a hope that it will not come true. That's why there's many people who climb Everest in the middle of a blizzard, even though they shouldn't be doing that. Use the pre-mortem to now create structure around those signals that you've spotted and commit to actions that you're going to take if you see those signals. And I think that's the best use of a pre-mortem.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:15):
That's really helpful. And it's interesting how many of your examples come back to just of a framework that you often talk about, which is make it explicit what is implicit. There's another example that the First Round example is a great example of that where it's just, here's all our assumptions, they just make them actually explicit and just shows how much [inaudible 01:10:32].

Annie Duke (01:10:32):
Right, then you can examine them. You can examine them, people can discuss them, you can figure out if they're wrong or right or whatever. It's like, I want to be very clear, I'm not anti your gut or your intuition. I think it's probably sometimes pretty good. I just want you to make it explicit, that's all.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:55):
Okay. So we didn't have time to get into quitting, which is your more recent book. Maybe we'll do a follow-up episode specifically thinking about quitting, but let me just ask-

Annie Duke (01:11:03):
It's my fault because my answers are long.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:05):
It's my fault.

Annie Duke (01:11:06):
I apologize to everybody.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:06):
No apology is necessary. We'll have plenty of time in the future, hopefully. Well, let me just ask one question. I found this one quote from you where you said you should assume that if you're thinking about quitting, it's already probably past the time that you should have quit. Do you still believe that? Is that generally a good rule of thumb? And just any takeaway, tip, lesson on quitting as our one question on quitting?

Annie Duke (01:11:29):
So the data is pretty strong that by the time you quit, it's probably long after the [inaudible 01:11:37]. And it's really just because, look, when we start things, we're starting things under difficult circumstances, which come from the uncertainty of the decision to start something. So when we start something, luck is going to have an influence on the outcome, which obviously, we have no control over because luck isn't in our control. And then there's also hidden information. So what happens is that after the fact, we know that we're going to learn new information and it can make it very hard to start things because we want to be more sure than we actually need to be. It's why Bezos has the 70% role to try to roll people back and be willing to accept that uncertainty in the starting decision. Now the good news is that when you learn that new stuff and the new stuff that you learn is, "Ooh, if I had known this, I wouldn't have started it", you have the option to quit generally.

(01:12:28):
So that's the good news. The bad news is that the same difficulties that apply to the decision to start apply to the decision to stop. In other words, we're making that decision under uncertainty as well. So we're not going to know for sure whether it would've turned out well or poorly unless we continue to do the thing that we already started. And we don't like to walk away from things unless we know for sure. So as Richard Thaler put it, most people won't quit until it actually isn't a decision. In other words, the whole thing is blown up, the startup has no money, or you're up on Everest and the blizzard is literally upon you and you're stuck in it. Or I think as he said, until you've fallen in the crevasse already, then you'll make the decision to quit because then you know how it was really bad. So people generally, for example, don't quit their jobs until they feel they have no other choice or relationships or projects or products that they're developing, it all applies because we want to know for sure.

(01:13:35):
And then on top of that is the fact that there is this issue of sunk cost, which is when we walk away, we feel like we'll have wasted everything that we've already put into what we're doing. But of course, waste is a prospective problem, not a retrospective one, even if we treat it like a retrospective one because it's the prospective one. Well, if you wouldn't start this today, then that means that everything that you're putting into this going forward is the actual waste, right? But we do that all the time. We go forward with things that we ought not to be going forward with because we're trying to protect the resources that we've already sunk into it in the past. Then there's other issues that have to do with, for example, endowment, the ownership over the things that we've built. This is particularly bad in product because we're building things.

(01:14:18):
And once we build things, we own them. And once we own them, we don't want to give them up and we actually value them more highly than identical things that we don't own. And then there's issues of internal and external validity, which is really just a fancy way to say your identity. How do other people view you? How do you view yourself? Do you feel like you failed? And what that means is that by the time, there's so many biases against stopping that by the time you're actually even thinking about quitting, it's probably already past the time that you ought to have quit. But we'll still continue on until we know for sure we didn't have any choice because here's the thing. When you walk away from something and someone's like, "Hey, why'd you stop that?" And you're like, "Oh, I had no choice" and you tell them everything that went wrong and, nobody's going to question you.

(01:15:04):
They're going to be like, "Oh, well, it sounds like you put in your best effort." But if you walk away early, people are like, "What?" So just quickly, I'll tell you I think just one of the best stories of this that I've got in my pocket here. Let me pull it out before the end. So Stewart Butterfield creating a product called Glitch, and Glitch is a massive multiplayer online world-building cooperative game. Releases it, this is in the aughts, and it's like a huge hit with the critics. It's Monty Python meets Dr. Seuss, it's an incredible whatever. They're getting tons and tons of great word of mouth and PR not doing any paid marketing. They have incredible investors in Andreessen Horowitz and Accel, they have $6 million in the bank and they 5,000 have diehard users, meaning users who use the game who play over 20 hours a week.

(01:16:04):
The issue is that customer acquisition was a beast that for every one person who was playing over 20 hours a week, there were between 95 and 99 people who came for five minutes and left. So obviously, this is a customer acquisition problem, which everybody knows. So they make an agreement in 2012 that they're going to do paid marketing, which they do for six weeks. And during that six weeks, their acquisition of new users, it's growing like six to 7% week over week, which is amazing. And at the end of that six weeks, this is November of 2012, at the end of that six weeks, that Monday morning, Stewart Butterfield writes a note to his investors and co-founders and says, "I woke up this morning with the dead certainty that Glitch was over."

(01:16:58):
Now notice nobody would do this in this case, right? But this is what happened is that the issue is that you really have to see is this worthwhile or not? Would I start this today? That's a forecast of the future, right? And what he did was some back-of-the-envelope math, and he said, "Look, if we continue to acquire customers at the weight that we've been acquiring them at the cost that we've been acquiring them, it's going to be 31 weeks until we break even." But that's an absurd assumption because customer acquisition costs, it's going to go up. Cap has to rise because we're going to saturate the core gaming market, so it's got to rise. So what he realized at that point was that this was not a venture scale business, and he was in this for a venture scale business. So even though nobody else saw that he was supposed to shut it down, he saw he was supposed to shut it down.

(01:17:45):
And not only that, he saw that he was supposed to shut it down for his employees who were working for equity, and he had now realized that the equity wasn't worth their time and that it wasn't fair to them to keep going with it. So he shuts it down. Obviously, that feels... Who does that? Right? And he will actually tell you that he knows he should have shut it down before the marketing push, but he needed the marketing push to prove it to himself that he was seeing the future clearly. Now, the code to this story just quickly is two days later, he's like, "Well, I'm a startup guy. I want to start something", and he's got this internal communication tool that his team is using in order to develop this product that everybody loves. And he says, "Actually, they really like that. Maybe that should be the next product."

(01:18:29):
So he goes and talks to the investors, they roll their money over into that. And that thing, which had no name at the time, now gets a name which is searchable log of all company knowledge, which is Slack. And so I think this is the important thing to realize is that we get so focused on, "But what about everything that I've put into it?" When what we forget is that when you're doing something, there's not just the cost of doing something that's not worthwhile that's direct, but there's also the cost of not being able to devote your attention to other opportunities that might be available to you. And as smart as Stewart Butterfield is, he couldn't see Slack until he quit Glitch. And that is a true cost that he would've born of continuing with Glitch. If he had continued with Glitch, Slack would not be something that we're all using today.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:21):
That is an incredibly beautiful way to end our conversation. I feel like I have at least a billion more questions to ask you and on the other hand, I feel like we've also helped a lot of people make much better decisions through this chat so I'm really thankful that you made time for this. Two last questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to learn about the stuff you're up to in case they want to work with you? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Annie Duke (01:19:43):
You can find me at annieduke.com if you're interested in working with me. I have a Substack, Thinking in Bets. Please go check that out. I teach a class on maven.com twice a year on effective decision-making. So if you're interested in that, you can go to Maven and check it out. My next cohort at the moment is in September, although I might do one in May. I'm not sure. But in terms of people can help me, I co-founded an organization called The Alliance for Decision Education. We're trying to bring the kinds of knowledge that we have about improving human decision-making in adults to K through 12 education to make the world a better place. So I would love it if people could go look at that. If you're interested in it, get the word out.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:26):
Amazing. So we'll link to all those things in the show notes. Annie, again, thank you so much for being here.

Annie Duke (01:20:32):
Thank you. Thank you so much, this was so fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:35):
Same. Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Geoffrey Moore (00:00:00):
The tendency when you're in the chasm is, "I just need more customers. I should take any customer I could find," because we need revenue. It's like taking a match and running it back and forth under a log. It's not going to light the log. So how do you start a fire? Well, you start it by putting a little kindling, little crumpled up paper, and you hold the match in one place until the fire starts. That's why adjacency is so important. If you light the fire, the piece of kindling is here, but the log is in the other room. That doesn't work.

Lenny (00:00:32):
Today, my guest is Geoffrey Moore. Geoffrey is the author of maybe the most influential and important book on go-to-market ever written, Crossing the Chasm. Even though it's sold over a million copies, it still feels like people continue to reinvent many of the lessons that Geoffrey uncovered and shared in a seminal book. In our conversation, we discuss why it's so important to get very narrow with your initial audience, how the bowling pin strategy helps you get past early adopters, what the specific go-to-market playbook is for every stage of the adoption lifecycle, why using the wrong playbook during the wrong phase will slow you down. Also, the seven deadly sins of trying to cross the chasm incorrectly. Also, how to sell your product at different personas, why you don't need to focus on the problem and the pain when you're selling to early adopters, plus some real good life advice that I didn't expect.

(00:01:22):
Geoffrey has so much wisdom to share if you're building a B2B company, and I'm really excited to bring you this episode. With that, I bring you Geoffrey Moore after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:01:34):
Let me tell you about CommandBar. If you're like me and most users I've built product for, you probably find those little in-product pop-ups really annoying. Want to take a tour? Check out this new feature, and these pop-ups are becoming less and less effective since most users don't read what they say. They just want to close them as soon as possible, but every product builder knows that users need help to learn the ins and outs of your product. We use so many products every day, and we can't possibly know the ins and outs of everyone. CommandBar is an AI-powered toolkit for product, growth, marketing, and customer teams to help users get the most out of your product without annoying them.

(00:02:08):
They use AI to get closer to user intent, so they have search and chat products that let users describe what they're trying to do in their own words, and then see personalized results like customer walkthroughs or actions. They do popups too, but their nudges are based on in-product behaviors like confusion or intent classification, which makes them much less annoying and much more impactful. This works for web apps, mobile apps, and websites, and they work with industry leading companies like Gusto, Freshworks, HashiCorp, and LaunchDarkly. Over 15 million end users have interacted with CommandBar. To try out CommandBar, you can sign up at commandbar.com/lenny, and you can unlock an extra 1,000 AI responses per month for any plan. That's commandbar.com/lenny.

(00:02:56):
This episode is brought to you by WorkOS. If you're building a SaaS app, at some point, your customers will start asking for enterprise features like SAML authentication and SCIM provisioning. That's where WorkOS comes in, making it fast and painless to add enterprise features to your app. Their APIs are easy to understand so that you can ship quickly and get back to building other features, and hundreds of other companies are already powered by WorkOS, including ones you probably know, like Vercel, Webflow, and Loom. WorkOS also recently launched AuthKit, a complete authentication and user management service. It's essentially a modern alternative to Auth0, but with better pricing and more flexible APIs.

(00:03:38):
AuthKit's design is stunning out of the box, and you can also fully customize it to fit your app's brand. It's an effortless experience from your first user all the way to your largest enterprise customer. Best of all, AuthKit is free for any developer up to 1 million users. Check it out at workos.com to learn more. That's workos.com.

(00:04:03):
Geoffrey Moore, thank you so much for being here, and welcome to the podcast.

Geoffrey Moore (00:04:07):
Well, it's nice to be here, Lenny, and thank you for having me.

Lenny (00:04:09):
It's incredibly cool to have you on. You've been at the top of my wishlist of guests to have on this podcast ever since I launched it, so it's surreal to be chatting with you. It almost feels like maybe this podcast has crossed the chasm now that you're on.

Geoffrey Moore (00:04:22):
If you'd called me earlier, I probably would've been on it with you. But anyway, we're together now.

Lenny (00:04:27):
I thought it'd be fun to start with this question of just what frustrates you most about what people still don't get about the things that you teach, particularly Crossing the Chasm. You wrote that, I think, 33 years ago at this point. You have a lot of follow-up books around the topic. What do you think people still don't really understand or often get wrong?

Geoffrey Moore (00:04:45):
All the books I write are about frameworks. They're conceptual models about what patterns should you be looking for as something evolves? Because in disruptive innovation, there's no history. You're always projecting a possible history, and then seeing if you can make it come true. So that implies there's a lot of freedom to exercise the framework however you choose to. People sometimes do that in ways that are just... They actually end up being very misleading about what's possible. I can remember one person early on saying, "Yeah, we're Crossing the Chasm. Our beachhead segments the Fortune 500," and you went, "Well, I don't think maybe you're as clear on this as you could be."

(00:05:32):
To be fair, that's what the function of any third party advisor is, is to say, "Look, time out. You might be looking at this through an inside-out lens. Maybe you should be looking at it from an outside-in lens." That's probably number one. Gosh, after that, I'm just empathetic with the fact that their world's more important than my world, so I try to work with their world.

Lenny (00:05:59):
That's exactly where I actually wanted to go next is this idea of starting very focused with your initial target audience. I think people conceptually know this. They're like, "Yeah, we should be really focused with our initial target market. We should stay very small, and expand this beachhead idea." But I think they still don't quite actually do this because it's like, "Why not go wider?" So could you just talk about why that is so important, and how to actually think about how to do that correctly?

Geoffrey Moore (00:06:23):
If you're essentially in a business where the category is emerging, then the most important thing for you to do is to be able to create enough power around your company that you can navigate your future on your own power. Where does power come from in an early adopting technology world? First of all, it'll come from can you get a lighthouse customer? So one of the things we try to do even before you try to cross the chasm is can you get one or more customers who put you on the map? And they go, "Whoa, did you know that the CIA used AWS?" Like, "Holy smoke." Okay, that's great. It doesn't make a company, but it makes a story, and it lets people know, "Oh, here are the guys that did the CIA project," that kind of thing.

(00:07:09):
The Crossing the Chasm model is, "Can you create a viable repeatable business?" And in order to do that, you need to have an ecosystem of partners work with you in order to consolidate your position. Well, why would an ecosystem work with some startup that nobody's ever heard of? The answer would be if you had consolidated a market segment where you were number one. So one of the things we've learned about company power is that basically it's the company power plus the ecosystem together. So ecosystems form around market leaders, and they do not form around the rest of us. If you're a category leader, if you're like Oracle and Databases, you're 40 years in. You're still the leader, because the ecosystem organized around you.

(00:07:51):
But when you're little, the only way you can get an ecosystem to organize around you is to go after a segment where you're a big fish in that pond. We talk a lot about fish to pond ratio. You want to be... Your first pond, your target segment should be something that in the next two years, if you hit your really high growth rates, you could be 30, 40, 50% of the market share in that segment. That would cause partners to go, "Whoa, if we're going to serve that segment, we got to work with these guys." So that's the key. The concept there is, "Well, why wouldn't you also do two or three or four segments at the same time?" It's sort of the same reason, "Why wouldn't you run in three or four primaries at the same time if you want the presidential nomination?" Although why you would want that nomination, I have no idea.

(00:08:39):
But if you did, you realize if you're running in New Hampshire, votes in Vermont do not count. It's the same thing with Crossing the Chasm. You need to get three or four or five or six reputable companies in a segment to all pick you, for then the rest of the segment to go, "Well, it's pretty obvious who the standard is." I'll just close with one last comment. And the reason, the mechanism behind all that logic, is that pragmatic people buy what they see their peers are buying. So if peer one is buying product A, and peer two is B and C and D, there's no market leader, and the category goes sideways. But if A, B and C, if three out of four people are using the iPhone, it's like, "Oh, I guess I'm supposed to get an iPhone," that kind of thing.

Lenny (00:09:29):
Awesome. I'm glad you went there, because that's essentially the root of this Crossing the Chasm idea that people after the chasm, the pragmatists, wait for references and social proof, and they're waiting for someone to tell them, "This is worth using," versus visionaries right before the chasm. They're like, "I just want to use the future. I need to be there before anyone else."

Geoffrey Moore (00:09:49):
You're right. One of the ways we try to capture that in a thought bubble is before the chasm, the customers you work with are people who say, "We believe what you believe." So in other words, they're on the same side. After the chasm, they say, "I'm not sure about that, but we need what you have." So transitioning from, "We believe what you believe," which is how you sell to visionaries to, "We need what you have," which is how you sell to pragmatists. That's the shift.

Lenny (00:10:17):
Let's actually spend some more time there on what it is that each of these segments needs, and how you convince them to use it, because this is really useful. So in these pragmatists group, you're saying the pitch there is you have a pain. I will solve this pain, and it's important pain. I think people always assume that's the pitch. But interestingly, your point is earlier in the two segments and maybe share what those two are, they use your product for a different reason.

Geoffrey Moore (00:10:41):
In fact, if there's a total in the model of the technology adoption lifecycle that we organize this all around, there's actually four, I call them, inflection points. The first one we call the early market. That's the one we were talking... That's the visionaries and the technology enthusiasts. They are as excited about you as you are. I mean, they want the demo. They want to see the vision. They're exciting. And the key to that market is to have an executive sponsor who has enough clout to essentially fund this thing, because there's no budget for you. So they've got to create the funding, and then drive the organization to go all the way to bright.

(00:11:21):
They're not that many visionary customers, but there's always one or two. The reason why it's so important to work with a marquee customer then is you... Look, nobody's ever heard of you, and if they've never heard of your customer, I don't care how amazing the win is. Nobody's going to hear about it. So it's really important you did it with Apple, or you did it with Verizon, or you did it with Mercedes, somebody that people have heard. So that's number one, and that's a project model. Even if what you sell is a product, those early mark... Every one of them is kind of a snowflake. It needs a ton of special services. There's no ecosystem of partners to support you, so you throw a bunch of extra labor at it. You do whatever, because you got to make them successful. So you'll do whatever it takes.

(00:12:13):
Okay, very cool. Got my marquee client, not scalable business, I mean, obviously. So then the second one is the Crossing the Chasm playbook. That's the one that organizes around the problem. The good news is those customers are open to hearing from someone new, because they've already talked to everybody they already know, and the problem is still... It's not that it's unsolved. It's being solved in a crummy way and, by the way, in a deteriorating crummy way. So it's getting actually worse. So there's pressure for them to act. This is where you go from the project model to the solution model, and as a vendor, you over commit to their problem.

(00:12:54):
From the very beginning, you talk to them. They don't want to talk to you about you. They want to talk to you about them, and you need to ask them probing questions about them. Just like going to a doctor, you don't want the doctor to come and say, "Hey, can I show you a movie of the operation I just did? I want to give you a demo. You mind if I give you a demo?" It's like, "No. What I would like to do is talk to you about this pain I have in my side." And then when the doctor asks you good questions about it, you go, "Ah, this is a good doctor. I'm going to trust this." So that's the whole point about that. Again, that scales a lot more than a project business, but it only scales up to the limit of the target segment.

(00:13:31):
So we had this bowling alley model of extending. You could go to a second segment, a third segment if it was adjacent. Adjacent means either it's the same customer with a different use case, or it's the same use case in a different customer base, because the one case, you use your customer references. The other case, you use your partners, because the partners who built the one use case will say, "Well, we got another segment that we work with. Let's bring you into that segment too." So that can take a company from, I don't know, tens of millions of dollars to hundreds of millions of dollars in the bowling alley. And in specialized industries like computer-rated design or things like that, you can actually go to a billion dollars or higher.

(00:14:13):
But with most other categories, at some point, you have this third inflection point, which is it's when people go, "Well, wait a minute, wifi isn't just for financial analysts, or isn't just for... Wifi is for everybody." So instead of saying, "We believe what you believe," which we're not there anymore. And these people aren't even really saying, "We need what you have." What they're saying is, "We want what they have. This is really cool. I want what they have," and that creates what we call the tornado. That's when people... This is when you do want sales coverage, and you do want to go broad, and you do want to have a standard product. Basically, you want to capture as much market share as you can. There's a whole playbook around doing that, which was in a book called Inside the Tornado.

(00:15:02):
And then the last one, which is actually becoming much more important in this century is called Main Street, but Main Street where products have become commoditized, services become the new place of innovation. We've had taxis for 100 years, but Uber is an incredibly valuable thing. You convert the product to the service, and how do you revolutionize services? That's a situation where now people are saying, "Look, I don't want to own the product. I don't want to own it." Well, kids, "I don't want to own a car. I just want to call Uber. It's convenient." So anyway, those are the four models, and Crossing the Chasm was about that second one.

Lenny (00:15:45):
Amazing. You touched on so many things that I want to talk about. I definitely want to dive into the bowling alley metaphor and strategy there. But to close the loop on this target audience to start with initially. First of all, you have this awesome bonfire analogy that I think might be useful to share. Then along that, is there any example or an example or two you could share of just someone that did that really well of picking a really good initial target?

Geoffrey Moore (00:16:08):
Sure. Well, the bonfire analogy is just the tendency when you're in the chasm is, "I just need more customers. I should take any customer I could find." Because we need revenue, but the analogy I have is it's like taking a match, and running it back and forth under a log. It's not going to light the log. So how do you start a fire? Well, you start it by putting a little kindling, a little crumpled up paper, and you hold the match one place until the fire starts. Then you want to build... The bowling alley metaphor is a little bit about, first of all, how could you win your first segment, but then increasingly, how would you go forward to win it? That's why adjacency is so important. If you like the fire and the piece of kindling is here, but the log is in the other room, that doesn't work. So I think those are the key ideas.

(00:16:59):
There's a lot of people that have made Crossing the Chasm successful. The one that we wrote about first was this company called Documentum, and it's a good example. So it was a document management database back in the day that was not... that nobody had any, "Why would you need this?" It started with the pharmaceutical industry, because pharma said, "Well, new drug approvals are 500,000 page documents, and they really, really, really are hard to manage, and we're screwing it up. And every day we screw it up, we lose a day of patent life of our drug, and the day of patent life's worth about a million or $2 million a day. This is a bad situation. We need to do something."

(00:17:37):
So "Okay, pharma, you got pharma." Great. Well, then what happened was the guys in petrochemicals said, "Well, we're in the chemical industry. We're not in the pharmaceutical industry, but we have these standard operating manuals, and we have all these regulatory demands on us too. Not quite like the FDA, but this looks like this could be pretty useful to us too." And then after the petrochemicals guys got... Well, the chemical guys got it, then the petrochemical guys got it. Of course, they're oil and gas, and they say, "Well, in addition, we have all these leases. The lease holds them. It's brilliant. This property is critical to our future plan, so we need a document database for the leases."

(00:18:20):
So the guys on Wall Street who are financing these guys are going, "Well, wait a minute. Hell, I mean, we're paper from wall to wall here. Why don't we..." So what happens is you have this thing of this expansion, but in each case, it was into a new segment, but the use cases were close enough.

Lenny (00:18:36):
So if a startup founder is listening and trying to decide is their initial target audience, their ICP too wide, do you have any advice for how to know if this is still too wide, and you should try to get more and more narrow? I know you talk about a single use case. What else should people be thinking about there?

Geoffrey Moore (00:18:53):
Well, so first of all, before you try to cross the chasm, do you have a marquee? Have you won a marquee customer that puts you on the map? Because if you're not... You need to make yourself visible before you can make the Crossing the Chasm play. Let's assume you've done that. So then when we first saw, "Well, why don't I just use that industry?" Turns out that the visionary person you work with... First of all, they did some very weird things because they're visionaries and second of all, they don't want to help their industry. The whole point of this was they wanted to get ahead of their competitors. They didn't want to help. So normally you can't use the visionary project as your beachhead. You'd love to from a point of view of reusing the work. You just can't. So then the question becomes, "Okay, where am I going to go?"

(00:19:41):
So the key formula, and this is the formula... If there's one sort of takeaway from founders listening at this point, you want to have a target segment that is big enough to matter, small enough to lead and a good fit with your crown jewels. That's the formula. So big enough to matter means do I have enough room to double or... Often venture capitalists talk about a triple double followed by a double triple. So if you said, "Okay, let's just, I'm going to make you a million dollars." Put that visionary, but just to give you a number. Okay, so a double triple would be I went from one to four and from four to 12, and then I did a triple double. So that would be 12 to 24, 24 to 48, 48 to 90. Okay, so how would you get from one to a hundred million dollars?

(00:20:31):
So you want to have a segment that says that I could get to a hundred million dollars in a five year... That was a five-year window. So you say, "Okay, but what it can't be is a billion dollar segment." Because if it's a billion dollar segment, you might be able to get there, but you would not be a big fish. So that's a fish to pond ratio thing. So you want to think about, particularly as you're starting out... This is a B2B model predominantly. If I could take the top 20 customers in this segment, meaning... What do I mean by a segment? It's in the same geography. People in Japan don't talk to people in America. People in America don't talk to people in Germany, they even speak different languages. I don't know why everybody doesn't speak English, but apparently they don't. So they have to be same geography, same industry, because dentists do not talk to software designers, who don't talk to advertising people and in the same profession.

(00:21:23):
So salespeople don't talk to finance people and finance people don't talk to the guys in the warehouse. So same industry, same geography, same profession. And then the compelling use case, which is the thing... That's the thing that starts the fire. There's segments everywhere and by the way, they all have that... They all do... Every segment works the same way. If I have to make a high risk buying decision, I'm going to talk to my peers about it. And I don't want to be first. I want to be able to do whatever the herd's doing. But what a compelling reason to buy does is it goes well, but I have to act faster than I want to. And that's what you need as an entrepreneur. You need the customer to be coming toward you even though you're new and you're unproven, and frankly you scare the crap out of them, but they're even more afraid of the problem that they're saddled with. So that's why you can build a relationship with them.

Lenny (00:22:19):
Amazing. And this phase comes... You kind of imply it comes after, say you're at a million dollars AR, you don't do this sort of work of trying to cross the chasm at that point, until you reach something like that?

Geoffrey Moore (00:22:31):
I'm not sure AR is going to be the right reference. Here's what you need. You need a major account who's gone all in with you on the new technology and who is willing in some way to talk about it. The good news about visionaries is they tend to have fairly big egos and they tend to like to talk, unlike pragmatists who will not want to talk. Pragmatists, they'll have to go to legal and get permission and blah, blah, blah. But once you've got that, whatever your revenue is at that point, you should be starting to think about, "Well, what is my beachhead segment?" And the good news about Crossing the Chasm, it's not expensive.

(00:23:12):
Think about it, once you've said, I'm going to stay in one geography, in one industry, one profession, think about your marketing budget. You're not buying Super Bowl ads here. There's no sock puppets. That's not what we're doing. We want to get to maybe 200 people with a message. And then do you have the domain expertise to really understand the problem? And if it's a really compelling problem, they'll take the meeting and getting that meeting is... Because if you're an entrepreneurial founder, you're probably fairly charismatic. First of all, you've convinced your spouse that you're willing to work for no money with no benefits, and maybe you pitched a venture capitalist and you fooled them, so why can't you fool these guys? Anyway, that would be the way I would go.

Lenny (00:24:02):
Essentially, the advice here is if you're a new early stage startup, one of the biggest milestones you want to aim for is a big marquee customer. When I think about this and look at a startup deck, if I see something like Figma is using this product or notion or Salesforce. Clearly, I'll be like, "Wow, okay, these really sophisticated people decided this was useful to them." And so I will innately trust that. There's also often advice of don't work with big companies because they'll push you around, they'll take a long time, they'll force you to build a thing just for them and it won't apply to other people. What's your advice to avoid that downside?

Geoffrey Moore (00:24:37):
It has to do with the persona of the executive sponsor. Nine out of 10 executive sponsors are going to be the negative because they're going to be a company person working with company processes. They're going to send you to purchasing, nobody's going to be happy. You're looking for the 10th one. The 10th one is one who says, "I'm so tired of the status quo. I'm looking for people that are visionary like me. I like talking to you better than I like talking to my peers because you're different and I want to be different. I want to leapfrog the world, and these people just want to stay on the escalator. So they're staying on the escalator. God bless them, but I want to jump over the top." So it's a persona based choice is the key thing there.

Lenny (00:25:20):
That is really interesting. And then say that you are an early stage startup again, how soon do you think it makes sense to invest in finding that big marquee customer versus finding some smaller... I imagine you start with some startups to see how people... You don't go straight there.

Geoffrey Moore (00:25:36):
Yes, and so initially, I think... And of course you and I are both playing, let's be clear, we're playing a software game. For example, I was trying to apply this framework to Intel, and Intel said to me, "Geoffrey, you do understand that a prototype product in our industry costs about $500 million." Okay, okay, okay, okay. Maybe that's not the same model. I think in our world right now with digital transformation, most entrepreneurs are doing some software led play, which means you can work with a small team. So I think what I would advise is I would do projects. Even though I have a product vision, I would start with trying to make as much projects, which would be very customer led. And frankly, initially, even if I have a roadmap, the customer's probably going to take me off my roadmap a bit.

(00:26:31):
I'd have to be willing to say, "I'm going to open the aperture enough." Because I just need to get enough experience with the technology. I need to put in people's hands. If it's a freemium play, you can do it for free. But that tends to be more of a consumer play. There are exceptions. There are B2B companies like Atlassian and things that did start as a freemium play, but that's not as normal. I would think more of the consultative play to do that. But what I would try to do, so I would try to get to cashflow break even on my own money with no venture capital. The only reason you need venture capital is if... Well, two things. Either A, the technology is too expensive and you cannot self-fund it, GPUs a bunch of that, training large language modules, those kinds of things. Or this thing is going to catch fire too soon and I don't have time to dither around for two or three years. So those are two reasons to go to venture capital, but just because you want to do a startup doesn't mean you need venture capital.

Lenny (00:27:35):
We had Jason Fried on recently the CO of Basecamp, and he made that point in many different ways. The benefits of not raising and how most VC funded companies do not work out, and even though they do, you often don't make as much as you could if you tried it to bootstrap it. So I think there's a lot of resonance there. And you have this quote that essentially kind of what you just said, that with a single round of funding, you should be able to cross the chasm and dominate a single use case in a single market within 18 to 24 months.

Geoffrey Moore (00:28:03):
Yeah. This is like an English major doing math, so be careful because I am an English major. But in general, because again, I said it's not expensive, and by the way, you're not discounting. In other words, you're actually using value pricing because the problem you're solving is severe enough, the customer doesn't want a discount, the customer wants you to... It is like if you have to have heart surgery, you don't want a coupon that says, "Heart surgery 9.99 this Saturday only." You want to go to the Mayo Clinic or you want to go to wherever, so you don't have to discount.

(00:28:44):
What you do have to do is you have to make almost like a guaranteed commitment to the problem to solve. We're going to take this problem off the table and we're not leaving until you're satisfied. That's the key to the game. That's a little bit weird because if you've invented ChatGPT, and now you're saying, "But I am going to solve the third grade math problem," which is a real problem. But ChatGPT can do anything. I know, but we're going to solve the third grade math problem. That's hard for a lot of entrepreneurs to get their head around.

Lenny (00:29:23):
It reminds me of the way Figma started, even though it took them a long time to find product market fit and started scaling, they ended up working very closely with Coda. I don't know if you know the story where they just wanted to make sure the Coda team, and it was called Krypton back then was very happy with Figma. So they went to the office, they set them all up, they started using Figma. And then on the drive home they called him like, "It doesn't work anymore. Something's broken." And they were already home. And Dylan basically, and this team drove all the way back, I think it was an hour or two, and got there and turned out the Wi-Fi was down and there was some internet issue and fixed it and just was obsessed with making sure they were using it. And they're also just fixing the most ridiculous bugs that were not important because they just wanted to make sure they were really happy with it.

Geoffrey Moore (00:30:11):
[inaudible 00:30:11] a larger company would say, "Look, we'll put you in our queue and you'll be on our... We'll get to you." I think this is... And by the way, this is part of the fun, frankly, of being in a startup because you're so close to the action, because there's nothing between you and the action. So why wouldn't you do that?

Lenny (00:30:29):
Yeah, and I think one of the takeaways I've had for my own research into this is that you need to find one company that just loves you. It's not like "[inaudible 00:30:37], this is cool." It's like, "I love this product. I would never want to give it up."

Geoffrey Moore (00:30:40):
That's kind of what I meant by that marquee ref... We sometimes we call it a radiating reference. It's just somebody really, we talk about you when you're not even in the room. Yeah, very cool.

Lenny (00:30:52):
We've talked about this idea of the chasm and Crossing the Chasm, but it might be helpful just to explain what is the idea, what is this chasm? What is it that people fall into and why is this important?

Geoffrey Moore (00:31:01):
And this was funny, because I was working at Regis McKenna, which was this marketing agency that was sort of the premier high-tech marketing agency in the eighties. And we had all these really successful launches, and then covers of front page articles on Fortune magazine and Wall Street Journal. And then a couple of years later it's like, "Well, what happened to these guys?" So that's where the chasm was like... That's what caused the investigation. What we learned was visionaries make their own buying decisions, and they do not consult their peers. In fact, if their peers are doing it, they're probably not going to do it because they want to be different. So basically these companies were having success capturing the imagination of the visionary, and they thought, "Well, I'll use the visionaries as a reference to get the pragmatist."

(00:31:53):
The pragmatist looks at the visionary and goes, "That's not my guy. First of all, he thinks I'm dumb. He thinks he's smarter than I am. Second of all, he does stuff that I would never do, and he makes decisions in a way that I would never make them. So that's not... No. So but I am interested in talking to my peers, but the problem now is, well, which of the peers are going to go first?" And it was kind of like the junior high dance problem. How do you get the party started? So that was the chasm. That was what created the chasm. The pragmatists need references and they will not accept a visionary as a reference, and they don't have any peers that have tried it yet. So that was what was happening.

Lenny (00:32:35):
I think that's such an important point that I think people don't quite always get that that reference, marques customer needs to be a pragmatist. It can't be one of these early adopters that are just trying stuff. And these other pragmatists need to feel that this is my person, this is just like me. And they love it.

Geoffrey Moore (00:32:53):
By the way, one of the reasons that pragmatists have a certain... It's not contempt for visionaries, but it's definitely wariness, it's because often they have to clean up the messes that these guys leave behind because when you're a visionary, you leave a lot of messes in your wake. And then the pragmatist has to come in and clean it up. So they're going, "Oh, that's another mark against these people."

Lenny (00:33:14):
I saw a deck of yours where you actually represent each of these stages of the lifecycle and the visionary Steve Jobs is the way you represented it, and the pragmatists are just like business people in suits sitting at a conference table.

Geoffrey Moore (00:33:24):
Exactly. And there's six of them. And the key idea behind that is none of us... By the way, I don't think any of these people are a guru and they don't think I'm a guru. We're using the antelope strategy, it's a herd strategy. But at some point... And by the way, we do this all the time, every one of... Airbnb, I want to get an Airbnb in Portland. Have you ever stayed [inaudible 00:33:53]? Is this a good hotel? Is this a good restaurant? Is this a good dentist? Is this a good lawyer? That's how we do it.

Lenny (00:33:58):
I think Uber and Airbnb is the best example of this in action where I would not ride in a random car, especially I think women were most like, "I will never get into a car, into an Uber." This is insane until all of their friends are doing it. And then, "Okay, let's give it a shot."

Geoffrey Moore (00:34:13):
I guess it's okay, yeah.

Lenny (00:34:15):
Yeah. So essentially most people were pragmatists and I guess that makes sense. And pragmatists make up the biggest chunk for it.

Geoffrey Moore (00:34:21):
And by the way, you can be a visionary with some things, a pragmatist with other things, and a conservative with other things. So the way to really think about them is, what is my persona in relation to this decision?

Lenny (00:34:34):
I love this example of the junior high dance problem where nobody wants to go ask the person. It's like, "I'm going to wait for them to come to me. I want to see how this plays out." It's such a good metaphor. In terms of how much of your product needs to be built at each of these stages. What advice do you share? How much do you need for these visionaries versus the next?

Geoffrey Moore (00:34:52):
So with a visionary, you have to have the magic ingredient working. You don't have the whole product. And in fact, your product may be buggy, but it does something... Andy Grove used to call it the 10 x effect. You need to do something that is an order of magnitude better than anything because that's why the visionary is talking to you. They're going, "Oh my gosh, you have this fusion." "Fusion, really?" "Yeah, we got fusion energy." So that's number one. Then what would still cause you to not cross the chasm yet? If there's not enough product there, pragmatists cannot put up with a product that doesn't work. So you may need to do some additional work to say, "Look, we get some more customers. I'm still living hand to mouth. It's mostly project work, but until the product has got enough stability and can be productized, I really can't afford to cross the chasm." So once you have a product that works, then you've got to say, "Okay, now I've got to find a market where it can be the dominant solution." That's the time to cross the chasm.

Lenny (00:36:05):
And a big part of that is obviously they have bosses, they have checklists, they have compliance people, they have IT people, they have people that need to buy into this or this meeting room with six people. They all have to be like, "All right, this is the best choice."

Geoffrey Moore (00:36:18):
And by the way, normally those people are designed to keep you out, and that decision process will take forever and you'll be in the welfare lines before they make their choice. So that's why it's so important to have what we call the compelling reason to buy. You need to have a group of people in a room where the leader, the guy who's going to actually sponsor make this decision is saying, "Look, I already gave this problem to everybody in the room, and our answer sucks." He wouldn't say it that way, but that's the truth. And therefore, we're kind of at the... I mean, I'm getting the message. First of all, my boss's boss's boss knows my name. That's a very bad thing. Secondly, I'm getting the message, you're either going to fix this problem, Geoffrey, or we're going to find somebody who can. So that's what gives them the energy to go against the inertial momentum of the decision-making process in their company.

Lenny (00:37:15):
Let me tell you about a product called arcade. Arcade is an interactive demo platform that enables teams to create polished on-brand demos in minutes, telling the story of your product is hard, and customers want you to show them your product, not just talk about it or gate it. That's why product four teams such as Atlassian, Carta, and Retool use Arcade to tell better stories within their homepages, product change logs, emails, and documentation. But don't just take my word for it. Quantum Metric, the leading digital analytics platform created an interactive product tour our library to drive more prospects. With Arcade, they achieved a two x higher conversion rate for demos and saw five times more engagement than videos.

(00:37:57):
On top of that, they built the demo 10 times faster than before. Creating a product demo has never been easier. With browser-based recording Arcade is the no-code solution for building personalized demos at scale. Arcade offers product customization options, designer approved editing tools and rich insights about how your viewers engage every step of the way. Ready to tell more engaging product stories that drive results? Head to arcade.software/lenny and get 50% off your first three months. That's arcade.software/lenny.

(00:38:30):
So April Dunford was on this podcast and she has this book that she put out recently called Sales Pitch. And she make this point that buying software, SaaS software is harder than selling it these days because you can get fired for buying the wrong thing. It's so stressful. There's all these options. Your boss has to be happy with it. So often people end up just not going with anything. We're just going to keep what we have. It's fine, simpler, safer. Salesforce is fine. And it sounds like that's kind of what you're describing. It's so hard-

Geoffrey Moore (00:38:58):
So if you're a pragmatist, the first thing is if it ain't broke, don't fix it. Which makes you totally different than a visionary. A visionary's like, "Yeah, no, come on, break it. Come on, let's move on." It ain't broke, don't fix it. If it is broke, who has fixed it? Is there fix in production? Does the fix work? I want that. In other words, basically to April's point, it is a risk reduction buying strategy. And by the way, you go as slowly as you can normally, but when you're under duress, you have to go faster. So the compelling reason to buy is putting you under duress.

Lenny (00:39:41):
Are there any examples of these compelling reasons to buy that come to mind that give people a sense of here's a really good compelling reason to buy? I don't know if it's a pitch.

Geoffrey Moore (00:39:48):
Well, there's a ton. Well, how about ransomware? I mean, all of a sudden the cybersecurity thing is like holy smoke because it used to be, "Well, they wouldn't attack my company. Or if they did, I mean, I have no assets." Yeah, well, actually... Because it used to be what they did is they would only attack companies that had data that they could resell in the dark web. Then God bless cryptocurrency, people are saying, "Is it cross the chasm yet? Well, their first use case is criminals." It's not a very good use case, I'm sorry to say. But the point is, now ransomware with cryptocurrency can be a monetization, so that means everybody is vulnerable. So that's one kind of compelling reason to buy. But if you look around kids who are struggling with school, the parent has a compelling reason. Anything with healthcare, compelling reason to buy. Anything if you're in a legal problem, you have a compelling risk to buy.

(00:40:48):
So I mean, there's always these situations where you say, "Okay, that's on a personal basis." On a company-wide basis, it may be things like, "Well, what am I supposed to do my office space? Can I get my company to come back to the office or do I have to dump the space? What am I supposed to do? And by the way, I know I'm going to have some kind of space, but do I want to design it the way we used? I'm getting into some space by the way, I got a great deal if it was a fire sale, right? Cool space, what do I put in it? Is it supposed to have offices? Do they have doors, do they not have doors do?" So in other words, there's a bunch of stuff where you get people going, "Okay, how can we help? How can we help?" "I need help. And I've gone to my standard solutions and no, I don't believe that, so I need help."

Lenny (00:41:37):
Okay, so it's interesting that I even misunderstood what you're saying and I think this is a really important point. The compelling reason to buy is not a compelling reason to sell, which people often think about as the pitch you're making. The buy is basically the pain point. They need a really big pain.

Geoffrey Moore (00:41:51):
Yeah, because that's what's going to... So therefore the key to the bowling alley that's different from the tornado, and it's also different from the early market. In the early market it's about you. You tell the story about you and the visionary wants to hear about you. In the tornado it's also about you, because we now have budget to buy this stuff, and you're a candidate. In the bowling alley, it's never about you. And that is so hard for a series of entrepreneurs because they want to give a demo, they want to tell the story, they want to share their vision. The answer is, "We don't care. We don't want to hear your story. We hate demos, and I don't know who you are and I don't care. I'm in trouble. We need to talk about me. We don't want to talk about you."

(00:42:35):
So we have this saying in the Crossing the Chasm playbook. First of all, "Shut the God damn laptop. Just don't open it and start with..." And the way you start the conversation is always the same. "We're here because we've been working with some people in your industry and we understand there's this really serious problem around document management or around Wi-Fi access or whatever it is, and we believe that your company might have it, is that true?" And what's interesting about it is you'll get one of two responses either, "Oh, are you kidding me? Okay, we have that." Or often they'll say, "Well, not exactly." And you go, "Oh," but then before you can say anything else they'll say, "What our real problem is..." So people will talk about their... They want therapy, they'll talk about their problems. So if you're willing to... But as an entrepreneur, you got to realize the gold at this point is problem domain knowledge. That's the thing you really want to collect.

Lenny (00:43:45):
Amazing. So you've sort of answered this question, but I want to make it even more complete. You have this amazing LinkedIn post of these four go-to-market playbooks based on the stage you're in. And you've touched on this already, but it might be helpful just to go through it one by one. And even more helpful would be like, what does it look like when you're in the early market? How do you know if you're in the early market versus in the bowling alley versus in the tornado?

Geoffrey Moore (00:44:08):
Okay, so in the early market, you know you're there because first of all, the story is the technology, and it's specifically the disruptive technology. By the way, you could start a business with a non-disruptive thing, but then you don't need these playbooks, then you're on Main Street. So the assumption is you've got something that nobody's ever done before or seen before. So in that playbook, the first thing is just you hear the responsibilities. And a venture capitalist would say the same thing to you. "Do you have a technology expert who's a wizard? Because we're not going to fund just any two guys and a PowerPoint tech, even though we like your dog."

(00:44:50):
So that's number one. Number two, "Can you demo the technology?" You have to be able to demo thing. And then three, "Can you create a vision which says what forces are going to release?" And the concept that we use in venture, I call it trapped value. And with the idea is where's the trap value that this innovation would release? Because when you release trapped value, the world will give you a portion of the gain, typically 10%. It's easy an number to do math with. As I said, I'm an English major. So if you want a billion-dollar company, you better find $10 billion worth of trapped value that your technology could- [inaudible 00:45:30]

Lenny (00:45:30):
Airbnb is an amazing example of that, right? Where they unlocked people's homes, basically 10%-

Geoffrey Moore (00:45:36):
Yeah. Uber unlocked their backseat of the car. By the way, the free labor force, it was like, "Whoa." Okay, so really cool idea early market fund. For the bowling alley one then the playbook is, "No, where's the problem?" And then you got to take it down to in what geography, what industry, what profession, what use case. And that takes... That's not just... I mean, you want to spend some time in doing that. And then what you want to really do is just maintain intellectual curiosity about the problem as opposed to jumping to the solution. So why is this a hard problem to do? What is going on? Where is the trapped value? By the way, how expensive? What is the cost of not solving this problem?

(00:46:24):
Often it's a risk exposure, or it could be just a gating item on your growth or potentially a churn problem. By the way, if you wanted to pick a compelling reason to buy, how about if you help SaaS companies deal with churn? Do you think they would care about that? I think they might. So the point being... And you're going to say, "Okay, I'm going to learn more about churn and I'm going to really understand... And by the way, I'm going to understand your churn," which is different maybe from somebody else's churn. So it's the problem domain thing. And then you build your go-to market around... The lead gen is, "Hey, do you have any of these seven symptoms of fatal churn?" And the people that respond to that ad are pre-qualified. And then the BDR, if you're at Salesforce, a BDR would call you and say, "Just confirming you have these problems." "Oh yeah, RBI." "And your role at the company is... And are you responsible for doing this?" "Well, actually no, it's Harry, not Mary." "Maybe we should talk to Harry." "Yeah, you probably should talk to Harry."

(00:47:32):
Then you call Harry and you get the appointment with Harry because Harry's got the problem. And then the next thing is you do a diagnostic with them. "So we understand we're talking to your colleagues, here's the problem, here's what we think we're doing. But before we tell you about how great our solution is, let's make sure that we understand what your challenges are." And your goal in that call is to get them to talk as much as possible and for you to take notes. And by the way, this is a place where you probably still want to remember to use a pen because you actually want them to see you writing down their words, because that means, "Okay, he's listening. He's listening."

Lenny (00:48:14):
Oh, interesting. That's a good tip. Like on Zoom, would your advice there be just make sure the camera shows your hands?

Geoffrey Moore (00:48:19):
Oh, yeah, yeah.

Lenny (00:48:22):
Okay. Lean in. Yeah, yeah.

Geoffrey Moore (00:48:23):
Or sometimes... I mean, no, you couldn't do this. I was going to say we record it, but they don't want to record it because they're going to say some things during the call that they won't be necessarily complimentary to all their colleagues and they don't want you to record it.

Lenny (00:48:38):
Got it. So in this bowling alley phase, how do you know you... I know it's not like this binary switch, but that you're ready to move into that versus the early market playbook.

Geoffrey Moore (00:48:50):
Well, I think you get to a point where you realize, "I can't scale my business doing what I've been doing. I mean, I just can't." And if you've taken venture capital, the thing you want to do is, "I don't want to have to raise another..." Well, so understand how venture capital funding works for a second. This is important. A venture capitalist gives you money, and what they're buying from you with this money is, "I want you to use this money to change the state of your company such that when we raise the next round, the next investor will value your company two to three times higher than we're valuing it today."

(00:49:30):
So basically the purpose of this money is to change the value state of your company. If you do anything else with that money, you could have done brilliant things, created amazing demos, hired great people, but if at the end of the day you haven't changed the value state of the company and we have to raise more money, we're going to raise it at the old valuation and I as an investor lose, or even worse, we have a down round and I lose even more.

(00:49:58):
So once you start thinking about that, so we're then Crossing the Chasm. The Crossing the Chasm play is I need to change the state of my company from a cool possibility to what accountants call a going concern. So what is a going concern? A going concern is a company that two years from now you would expect still to be in existence. Why would you do that? Because they have a customer base that's loyal and they have a ecosystem of partners that bring them into new deals and they have established their CAC and LTV, and they've kind of figured out their operating model. And it's not the biggest company in the world.

(00:50:38):
It's somewhere we're now probably in the 10, $20 million, but it's a real company. It's a real company. And that's who you're trying to create when you cross the chasm. And you know you've crossed the chasm when you say, "I don't have to raise any more venture capital. Now, I may want to because I have ambitions to be globally dominant." But you get to raise it on your nickel and on your timeline, not on, "Oh my God, I'm running out of money." So the sooner you can get off with the, "I'm running out..." And particularly last year was fatal to a huge number of companies because that was not how they were thinking about raising funds. They always thought, "Well, there'll be another round, another round, another round." And they were not thinking about changing their valuation state and they're not here.

Lenny (00:51:26):
That's a really interesting insight. This idea that you know you've crossed the chasm if you can survive without more venture funding, how do you think about that, the profit element of that? Because it feels like that's the core to being able to survive without venture funding. Is it about making enough money that you can cut and make a profit, or is there some other reason?

Geoffrey Moore (00:51:47):
All you really care about is cashflow positive. I just want to be able to keep doing what I'm doing. So you don't care about the actual GAAP accounting at all.

Lenny (00:52:01):
I see. So you could cut back and you can get to profitability if you need, but the idea is your cashflow positive?

Geoffrey Moore (00:52:08):
And you'd like to grow and you might want to raise money. But the point is, if you do go out to raise money, you get to raise money at a different valuation. So the way in which venture capitalists categorize you is they say, "What risk is my money going to take off the table?" So an angel investor says, "Well, my money is going to take off the table, the risk of whether you can even create anything, I'm going to give you enough money to get into trouble." That's basically it. And then the Crossing the Chasm money says, "I'm going to take company existence viability off the table. I don't know if you're going to grow, I don't know if you're going to become a venture return, but I'm going to take you going out of business off the table."

(00:52:48):
And then the bowling alley stuff is, "Okay, now I'm buying probably a journey from 10 million to a hundred million dollars," something like that. "And I'm expecting a growth rate," and this is probably where the rule of 40 starts to kick in. If you're playing the rule of 40, we want to raise more money later on, you're going to have a different valuation than we had before. And then the tornado thing by that point, now you say, "You're in Gen AI? You have a large language module? Whoa, okay. You're worth a lot more than we thought," because now the category's in the tornado and that's a different game.

Lenny (00:53:29):
Yeah. I was going to say AI is clearly an example of being in tornado. So maybe just talk a little bit about what that is, the tornado phase and then there's the Main Street playbook.

Geoffrey Moore (00:53:39):
So how do you know the difference between the bowling alley and the tornado? Prior to the tornado, when your sales team calls on the customer, they do not have a budget for you. In the early market, there's no budget for anything. In the bowling alley there's budget, but it's budget for a solution that's not you. It's for the old way of trying to bandaid the problem. So we say in the early market, you have to create budget. In the bowling alley, you have to redirect budget, but that takes sales cycles. It takes time. And if it's a small market... This is why entrepreneurs can win these market segments, because if you're a big established company, this is just a pain in the ass. It's too small a market, it's too much work, it's too hard. Redirecting the... I want my salespeople to go where the budget's already established.

(00:54:28):
Well, when does budget get established? When a category goes horizontal and people go, "Well, yeah, we all want Wi-Fi, we all want mobile apps, we all want cloud computing, we all want whatever it is." And now what happens is... And by the way the pragmatist heard is they went from, "You're not doing that, are you?" "No, me neither." "Okay, good." To, "You are, you are, you are. Oh, we're behind. We better do it." So these budgets come into the market and kind of all at the same time, which is what creates the tornado. Because if you give a department a budget, they will spend it and when they spend it, they're going to spend it with a vendor and whoever vendor they select they're probably going to stay with. So now the market share battle is now on, and whoever gets the most customers early on, the ecosystem starts to form around them.

(00:55:23):
So in the nineties, we saw a lot of tornado, gorilla play. Cisco, Intel, Oracle, obviously Microsoft. I mean these companies, [inaudible 00:55:36], they were all incredibly competitive companies. They were all tornado plays. Between client server and the internet, it just created this massive tornado effect. And that game plan is very competitive sales to grab market share. And then at some point, if you're not number one, then you have to kind of do a defensive maneuver and retreat into a niche and say, "Okay, if I can't be a gorilla, I at least need to be a chimp." And a chimp is like a local gorilla. "I'm not the gorilla, but..." "I'm not Cisco, I'm Juniper." But for telcos, Juniper was the Cisco of telcos at that time. So anyway, I don't know if you saw in the paper today, but at the other end of that lifecycle, HPE has bought Juniper.

Lenny (00:56:28):
[inaudible 00:56:28] is happening. I like that. That's good news. So one of the most interesting lessons you teach is also that these playbooks don't work together well. Basically if you use one in the wrong phase, it's the opposite. It has the opposite effect. So before we get there, let me just summarize maybe quickly the playbook in each of these four. I have some notes here and then maybe just talk about why is it that they fail if you pick the wrong one. So in the early market, you're looking for a visionary customer that just wants to use something new and cool and stay ahead of the curve. In the bowling alley phase, you want to engage with a pragmatic business person who has a huge problem and they need a fix and you're there for them. In the tornado, there's just this land grab, something is just going crazy, AI and everyone's just spend, spend, I need AI in my product. And then Main Street is just, it's kind of the sustaining tech that everyone just needs to make sure continues working and doesn't deteriorate.

Geoffrey Moore (00:57:23):
By the way, the way I would [inaudible 00:57:25] the last two is think of tornado as kind of the land and Main Street as the expand. I mean, that's not a bad way to think about the two as well. Yeah, you got it. You got it.

Lenny (00:57:35):
Okay, great. So why is it that these undercut each other if you're trying to use either the one in the wrong phase or use both?

Geoffrey Moore (00:57:42):
Well, so let's start with classic sales 101 from the nineties. Qualify the customer on budget before you make a sales call. That absolutely is critical on Main Street. I mean it's critical on the tornado, it's dumb on Main Street because obviously they have budget, they've got budgets that even has your name on it if you can go get it. But it's a big mistake in the early market or in the bowling alley because they don't have budget. So you're not going to get it. And the way you win in the early market is with a project model and the way you win in the bowling alley is with a solution model.

(00:58:17):
And the problem is if you bring a project model to the bowling alley, the problem is you won't scale because it won't be repeatable. The ecosystem won't form around you. And if you bring a solution model to the early market, it's like you're over investing in one thing. The visionary's saying, "Well, yeah, but I have so many other things I want to do." So they're going to want to take you way off your solution roadmap. So each one of these things, the market dynamics call for a very clear response. It's not hard to see the response. What people struggle with is, I have been successful with this playbook, the market has moved to the next phase, but I'm really good at the old playbook, so I want to stay with the playbook I'm good at. So that's when they get in trouble.

Lenny (00:59:05):
So I think that's extra reason to pay close attention to which phase you're in and that you're practicing the correct playbook. We've talked about AI a little bit, and I don't want to get too far down this road, but I guess is there any advice you would share for an AI startup in being in this tornado or a company looking to integrate AI? Is there anything that you've seen of just make sure you're doing this right?

Geoffrey Moore (00:59:26):
Well, it's interesting about... And particularly right now, I mean the thing that's caught everybody's imagination is generative AI. So we should be thinking about things like open AI with Microsoft and Co-pilot and those kinds of things. Well, maybe not. It depends on what... So from a customer's point of view, there's AI in the early market, there's AI in the bowling alley, there's AI in the chasm, there's AI in the tornado, and there's AI on Main Street. So I mean, I would argue if you go to Microsoft Copilot, you're on Main Street, you're not taking any risk, you're experimenting with a new thing. It's kind of cool, makes you more productive. God bless. It's kind of like just an add-on to Teams or to your whole Office 365 suite. Stuff that's in the tornado right now, I don't know. I'm trying to think about what is the use case for Gen AI? I'm not sure there is one in the tornado, but the closest I would say is Salesforce is probably close enough.

(01:00:23):
They have a sales co-pilot. They have a services copilot, right? I'm sure there marketing co-pilot. So you're going, but we're going to change our sales motion and we're going to use generative AI in line, in our performance on a very widespread, across our entire base. So all our salespeople are going to use this new tool. That would be okay. And that makes sense because the new tool... First of all, Salesforce has their own large language module. So it's not like you're going out to the open AI world and having all those issues. So you can do it and there's a very high productivity return at a modest risk, I think, and modest disruption. For the bowling alley you'd say, I don't know if this is bowling alley or early market, I'll say it's bowling alley.

(01:01:18):
So if you're Sal Khan and you have the Khan Academy and you're saying, "Look, we want to provide educational resources for the world for young people." The problem with education right now is that particularly after the pandemic, you're a teacher you used to have... When you were a teacher in say K through 12, K through eight, you have a class of 30 kids and probably 10 to 15 of them are middle of the road and some number are actually significantly ahead and some number are behind. And your job as a teacher is to kind of work with that. Well, after the pandemic, you might have five different grade levels in the same classroom, not three or six even. That's an impossible problem. But if you said, "Look, we can use Gen AI tutoring and we can tune it to each one of those sixth grade levels."

(01:02:09):
Now that's a teacher co-pilot, but that's a really specialized idea. So you go, "Well, that's amazing." And then if you wanted to go to the other side, "You say all these ad agencies say they do this really cool advertising, but I think I can do it myself with Gen AI and I'm going to sell it to other people." I mean, you can imagine a whole businesses that say we write legal opinions and we always start with Gen AI. We don't ship Gen AI, there's a human in the loop. We're going to do amazing or more images, maybe. We're going to design visual images with all the really cool stuff you could do. We're going to invent a new agency or a new kind of agency we're going to charge to..." I don't know what it would be, but the point is Gen AI I think can be absorbed by the marketplace at multiple places.

Lenny (01:03:02):
As you were talking about that lawyer example, I was thinking part of the pitch would be... And it's also a lot cheaper, but that reminds me of this other post that you wrote, The Seven Deadly Sins of Crossing the Chasm. And I wanted to chat about some of these, and one of them is discounting before you cross the chasm. Can you talk about why that's something you want to avoid?

Geoffrey Moore (01:03:20):
Back to that issue about, "Heart surgery 9.99, this Saturday only bring a coupon." I mean, the discounting model makes sense when something's commoditized or the let's even do the freemium model. The freemium model makes sense if there is no risk in adopting the offer. But chasms are based on risk bearing decisions. Basically that's the problem that creates the chasm. I have to make a risk bearing buying decision. So discounting does not reduce risk. In fact, it might even increase risk because this vendor might say, "Well, yeah, I'll give you a better price, but now I'm not going to give you the extra support or we'll have a change of scope." We'll say, "Yes, but now, that wasn't in the contract. So you have to add more." And all of that is fair game on Main Street, but it's not for crossing the chasm.

Lenny (01:04:21):
I'm going to pick on a couple of these other sims that you mentioned. One is you call the target customer mix up. Can you talk about that?

Geoffrey Moore (01:04:29):
The key to this whole Crossing the Chasm playbook is start with the world. Don't start with... Well, the question we're trying to answer is where is a small pool of trapped value that we can become our pool? So that's why we have geography, profession, use case. We're just trying to get big enough to matter, but small enough to lead is one. And then once you find that pool, the question you have to say is, "Who controls access to that? Who's going to sponsor my deal in order for me to solve that, to release that trapped value for that company?" That's your target customer. And you may not know them. Typically, my experience is you probably have worked with at least one company in the industry at some point along the line. It's kind of odd if you just had never heard of the industry and you picked that one.

(01:05:24):
Usually that's why I said, "Well, maybe I should have added that to how do you know you're ready to cross the chasm?" You should at least have a hunch. You should at least, "We've done this work, and I think this is the one." Now, you still have to go validate it and make it happen. But basically the way you would validate it is rather than try to go to a research or do something, that won't work. You say, "Well, we're going to run a marketing campaign, a modest one. I'm going to see if I can't get two more of the same use case. I'm willing to bet the next three months of my company by saying in this three months, all we're going to do is try to get two more deals that have this pattern." And that would be kind of the way you might go after it.

Lenny (01:06:10):
So I think this is worth spending a little more time on this idea of how you know you're ready to cross the chasm. So one is you find one very excited marquee customer, then you're sharing, maybe find a couple more and see if it's actually starting to roll and tip.

Geoffrey Moore (01:06:26):
No. Well, I said it wrong. So the marquee customer is probably not in your beachhead market. The marquee customer is a famous company that you have the visionary sponsor. That's the thing, because that's the company that the business press wanted to write about, or the tech press wanted to write about. People went, "Oh, you were the guys who..." You're like Hans Solo. You did whatever that run was in 15 parsecs. I can't even remember what it was. But that's your claim to fame. It's your claim to fame. But the Crossing the Chasm one is, "Oh..." And by the way the press is not interested in the crossing chasm, but the local, if there was a local press, they'd be all over it.

Lenny (01:07:08):
The Kessel Run.

Geoffrey Moore (01:07:11):
The Kessel Run. Thank you. The Kessel Run in 15 parsecs. Thank you.

Lenny (01:07:13):
That's right.

Geoffrey Moore (01:07:14):
Exactly. That was his visionary thing.

Lenny (01:07:16):
So I think the important takeaway there is there's always this advice of talk to customers, make sure they're happy, build what... Not necessarily build what they want, but make sure you're understanding what they need. But I think when your most important insights here is make sure you're talking to the right people. Which are essentially people in the next stage, essentially of the adoption life cycle. The more pragmatists.

Geoffrey Moore (01:07:35):
Yes. And they have to be the... I think you need to talk to the economic buyer as opposed to the end user, because the end user will be saying, "Oh, yeah, you're right. Oh, it's just terrible and we're oppressed." But if their boss doesn't want to sponsor it, it doesn't work.

Lenny (01:07:51):
Which is hard, hard often when you're building B2B software, you just don't make it great. And then it's like, "Oh, these people don't actually care what they're buying it. They just have all these check boxes." And then another deadly sin, which you've touched on, but I think it might be worth sharing again, is just this idea, you call it the compelling reason, confusion, where instead of thinking about your compelling reason to sell, you think about what is the pain point you're solving, compelling reason to buy.

Geoffrey Moore (01:08:16):
Obviously as an entrepreneur, you have a compelling reason to sell. But what they tend to do is in trying to cross the chasm, if they're not using this approach, they think, "Well, I haven't made my product attractive enough." So then they'd say, "Well, I'm going to make a sexier demo, or I'm going to change my deck. I'm going to write a new..." And the sales guy comes back, says, "I had a great presentation. This is the deck that we ought to be using." And that's all about compelling ways to sell, not compelling reasons to buy. And the pragmatist, by the way... And by the way, the practice will take the meeting. One of the problems with the chasm is they don't say no. They just never say yes. And they actually encourage you... "You should come back again with this too. This is really interesting." Yeah, it is really interesting.

Lenny (01:09:09):
Kind of along those lines, positioning, how important is that, and any advice on figuring out your positioning when you're doing this? I know you talk a lot about making sure you focus on their pain point, but at some point you're like, "Here's what we're doing for you."

Geoffrey Moore (01:09:22):
One of the nice things about Crossing the Chasm is the positioning formula is absolutely the same every time. It's really cool. So basically when you're thinking about positioning, you're saying, "Look, I'm going with this use case in this particular segment." So they have an incumbent vendor. The advantage of the incumbent vendor is they understand the business, but they don't have the new technology. Conversely, you have technology competitors who have as good technology, maybe a better technology than you have, but they're not committed to this domain expertise of this thing.

(01:09:56):
So your positioning is, "We are the technology leaders who have specialized and committed to solve this problem. And by the way, we have huge respect for your incumbent vendor. We're not asking you to kick them out. They just can't solve this problem. We also have respect for our peers, but frankly, they wouldn't know your problem if they wouldn't recognize it in a lineup. We are here, and by the way, if anybody comes into our quadrant, we're going to kick their ass. We are going to be beyond compare. Nobody is going to handle this problem with this kind of technology the way we will, and that's our claim of fame. That's what we're going to do, and that's our positioning."

Lenny (01:10:36):
I love that. Say you're building a product led growth company, a bottom up oriented B2B SaaS company. Is there anything that changes in your advice?

Geoffrey Moore (01:10:46):
Yeah, if you're going to use a volume ups approach like Atlassian or anything grows up from the bottom up, you're playing a different game. First of all, you're playing... Because you attract the end user before you attract the economic buyer. So you have some version of a freemium strategy, that's what you're going to do. And Yammer did this, right? And eventually got bought by Microsoft. So the way you play that game is, first of all, you probably do need some funding, not necessarily, maybe you can do this all on AWS and a credit card. But the game that is going to be, how do I create that moment of criticality? What you would do is you'd say... First of all, you need telemetry. So you need to figure out what are the people really doing with our product? And then you need to find a way to communicate with them to see if you can ferret out, is there a compelling reason to buy thing in their environment? So it'd be a different way of doing early market.

(01:11:52):
You would not have a marquee client, but to cross the chasm... You cannot cross the chasm of product-led growth, you can't because it is like saying, "Well, yeah, I'm going to cure Covid by just putting vaccines out in public places." It's like, "No, people need to learn more. No." So you'd have to do that. Where product-led growth plays really interestingly, is in the land and expand phases of the market. If you can land with a hot product, but more importantly, product-led growth, which is really good at is expand because it prompts the user to get more involved. And that's classically a Main Street play. But there's got to be no risk. That product-led growth works when basically the extended the next purchase has very low risk, and therefore you're not really dealing with chasms.

Lenny (01:12:53):
That is incredibly interesting. Interestingly, every product led growth company ends up building a sales team, 100% of them, including Atlassian, which had product led growth for a long time. And I don't know if anyone's heard this perspective on it, that if you really want to cross the gap... I imagine it happens in some form of-

Geoffrey Moore (01:13:12):
Well, and here's the thing. The reason they build a sales team eventually is they need to get enterprise deals. And obviously you need a sales team to get enterprise deals. And one of the mistakes you could make is hiring an enterprise salesperson when you're trying to cross the chasm. Enterprise salespeople are not good chasm crossers because they're used to doing horizontal coverage model. This is like no, domain expert narrow model. You want somebody that looks more like a sales engineer than a salesperson. You want somebody very diagnostic, very committed to the integrity of the problem solution framework. So it's just different.

Lenny (01:13:54):
Okay. Just a couple more questions. You had this very public exchange with Martin Casado, he's a partner at Andreessen Horowitz. And just to summarize briefly, essentially he was arguing that I think some people believe once you've crossed the chasm, life's good. It's all downhill. People are going to start pulling your product out of you. It's going to be so easy. And his argument is he doesn't see that, it's endless pain and suffering and hardships. And I know you went back and forth trying to correct this, but what's a way to think about what happens?

Geoffrey Moore (01:14:25):
So actually, Martin and I had a couple of this... By the way, his biggest point... I'll come back to your point in a second, but his biggest point is, "Jeff..." The venture community at least, and certainly Andreessen Horowitz doesn't deal with the level of granularity of Crossing the Chasm anymore. There's too much money that wants to be put to work. By the way, there's so much software already out there that the notion that your software is going to be that disruptive is increasingly improbable because you're not standing on the shoulders of giants, you're standing on the shoulders of people standing on the shoulders of people standing on the shoulders of people standing on the shoulders of giants. So he was making a bunch of those points, which I thought were pretty interesting. But his other point about, does life ever become easy? No, life never becomes easy. The problems change.

(01:15:17):
The challenge with software is... Well, there's a lot of challenges with it, but software that people use, the application software, we all have different minds. We all have different contexts. To make a product that would work, that would solve what I want and solve what you want and solve what the listener wants. I mean, the margin, no. We're going to have different expectations. So there's always... And then of course there's competition, and then there's funding, and then there's technological shifts, and just about the time it really works well, they say, "No, we got to put it... No, no, no. You put it in the data center. We got to put it in the cloud." "Oh, no, no, you got in the cloud, you got to put it in Kubernetes." "Oh, no, no, no. You don't understand. It's edge AI, it's not cloud." It just goes on and on and on. So I think if you're going to play this game, you got to be up for... Yeah, there's going to be a new headache every week.

Lenny (01:16:17):
That's exactly how I see it. I always tell founders, you shouldn't start a company unless you can't not start a company.

Geoffrey Moore (01:16:23):
Yes. By the way, why did I leave? [inaudible 01:16:28] County was a great place to be, but I had to do my own thing.

Lenny (01:16:32):
And that's a real pull. Kind of along the lines of something you just shared, maybe a final question. Is there something you've changed your mind about or something you've evolved your thinking on recently? Either from the beginning of the book or just even more recent?

Geoffrey Moore (01:16:47):
I think what I realized over time increasingly was this is a model that's really optimized for B2B markets, because it implies federated decision making around high risk buying decisions. I would say for the 20th century, that was 95% of tech. But what was so interesting about the change in the century... Because remember right at the change of the century, B2B tech went in the tank, the tech bubble just... Because everybody was afraid of the Y2K problem. So they did a whole bunch of buying up of software, and then there was a year where they think, "Well, we ate more than we could at Thanksgiving dinner. We're not interested in eating another burger here. "So the market went in the tank. By the way at that point, venture started saying, "Well, maybe we should be investing in biotech, or maybe we should doing clean tech." Venture stepped back from the table too.

(01:17:46):
But out of this, consumer computing came out of nowhere. And for my generation, it was unimaginable. The first time I heard about Google and they said, "We're going to save every search argument." I thought, "That's the dumbest thing I've ever heard in my life. They're not going to be able to afford it." But their model was, "We are rethinking this thing from the ground up. Geoffrey, you have no idea what we're doing." And boy were they right. So the point was when that came in, then consumer computing and then the iPhone hits, and then we have mobile apps. You have a world now where the B2C play can actually be the core of innovation. It used to be B2C was an afterthought. Now it's like, "No, no, no, no, B2B might be the afterthought." So it's completely different... And the whole digital transformation of the universe, and we're still living through the digital transformation 20 years in, and I don't think Crossing the Chasm is designed for that problem. So that's a different problem.

Lenny (01:18:48):
So basically, if you're building a consumer app, don't spend time studying Crossing the Chasm.

Geoffrey Moore (01:18:53):
Yeah, if you're doing B2B, this is the most reliable playbook. It's still on... People are still into this playbook 30 years in. So it's obviously... The playbook kind of works.

Lenny (01:19:05):
I said this earlier, I feel like people are just reinventing many of the things you uncovered 30 years ago. Everyone's like, "Oh yeah, target audience, really important, or finding a marque customer." So I'm really happy that we spent this time digging into many of your theories.

Geoffrey Moore (01:19:22):
Well, Lenny, thank you for being... You've been a really great prompter and questioner, so thank you very, very much.

Lenny (01:19:28):
I really, really appreciate that. Is there anything you want to leave listeners with as a final thought or piece of advice or just anything?

Geoffrey Moore (01:19:35):
Look, I don't know if anybody's reading the paper recently, but the world's not exactly nailing it right now. There's a lot of stuff going on that we could do a lot better, and software enabled technology is almost certainly at the core of any solution that scales to any world problem that matters. I think it's more important to be an entrepreneur now than maybe ever. I wouldn't make becoming a billionaire my goal. Frankly, I don't even know what a billionaire would even do with their money. I don't even how to even imagine their money. That's a thousand million dollars. It doesn't make any sense, but what does make sense? But what does make sense is to... I'm happy to get two... Do I know what to do with 10 million? Yeah. Could I do 20? Probably. Could I use a hundred? Probably not. But at some point, I want people to make yourself a great living, make yourself... But after that, have an impact. If you're gifted enough to be able to start a software company and do something original, you're a scarce resource, so don't waste it.

Lenny (01:20:42):
Amazing. I'm going to sneak it one more question along these same lines actually. Your last book is very unlike all your other books. It's called The Infinite Staircase, which is essentially a guide to living a good life and a meaningful life. Is there maybe one piece of advice you could share with folks of just how to live a better life, a more meaningful life, happier life?

Geoffrey Moore (01:21:00):
The purpose of that book was twofold. One was... So I was looking around... And this is an American sort of experience between social media and the politicians or whatever. Our ability to defend traditional values is becoming increasingly challenging. And historically, you say, "Well, religion was sort of the place where the foundation for solidifying traditional values." But in my lifetime, the counter explanation of how we got here, other than being created by a creator, this whole the Big Bang and the Darwinian model, it's becoming increasingly credible and I'm fascinated by it. So the question I had in the back of my mind is how could you take that model and still support traditional ethics?

(01:21:53):
So the first part was, well, what's the model? It turns out to explain getting from the Big Bang to Lenny and Geoffrey talking on this podcast, there's a lot of steps you've got to go through. But there's a whole thing about complexity and how complexity emerges in layers and the staircase is a series of layers, and the first two thirds of the book takes 11 stairs. That gets you from physics to theory. And it's like, really? Yeah, yeah. From a cloud of atoms to us talking about Crossing the Chasm, 11 steps, we can get you there. It's kind of fun. It's assembling the last 25 years of my reading. It's fascinating stuff. All these different topics, and I was just trying to knit it together. No original research. I was just literally just trying to get the story together.

(01:22:41):
But then the last third was, okay, that's a very reasonable narrative. It's maybe even more reasonable than religious narratives, but now how do you validate ethical action and where does it come from? So the last part was about, okay, how do you do that? How does it derive from that creation story? The secular creation stories were. So that was what was important. At the end of the day, I think the message of that book is just, you really do need to do good, but it's not because you're obeying... In this framework, it's not because you're a bang a divine creator. It's because we're mammals and mammals nurture their young, and we were gifted with unconditional love when we were born because otherwise, you and I could not be here. I mean, a 1-year-old cannot... If somebody doesn't love the hell out of a 1-year-old, they're not going to be two. So we know where we started. So come on, those values were built into us. They don't have to come from above. They can come from below, and therefore, how can you integrate them into your life? And that was where the book... Anyway.

Lenny (01:23:53):
That is a beautiful message to end on. I promised I'd get you out of here in one minute. Just to let people know, you do speaking, you do consulting, where can people find you online if they want to reach out and- [inaudible 01:24:05]

Geoffrey Moore (01:24:05):
LinkedIn. Yeah, I'm on LinkedIn and I have a blog on LinkedIn. And if these topics are interesting to you, you'd probably be interested in the blog.

Lenny (01:24:13):
And then message you on LinkedIn would be the idea?

Geoffrey Moore (01:24:15):
Exactly. Absolutely.

Lenny (01:24:16):
Easy. Geoffrey, thank you so much for being here.

Geoffrey Moore (01:24:19):
Well, thank you, Lenny. It was a pleasure.

Lenny (01:24:22):
It was my pleasure. Bye, everyone.

(01:24:26):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny (00:04):
Gibson Biddle, whose name is really fun to say, by the way, has directly taught and worked with more PMs than only a handful of other people in the world. Before going full time on teaching, he was VP of product at Netflix and at Chegg, and has written what is almost surely the most popular Medium post on product strategy.

Lenny (00:21):
In our chat, we learned about Gibson's very popular product strategy and prioritization framework, and we go through a bunch of real life case studies from his time in Netflix to see how they apply in the real world. I love how Gibson comes up with such clear and memorable frameworks, which help demystify the vagueness that surround strategy and prioritization. We're really lucky to have Gibson share these with us, and I hope you enjoy it.

Lenny (00:45):
This episode is brought to you by Flat File. Think the last time imported a spreadsheet. Did it work the first time? Chances are it did not. You probably got some weird error, had to try a bunch of things like removing the blank title rows above your column headers, or Googling how to save with UTF-8 encoding. What even is UTF? Who cares? You're just trying to get your file where it needs to go so you can do your actual job.

Lenny (01:07):
Your customers run into the same issues when it matters most, right after signing up for your product. Enter Flat File. Flat File is the data onboarding platform built to take the acute pain out of importing customer data into your product so they can see the magic that you promised them. Flat File is SOC type one and two certified, GDPR compliant, and even HIPAA compliant, ensuring your customers, no matter where in the world they're located, are sharing their data securely and in compliance every step of the way. No more emailing files back and forth. No more help articles that just don't land. Just clean data on day one, when it matters most. Get started importing millions of rows of customer data in minutes at FlatFile.com/Lenny.

Lenny (01:50):
This episode is brought to you by Coda. Coda is an all in one doc that combines the best of documents, spreadsheets, and apps in one place. I actually use Coda every single day. It's my home base for organizing my newsletter writing. It's where I plan my content calendar, capture my research, and write the first drafts of each and every post. It's also where I curate my private knowledge repository for paid newsletter subscribers, and it's also how I manage the workflow for this very podcast.

Lenny (02:15):
Over the years I've seen Coda evolve from being a tool that makes teams more productive to one that also helps bring the best practices across the tech industry to life, with an incredibly rich collection of templates and guides in the Coda doc gallery, including resources for many guests on this podcast, including Shreyas, Gokul, and Shishir, the CEO of Coda. Some of the best teams out there, like Pinterest, Spotify, Square and Uber, use Koda to run effectively and have published their templates for anyone to use.

Lenny (02:43):
If you're ping ponging between lots of documents and spreadsheets, make your life better and start using Coda. You can take advantage of a special limited time offer just for startups. Head over to Coda.io/Lenny to sign up and get a thousand dollar credit on your first statement. That's C-O-D-A.io/Lenny to sign up and get a thousand dollars in credit on your account.

Lenny (03:14):
Gibson, I am so excited to be doing this. We've collaborated on some writing. We've done a couple of fireside chats together, but we've never really dug deep into anything, and so I'm really excited for this opportunity to chat. So, welcome.

Gibson Biddle (03:27):
Great, Lenny. Thanks for having me. It's fun to virtually be in the same place at the same time. Someday we'll do that in person.

Lenny (03:35):
Oh man, I can't wait. For folks that aren't that familiar with you, could you just share a very brief overview of your journey through product?

Gibson Biddle (03:43):
It's hard, because I'm older than dirt, to be very brief, but I'll give my best shot. The intro was, I discovered I loved teaching early. I ran a sailing school, took a year off from college. That was my first startup. And then, the three chapters of my life. The first one was in marketing, so I actually started in the mail room at an ad agency, and then went into account services and created a service that helped name new companies and products, like if you're in the Bay Area, the Versatel, or the Versateller, it's a Bank of America name.

Lenny (04:10):
I've always been so curious about that industry, but that's a discussion for another time.

Gibson Biddle (04:14):
Oh yeah, well, we can come around to that. But at the end of the day, it's all about packaging and positioning and branding. And so, I was curious about that. I got good at it. And then, I lived in Silicon Valley, and I wanted to go into tech, and so I decided to go back to business school, and I went back to Tuck, which is at Dartmouth. It's the only ski... it's the only business school that has its own ski area, which is why I went there. It's in Hanover, New Hampshire.

Lenny (04:35):
Okay, that feels like a product market fit for Gibson.

Gibson Biddle (04:37):
Exactly. And then, after the school, this is the tech journey, I joined Electronic Arts. Punk kid in the right place at the right time. I joined in marketing, and then I switched over to product. It was a great place to learn product. They called it Producer College. I learned a ton, and my first startup was actually a joint venture between Electronic Arts and Disney. We created what's called EA Kits at the beginning, and that became Creative Wonders, and we sold that company to Mr. Wonderful from Shark Tank. He was the CEO of the Learning Company that made Reader Rabbit software and Oregon Trails. That dates me, because most of the listeners have probably played Oregon Trails as a kid.

Lenny (05:13):
Dying of dysentery. That's what I remember.

Gibson Biddle (05:15):
Yeah, yeah. And so, the product roles I grew up into, I call it a muckety muck, but a VP of product or a chief product officer. Joined Netflix in 2005. I left out some failed startups. That's important. It's important to let folks know I had some failed startups, but you can gloss over in the brief version. Netflix 2005, and then 2010 I went back to my heart, which is teaching. Chegg was a textbook rental and homework help company. It continues to exist. We took that public sort of 2014.

Gibson Biddle (05:44):
And then, last five years I stopped direct deposit, and I'm really back to the coda in my career. I'm back to teaching, which I really love to do. So I do talks, workshops all over the world. I do more writing, which really saves my voice, and then experiment with different ways to really try to be helpful to product leaders around the world.

Lenny (06:02):
Awesome. We're going to be spending time digging into some of that stuff. Did you describe this point in your career as stopping direct deposit?

Gibson Biddle (06:08):
I did.

Lenny (06:09):
That's amazing. Wow. I've never heard it that way.

Gibson Biddle (06:14):
At least you understood that.

Lenny (06:15):
I totally get that. Amazing. So, a question I ask folks in your line of work especially is, how many PMs would you say you've helped train, free workshops and advising and online courses, and anything else you've done?

Gibson Biddle (06:28):
I thought it was going to be a, how many PMs does it take to screw in a light bulb? I thought it was going to be a joke. Yeah, yeah. Okay, my SWAG. SWAG is a stupid wild-ass guess, important idea. So, my guess is, in real life I've worked with product leaders where I was in the building with them. It would be like 500 to 1000. When I would manage an organization, there might be 200 or 300 people in it. So, that's in real life.

Gibson Biddle (06:53):
The next one would be via talks, workshops, newsletter. That's probably, I kind of can SWAG my way into that. Probably 50 to 100,000 a year. The reason I sort of know, I'm a feedback freak, so there's a Survey Monkey at the end of everything I do. So for instance, every morning I wake up, it's always feedback for the same talk. I did a Branding for Builders talk for Product School and there'll be like 10 surveys. I've got like 6,000 surveys for that. They're all watching and recording. My guess is, that means like 60,000 people have watched that one video, for instance.

Gibson Biddle (07:26):
Anyways, and then lifetime, it's probably getting into 500,000 to a million. So, that's my SWAG. I could be 2X wrong on either side.

Lenny (07:34):
Okay, a million, potentially.

Gibson Biddle (07:36):
Well, your number's bigger. You could just go off of, what, 115,000 subscribers your newsletter?

Lenny (07:43):
Yeah.

Gibson Biddle (07:44):
You're getting to a billion, Lenny. You're going to get to the next level. 500 million to a billion.

Lenny (07:49):
I feel like the level that you've helped PMs is at a deeper level for most of the folks, especially the courses you've done and things like that. So, it's a little hard to compare. But anyway, that's really impressive, and I feel like when I ask people this question, I feel like this is going to be a high bar to meet.

Lenny (08:04):
So, I'm excited to dig into a lot of the stuff that you've learned along this journey. Maybe the area you spend most of your time on is helping PMs build their product strategy, muscle through your workshops, and you have these legendary Medium posts about product strategy. So, I'd love to spend the majority of our time talking through just helping people build this muscle. And maybe just start, you have this really simple model for describing what product strategy should be for companies: to delight customers in hard to copy margin enhancing ways. So, there's kind of these three parts, customers, hard to copy, margin enhancing. I'd love to just kind of hear your take on each of these three parts, how you came up with this, and then maybe a story or two of how you relied on this and used this at Netflix.

Gibson Biddle (08:42):
Sure. You got the model right. And I mean, the short answer is, I definitely learned it from Reed Hastings when I started at Netflix. Actually, he did a reference check to a friend of mine, checking up on me, and the only question he asked my pal, whose name is John Daz, was, "Hey, John, is Gib ready? Can Gib delight customers?" That was the only question he asked in the reference check.

Gibson Biddle (09:05):
Luckily, I built really delightful kids software. Back then, people were talking about satisfying customers, listening carefully, understanding them, et cetera. And the delight, it just said, no, no, no. The job is to delight customers. Like Peter Thiel, his book, From Zero to One. The job of an entrepreneur at the beginning is just to find out something that's 10X better. Delight is trying to work in that magnitude.

Gibson Biddle (09:28):
The hard to copy part, definitely I learned that. I had a product leader who worked for me, his name was HB Mock. He was focused on the non-member page. That's where people sign up for. They put in their email, their credit card, they would get a free trial. He'd looked like crap, like everything at startups sucks at the beginning, but he put a happy family on the couch on this screen, and that's where you put in your email. And that got a lot more people engaged. And so, it delighted customers, but it was helping to build the business, because more folks were setting up for a free trial.

Gibson Biddle (09:58):
I'm like, that's great HB, but I'll bet my paycheck that within a week, Blockbuster's going to put a happy family on their couch, too. And this is the problem of doing things that are easy to copy. So in the long term, if you can delight customers and create hard to copy advantage, things are just a lot better.

Gibson Biddle (10:17):
And so the last phrase, margin enhancement, that's just a fancy phrase for making money. Margin technically would mean profit. I just gave you example with that non-member page, with the happy family on the couch. It delights folks, it helps build a better business, but in that case, Blockbuster was able to copy it.

Gibson Biddle (10:37):
So, that's the model. The hardest part in that model is, how do you balance delight versus margin? So if Netflix said, hey, everybody, you're paying $20 bucks a day, but you're going to get exactly the same service tomorrow for $5 bucks a month, you'd be just like, this is fricking awesome. You'd be really delighted. But Netflix would not, the business wouldn't work.

Gibson Biddle (10:56):
So, one of the first places we sort of experiment on how to evaluate trade offs between delight and margin, in the old days, Netflix was a DVD by mail company, and if you ask customers what they wanted, then they all said the same thing. I want my new release DVDs faster, right? Back then, most customers would have to wait a week or two or four weeks. Back then, a movie came out in the theater, two months later it came out on DVD. We just couldn't afford to buy for that initial demand. So, the way it worked was, some people got it the next day in the mail, and some people had to wait two months.

Gibson Biddle (11:31):
And so, the A/B test we set up, we said, okay, everybody says they want this, in focus groups and qualitative and surveys. Well, let's A/B test and see what we really learn. So, the AB test was called the Perfect New Release Test. Imagine we're at about a million customers circa 2005. 10,000 peeps are in a test cell. They get their new release DVD the next day in the mail. Awesome, right? And the control gets it whenever. Let's say, average maybe two weeks later.

Gibson Biddle (12:01):
And so, the way we measure delight in this A/B test is, will you improve retention for the folks that are getting their DVD the next day in the mail? That's how we measured, it was retention. When Netflix started, it was like 10% canceled every month. 2005, it was about four and a half percent canceled every month. Today it's about 2% cancel every month. So, I'll just put it back to you. Do you think, when we looked at the AB test results... By the way, you can't get this wrong, Lenny, so just relax.

Lenny (12:35):
Excellent.

Gibson Biddle (12:35):
Do you think the Perfect New Release Experience improved retention?

Lenny (12:40):
My guess is, because you're telling this story, it's going to be a surprise, and I would guess that it did not.

Gibson Biddle (12:45):
Okay, so your guess is we won't see an improvement in retention. And I'm guessing people listening to us right now, there's going to be some folks that, oh, shit, yes, that's what everybody's asking for. Of course we should deliver it to them, right? Well, in this case, both right, right? We saw a very small change in retention. That was the surprise. And so, it went from something like 4.5% canceled in the control. It was 4.45. Very small change. We can measure it.

Gibson Biddle (13:13):
And so, now you get in the math of delight versus margin. If you push this out to all million customers, you would essentially save 5,000 customers. And so, what's the value in saving 5,000 customers? The way we valued it, we said, well we've got 5,000 customers. The lifetime value of a customer then was a hundred bucks. And then we multiplied it by two, which is our word of mouth factor. So our theory was, if you loved it, Lenny, you'd tell your friends about it, you'd rave about it, and you'd bring in one other customer for free into Netflix. And so, we used this 2X word of mouth factor. And so if you do that math, it was worth about a million bucks to us as a company.

Gibson Biddle (13:52):
So now you get into, okay, what's the cost of that additional inventory? And the answer was $5 million bucks. So on one hand, you're bringing in a million bucks of value by retaining more customers, but you're spending $5 million more, so it doesn't seem to make sense.

Gibson Biddle (14:06):
Okay, so easy question. I don't overthink this one, Lenny. Would you roll this out to all customers?

Lenny (14:10):
I would not.

Gibson Biddle (14:11):
You would not. Okay. Can you help build an argument for somebody who would choose to roll it out?

Lenny (14:17):
Oh, no. Give me the hint. I'll take it.

Gibson Biddle (14:18):
The hint was, there was an assumption in my formula. I said 5,000 customers times $100 bucks lifetime value, times a 2X word of mouth. So the argument for why somebody might do it, they disagree with the 2X word of mouth, and what the algorithm is.

Lenny (14:33):
Yeah, I see where this is going. Basically, the experience is so much better that word of mouth increases. It's so delightful.

Gibson Biddle (14:38):
Yeah. Amazon would use a 10X, right? And so, sort of a wash there. You'd probably lean forward and do it. We actually worked hard to try to isolate what that word of mouth factor was. It was really frustrating. And then, the reality was, Barry McCarthy was the CFO. He was apoplectic about the idea of using a 2X, because it means you'll invest more in building a better product. If you let the product team use 10x, Barry's like, "We don't have the money. We don't have the money to spend $5 million on DVDs."

Gibson Biddle (15:03):
Anyways, this is where we sort of refined our thinking about the model of delighting customers in hard to copy, margin enhancing ways. Pop quiz, I know the answer, Lenny, but want everybody else thinking about it. What makes Netflix hard to copy?

Lenny (15:18):
The licensing deals and content that they're creating.

Gibson Biddle (15:22):
Original content, yeah. Keep going.

Lenny (15:24):
Their brand that they've built over time.

Gibson Biddle (15:26):
You trust them with their credit card every month for $20 bucks, right?

Lenny (15:28):
Oh, absolutely. I think I've been a customer for five years.

Gibson Biddle (15:31):
Yeah, yeah. What else makes them hard to copy?

Lenny (15:34):
I imagine, their tech that used to be the ranking algorithm recommendation engine.

Gibson Biddle (15:37):
Yeah, so there's unique technology. Personalization is a great example. You just brought that up. There's only one other idea that I think is... Well, there's probably be two others for Netflix. So keep going, dig deep.

Lenny (15:48):
Maybe, I don't know if this is an answer you're thinking, but just the talent they've built up over time is probably something.

Gibson Biddle (15:53):
That's really interesting. People go to culture, and then I sort of specify, what makes the Netflix product hard to copy? So, I won't allow that one.

Lenny (16:01):
Oh, man.

Gibson Biddle (16:02):
Okay, keep going.

Lenny (16:03):
What makes Netflix hard to copy?

Gibson Biddle (16:05):
I'll give you one clue.

Lenny (16:06):
Okay.

Gibson Biddle (16:06):
What made Facebook wicked hard to copy?

Lenny (16:08):
Their network effects and growth loops.

Gibson Biddle (16:12):
Yeah, yeah. We actually tried to experiment with friends and social, getting movie ideas from your friends. The idea is, your friends were on the network, you wouldn't want to leave. And you'd also get great movie ideas. By the way, that was a failed hypothesis.

Lenny (16:25):
Right, I was just going to say, I remember that did not work out. I don't see it anywhere.

Gibson Biddle (16:28):
Yeah. It did not work out. Yeah, I guess we could make an argument today, every screen in the world is magically prewired so you can watch Netflix anytime, anywhere. There's sort of a kind of flywheel or network effect at work. But anyways, that's great. So, that's just a model. But I have found that model to be helpful in my thinking a bunch of times.

Lenny (16:44):
There's a couple things I wanted to follow up on there, because there's a lot there. One is this idea of testing the ideal almost, and kind of working backwards from that. That's something I always find found really helpful. Is that something that you espouse and find to be really powerful?

Gibson Biddle (16:58):
Honestly, I think of these product strategies as these high level theories, these hypotheses about how you will delight customers in hard to copy, margin enhancing ways. I just gave a failed hypothesis, the social one. You actually brought up a winning hypothesis. Personalization delights customers, because it makes it easier to find movies you'll love. It's hard to copy. Netflix sort of knows the movie tastes of a billion people worldwide. That's 222 members times about five profiles per. And then the margin, this is an interesting one.

Gibson Biddle (17:27):
When Netflix is making an investment in a TV show or movie, they kind of can guess how many people will watch it. So, they guessed that 100 million people would watch Stranger Things, so they were willing to invest $500 million. They guessed that 20 million people would watch BoJack Horseman, I'm a freak, so they're willing to make $100 million. I call that right sizing the investment, but that's how personalization helps Netflix to build margin, or to build a better business.

Gibson Biddle (17:54):
Anyways, back to your original question. I mainly was just trying to find these high level theories and hypotheses that I hoped would delight in hard to copy, margin enhancing ways. The reality was, we'd have 10 ideas and probably six of them would fail, but a lot of value in the three or the four that worked.

Gibson Biddle (18:10):
When we went to TV based systems, we actually couldn't A/B test at first, so we were going back to qual and they were looking over people's shoulders, and focus groups, et cetera. But eventually, Netflix could A/B test what's a good experience on a TV based system. They have server based systems now where they can create different experiences for different folks. So I guess my short answer was, so hard to find these product strategies that worked. There was no notion of building a perfect experience of all these things together, so we just took it one theory at a time.

Lenny (18:40):
Got it. And then, on that concept of delight, I always wanted to ask you this question. I've never had a chance. For B2B, do you find this is also something companies should really prioritize and do? Because not a lot of B2B products are delightful, and a lot of them are still really successful. How do you think about that kind of framework in B2B?

Gibson Biddle (18:55):
Okay, first, I think that most all of the frameworks I use work for both consumer and B2B. Personally, I've spent my whole career on consumer. The thing about consumer is, you're sort of trying to catch lightning in a bottle, right? Where enterprise, you can actually walk into it a little bit more thoughtfully. You can always find your first customers, et cetera.

Gibson Biddle (19:15):
Anyways, I was thinking about what's different. For instance, one of the hard to copy advantages of B2B is switching costs, right? I didn't bring that up in the context of Netflix. It's wicked hard to cancel. It's wicked easy to cancel Netflix and restart Disney+, whatever you want to do.

Gibson Biddle (19:29):
I was thinking about, I used to complain that the user interface for B2B software was horrible, and it's like, you've got to do better than this. And of course, at Netflix we proved that a simple, easy experience actually improves retention. So I would advocate, this is important, and they would explain to me all the basics. Hey, Gib. Actually, one of the basics surprised me. The people that are using our software are using it 10, 12, 14 hours a day. That's very different from a Netflix experience. And in fact, they want and need to engage in the complexity. There's stuff that they're trying to do that is really complex.

Gibson Biddle (20:07):
You can just think about our use of spreadsheets to build a cash flow statement. I'm highlighting some differences, but the model I think is still there. If you're starting a punk B2B SaaS company, I think at the end of the day, you're trying to find something that's 10X better than what's currently out there today, and then over time, your hard to copy advantage. It will be different from Netflix. It'll be different for every startup. But if you can delight your customers in these hard to copy ways, that also builds a business.

Gibson Biddle (20:36):
I mean, the reason you do that, you want to feel like you don't have to compete with peeps, really. You don't like it when you're always on guard about what your competitors should do. You sort of want to get to this place where you don't really care, and your sort of true North is okay, how can we best serve our customer? And that's what I really love about that particular model.

Gibson Biddle (20:53):
Lenny, I would be very careful about anything I say about enterprise and B2B, because I've spent zero hours in this, okay? Now, you said half of my audience is in B2B and enterprise, and you hear a lot about the consumerization of enterprise software, and I think that's good. I think that's helpful and important.

Lenny (21:13):
Awesome. That's a really helpful caveat for folks listening, that if you're building a B2B business, maybe don't follow all this advice to the letter. But I imagine there's still a lot you can pull out.

Gibson Biddle (21:21):
Well, honestly, it's so idiosyncratic. It's going to be different for each company, or each startup, or different stage. And that's why the tools, the models, the frameworks I use, they have to work generally, but then people have to apply their own good judgment.

Lenny (21:33):
Sweet. Okay. What I'd love to do is get a little more concrete using this model, and go through a few examples of how you may have thought through problems you were tackling at Netflix through this lens, to kind of see how it actually works in practice. Does that sound good?

Gibson Biddle (21:48):
That sounds like we're going to do some rapid fire mini cases.

Lenny (21:50):
That's exactly right.

Gibson Biddle (21:51):
And I'm going to put you in the hot seat, Lenny. You're the proxy for the listeners today.

Lenny (21:55):
All right. Just make sure they're easy questions.

Gibson Biddle (21:58):
No matter what you say, I'll make you look smart.

Lenny (22:01):
I like this. I just want that applied to all of life. Okay, so the first mini case study is something that I've seen a lot of people build, kind of hack together, is this idea of watching Netflix together with friends. I think one app is called Netflix Party. So the question there is, should Netflix launch a Netflix Party feature? Basically letting people watch Netflix together but in different places?

Gibson Biddle (22:22):
Yeah, yeah. It's kind of a real case. A bunch of engineers at Patreon, six or seven of them, they actually enabled, if you're using Netflix, they let you connect with your friends on Netflix, watch the same TV show or movie at the same time, and chat with each other while you're watching it, trash talk each other or use emojis, what have you. They called it Netflix party. The Netflix lawyers noticed it, and so they renamed it Teleparty. It exists. You can use it across multiple games, across Disney and Netflix, whatever you want.

Gibson Biddle (22:52):
Okay, so the hypothesis is, Netflix should launch this idea for real, not just download the silver light, download the...

Lenny (23:01):
Chrome extension?

Gibson Biddle (23:02):
Chrome extension. There you go.

Lenny (23:03):
Yeah, yeah, yeah. I think I've tried it, actually. It's pretty cool.

Gibson Biddle (23:06):
Yeah. It's complicated, right? I mean, you and I are both freaks, so we can figure it out. So the idea is that we'll delight customers, because this sounds like fun, especially during COVID. We can have this connected experience when we're also disconnected. Hard to copy advantage. We're kind of building a network effect. You and I will be connected and watching on Netflix. We don't want to quit because we don't want to leave each other behind. And then, the margin. For Netflix, it's largely about will it improve retention? Netflix today, 2% are canceling. Netflix has just ticked away at it point by point. It's just, it's these kinds of things that create a little bit more value, that improve retention.

Gibson Biddle (23:45):
The way I think about this is, the way that addition of this feature would actually improve retention is if some reasonable number of customers actually used it. And so, what I look out for is, I don't like two percenters. So if you find an idea that only works for 2% of your customers, now you're creating complexity, one more thing to choose. What happens when I hit this button?

Gibson Biddle (24:10):
And frankly, some complexity that everybody else building the product forgets, right? This happened to me a lot. We'd have, in the old days, there was a profiles feature. When we launched streaming, we forgot about the profiles feature for DVD. Like, oh, crap. So, as a rule, I never used rules as thumbs, but these two percenters, I would kill them. If I launched something and it was only 2% we'd, we called it scraping the barnacles, just get rid of it.

Gibson Biddle (24:34):
So, I think the key question here is, what percent of Netflix members would use Netflix Party if you launched to all? You want to guess at that, Lenny?

Lenny (24:44):
Let's say 5%.

Gibson Biddle (24:46):
5%. Okay. I think that's good guess. I'm going to give you some historical context. We actually did Xbox Party back in 2008, 2009. My guess with the Xbox team was it would be a two percenter. I think it barely squeaked to 5%. And then, because it was only at 5%, we killed it. So I think that's a great guess. If you had said 10 or 15%, then I would've been scratching my head. Could that actually have a shot at improving retention?

Gibson Biddle (25:14):
Anyways, Netflix hasn't launched this. They could, of course, test it, but I think the history, the failed hypothesis of social, kind of leans against it, and I just gave you two examples. The friends network getting, giving ideas of friends and Netflix, and the second, the Xbox Party. Those are two failed instances of social. Netflix will keep experimenting with this, but in this case they chose not to. So, not enough delight despite the fact that it could build hard to copy advantage. And if you don't have enough delight, enough usage, there's no shot at improving margin.

Gibson Biddle (25:45):
Okay. You were awesome, Lenny. I told you, you sounded exceedingly smart. Okay, what do you got? What's the next one?

Lenny (25:51):
Nailed it. Just real quick, I really like the reminder of just focusing on reach and making... As good as the idea might be, just always coming back to what is the reach of this thing? Even if conversion increases like 50%, if like 10 people see it, it doesn't really matter.

Gibson Biddle (26:05):
Yeah.

Lenny (26:05):
That's such a good reminder.

Gibson Biddle (26:06):
Cool.

Lenny (26:06):
Okay, next one is, something that you've shared is that during COVID, Netflix auto-canceled, apparently, something like half a percent of its members because they were inactive. And so, the question there would be, why do they do that, and how would Netflix have thought about that?

Gibson Biddle (26:20):
Yeah. Probably seen Netflix's stock history. But the beginning of COVID, they thought they were going to have 8 million new members, Q1 2020. They picked up 16 million. So, that was awesome. It was about that time that my perception as the product manager at Netflix was looking at the data focused on non-member experience, I think his name is Eddie Woo. And he was looking at the data, and he noticed half percent of the members weren't actually enjoying the service, like for a year. They clearly had entered their credit card, their email a year ago, and then just forgot that they had the service.

Gibson Biddle (26:51):
And so, when he thought about it, he said, you know, I feel like it's the right thing to actually auto cancel people who aren't using the service they're paying. Of course, he was doing it a time where there was great growth, okay? So, let's use the delight and hard to copy margin enhancing model. Is this a delightful thing to do?

Lenny (27:10):
Absolutely. I feel really good.

Gibson Biddle (27:11):
That's my question. Okay.

Lenny (27:11):
Yeah, if a company's like, hey, okay, here, take your money back. You're not using this thing.

Gibson Biddle (27:15):
Exactly. And what's the hard to copy advantage that you'd be building by engaging in this best practice?

Lenny (27:22):
I imagine there's kind of a brand halo, just you feel good about Netflix being really good to you.

Gibson Biddle (27:27):
Totally. So if I told you, and this is the case, Netflix chose to auto cancel these folks like, huh, that's a really cool thing to do. And then the margin, the bad news, you're going to lose a hundred million bucks. So, there is delight, there is hard to copy advantage, and you're going to lose a hundred million bucks. Does that delight and hard to copy advantage outweigh the negative of losing a hundred million?

Gibson Biddle (27:50):
I'm just going to ask you two more questions. Is this a high stakes decision or a low stakes decision? Eddie's decision to auto cancel these folks and lose a hundred million bucks. High stakes or low stakes? You're the product manager, Lenny.

Lenny (28:04):
It all depends on how much a hundred million is worth to the business. I imagine Netflix is such a large scale where it's not a huge deal, and it's a one off that's not recurring, and so you could give it a shot.

Gibson Biddle (28:13):
Okay, so you've skipped ahead. You're looking too smart. On magnitude, it's a hundred million against a company that's doing 30 billion in revenue. And then, the second thing you brought up is, it's reversible, which is, he could do it now, but he doesn't have to continue this practice forever. And so, my joke there, I got married 30 years ago. I was anxious about getting married. My friend said, "Gib, if it doesn't work out you can always get divorced." So they're saying it's reversible. Now I've been married 30 years, so it's worked out.

Gibson Biddle (28:39):
But my point here is, as product managers, we feel like every decision we make is high stakes. It's good occasionally to think about, hey, what's the magnitude? And then, is it reversible? Amazon calls those, this was a two-way door decision. It's reversible. The one way door, those are the bigger deal. And I think frankly, most people would argue that getting married is a one way door, but hey, half of folks don't.

Lenny (29:01):
Yeah, very hard to reverse. Reversible but expensive.

Gibson Biddle (29:04):
Okay, what else you got?

Lenny (29:05):
Okay, so you touched on Netflix's recent troubles with growth. And so, something that's always come up is this idea of why don't they offer a really cheap plan, or a free plan that's advertise supported. And so, I imagine you've thought about that a lot, and Netflix has thought about that a lot. How does that work with your framework?

Gibson Biddle (29:21):
Well, let's fast forward two years. Netflix earnings Q1 2022 were bad. For the first time in 10 years, they actually lost customers, and they'd like to get the growth going again. Okay, that's a different context, right? Today.

Lenny (29:37):
This episode is brought to you by PostHog. PostHog offers a suite of product analysis tools, including funnels, heat maps, session recording and experimentation, all in one easy to use platform. PostHog is open source, so you can host it on your own infrastructure, which means that you have control over who has access to your data and makes regulatory compliance a breeze, because you don't need to send user info to third parties.

Lenny (30:00):
Post Hog's app system works seamlessly with your data warehouse, both for importing and exporting data, which enables you to bring your data into one place and easily understand user behavior across a range of touchpoints. If you'd like to learn more, check them out at PostHog.com/Lenny.

Gibson Biddle (30:18):
So your question is, should Netflix have a lower-priced, advertising-supported plan?

Lenny (30:25):
Okay, great.

Gibson Biddle (30:25):
Okay, let's do it. We'll DHM it. Would an ad-supported plan that's lower price be delightful for customers, Lenny?

Lenny (30:33):
I don't know if delightful is the right word, but if I didn't have a lot of cash, it would feel really nice to be able to use Netflix.

Gibson Biddle (30:39):
Okay, so the possible delight is, it might only cost you five bucks, or who knows, it might be free, I don't know. But for a set of customers who are ad tolerant, that might be a reasonable trade off, right? You don't have to pay $10 or $15 or $20 bucks. You could pay maybe five, or two? I don't really know what the right price is.

Gibson Biddle (30:56):
Okay, so the next one is, would Netflix be building hard to copy advantage if they did this?

Lenny (31:00):
I guess the hards of copy pieces, if there's a network effect, they just accelerate that further, and that gives them some advantage. I don't know.

Gibson Biddle (31:06):
Maybe. So if they pick up a new set of people, a new set of profiles, it's a technical term, as you get big, is you build economies of scale. So if they are able to grow, Netflix, they'll spend about $18 billion on content this year, whereas poor Amazon will only spend $8 billion. I just love saying poor Amazon. Because Netflix can amortize it across 220 million members. So, more growth, more customers, and hopefully a different segment of customers that they haven't gotten yet, so it's not just cannibalistic, could build more hard copy advantage.

Gibson Biddle (31:39):
My argument, I'm just going to skip ahead, if you cross fingers, I mean, you are picking up a new customer profile, new customer type, so you're going to have incremental revenues, which is really what Netflix is looking for. For me, I just want to tell you why Netflix hasn't done advertising yet. We actually did do it, 5, 6, 7, 8... 2005 through 2008. We put big-ass ad banners on every page on the site, even for the members. We did a retention test, and it actually did not hurt retention. A big surprise. And that was the first year that we generated an operating income of $20 million bucks. It was like the first profitable year.

Gibson Biddle (32:14):
We also did this at our business. We were selling used discs, previously viewed discs. That's how we first made money, and Reed Hastings, the CEO, came to me in 2008 and said, "Gib, I need you to kill advertising and previously viewed, because I think we can deliver a profit in our core business." And he wanted to keep things simple, create this simple experience that's part of a subscription.

Gibson Biddle (32:34):
You have had this. We had a lot of pride and ownership. He didn't involve me in the decision, all of these things, right? He's just sort of sticking a gun to my head. He only asked me two questions. He said, "Gib, who's going to be the best in the world at advertising?" And I said, "Google." And then his second question is, "Who needs to be the best in the world of personalization?" I said, "We do." And his argument was to kill previously viewed and advertising to create a simple experience for the customers, and so that we could stay manically focused on personalization.

Gibson Biddle (33:02):
Now fast forward, so on the earnings call, for him, the debate is really between simplicity, which he's a huge fan of. But during the earnings call he said, "Actually, there's something I believe in even more, and that's customer choice." And he was saying, you know what? I think for this new set of customers, giving them the choice to have a $5 a month plan with advertising... He did not say the $5 bucks. I'm just plugging that in. In this case, customer choice may be more important than delight. And in this case, rather, customer choice may be more important than the complexity of advertising, or maybe the stinky experience.

Gibson Biddle (33:39):
Whew. There's something important. What he said is, today it's relatively straightforward to execute an advertising-based business doing this. There's a zillion partners who could do it, so we could continue to focus on the core of what we do, which is personalization. Which I thought was a really thoughtful response. So my guess is, they will do advertising, but he was very contrite. Stock had half of its value. He felt he had disappointed shareholders. So I think he was looking for ways to earn back that trust.

Lenny (34:05):
Yeah. The market sometimes forces you to do something you didn't expect. I really like the Socratic Method that Reed uses in the story you shared, where he kind of asks you these questions that help you get to the same conclusion he got to.

Gibson Biddle (34:16):
Honestly, I reflected on that for five years. Why didn't he engage me in the decision? And then I just realized... I mean, by the way, this being a CEO is a really hard job. But I realized I had so much pride and ownership, he just knew that I wouldn't want to kill it, that it would be hard for me to be objective. And he felt strongly that he believed he knew the right answer and said, hey, I just need you to do this. And he was right. So, it took me five years to process that, but there's a lot of things you do to support the CEO, because that job is really hard.

Lenny (34:47):
We're going to talk a bit about the role of a CPO and what you learned on that journey, but one final mini case study. Should Netflix charge for customers to share their accounts with other people, outside of their home, especially?

Gibson Biddle (34:59):
Yeah, this one's got a lot of history. Okay, so I sort of told you a bit of the story, which is Netflix's growth has been excellent until now, and the reason they had that challenging earnings call is, it was just really hard to forecast. They had the influx of customers at the beginning of COVID, I call them fence sitters, that just happened to join en masse. And then, are they going to leave when COVID lifts? Are they going to leave when the theaters open up again? They shut down, for 700,000 Russian members, they shut off the service. You can imagine that in Eastern and central Europe, churn was a little higher than expected. Just nasty.

Gibson Biddle (35:38):
One of the things that this cloud of COVID forecasting did, obscured how the large extent to which sharing happens. And so, what they said was, in the US and Canada, there's a hundred million customers total. They think there's about 30 million folks that are sharing their email password outside the home.

Gibson Biddle (35:57):
So, how did Netflix get here? Netflix generally, they've got three prices, $10, $15 and $20 bucks, and they're always trying to give people reason for choosing the $20 one. And so, if you looked at their, I call it the price and plan page, it looks like a gas pump. Do you want to the left one, the middle one, or the right hand one? One of the incentives that they provided for folks to choose the $20 a month was the number of multiple streams. They had gone all the way to four streams at the same time. So in my household, four people could be watching the same time.

Gibson Biddle (36:27):
And of course people shared outside the house, right? And by the way, I don't think Netflix was clear that you couldn't. So now, if you look at the price and plan page today, they're not sort of pitching for multiple streams as the reason you should go to $20 bucks. They're pitching other things. There's better resolution. That's the key one. Better sound quality. You're going to have HDR sound and video. And then, they did clarify in the fine print that you can use one, two, or four streams for members in your household.

Gibson Biddle (37:00):
And that was a new clarification, because it used to be kind of with a family. Kelsey and Brit are my daughters. They're in the house, of course they can use it. They go off to college, they're still my daughters, they're part of the family. Of course they can use it. Kelsey gets married. Okay, so this is the first time they clarified it.

Gibson Biddle (37:14):
So now, I come all the way back to your question. As a potential growth opportunity, they'd obviously like to clarify how this should work, and they started testing in three different countries. Peru is one, and I think in the Caribbean. These smaller countries, I'm sure they're focused with new members to figure this out first. And so, they have two different things. You could let a person outside your household, you could actually pay a little extra for them as the primary, as the sponsor, if you will. And the other is a function where a person who's sharing your account in a different household can bump up to their own membership.

Gibson Biddle (37:48):
So, this is just complicated. Can I make the DHM model work with this? Well it explains why they did it. They were giving multiple streams because it was a really delightful experience. And Netflix says it in the rules. They were very permissive. I don't really think they worried about this. Was it building hard to copy advantage? Absolutely. More taste profiles, right? And you wouldn't leave because you didn't want to cancel the service to your daughter's and using out on the east coast. And was it building margin? Actually, it was driving people up to the $20 price point, and it was improving churn. You're getting more value out of service, okay?

Gibson Biddle (38:21):
So now, what do they do? For me, this is just testing and math. Like, honestly, let's try it, Lenny. Well, think about those 30 million folks. If you get an email saying, hey, we've noticed you're enjoying the service on somebody else's nickel, would you like to upgrade to your own plan? What percent of those folks are going to say yes, right? I mean, do you have a guess on that? I don't have a guess and I don't have an answer. But this is the game, right?

Lenny (38:47):
I find with emails, open rates and all these things, it ends up always being really tiny. So I guess, again, probably 5%, maybe 3%.

Gibson Biddle (38:54):
Okay. I think that's a fine guess. I'll just give you a different perspective. This is kind of like a free trial, right? they've been using a free trial. And the free trial conversion at the end of a month was 90% at Netflix, right? 90% enjoyed their first month so much that they continued with the service.

Gibson Biddle (39:13):
So, I mean, I agree with you, it might be five or 10%. I was just giving you that 90% to get you to imagine, huh, maybe it could be 10%, right? Maybe it could be 20%. This is just speculation. I think they're experimenting in these smaller countries. As we do this, if it were 10%, they'd pick up an additional 3 million in a quarter. I think that's going to help them when their growth is at a standstill.

Gibson Biddle (39:36):
The other question would be, would the primary account quit when you tell them their daughters on the east coast can no longer use the service, right?

Lenny (39:45):
Right.

Gibson Biddle (39:46):
I think where I'm going on this is, I don't know if we can give any real insight. The team at Netflix, this is what they live for, and the team at Netflix is testing and experimenting. They've probably put in an assumption like yours, 5% will convert, and now they're seeing if they're right or wrong, and they're figuring it in on these smaller countries, and a year or two from now, they will have worked it all out and we'll see the answer in North America. But I think it's going to take them a year or two to figure this out, because it's really hard. But they're keenly motivated, because they're trying to get the growth going again.

Lenny (40:17):
I was trying to watch Super Pumped on Showtime recently, and Showtime wasn't working, and I have to call my dad, because I'm leaching off their cable login account. And turned out that they moved and they changed their cable plan, and I'm probably the reason they're keeping a lot of it.

Gibson Biddle (40:32):
Well, so, Lenny, I was thinking about it. I'm open. I don't know the answer on this one, but just you and me comparing notes, what do you think? This is the kind of behavior that I love all product leaders to engage in. I call it building your personal board of directors. You're on mine, because I've been learning a lot about newsletters from you, right? Super helpful.

Gibson Biddle (40:51):
But when I would have questions like these, I would reach out to my pals, like, okay, what's the right level of investment on a mobile app versus desktop? That was a moving target for years. And I would just text my pals, and they would just give me the data. That's amazing insight, just by having peers in the business that you talk to, which this is the behavior that I want everybody out there engaged in. I call it building your personal board of directors.

Lenny (41:14):
I'd love to hear a little bit more on that, actually. How do people do that? Is it pick a few people on a topic and have them as your standing board?

Gibson Biddle (41:21):
I didn't even know I was doing this. This concept began for me, I was probably 30-ish. 30, yep. I got promoted to VP and I asked my CEO, "How do I learn how to do the job well?" And he said, "I don't know. Reach out and build your community of peers." Like, oh, that was good advice. It really was.

Gibson Biddle (41:39):
So, at any moment in time... You actually had one of my board members on a podcast, Melissa Perri. She's on my board, right?

Lenny (41:46):
Amazing.

Gibson Biddle (41:46):
Yeah, you voted for her. So, short answer is, it's really easy to build your community of peers. Just keep up your former colleagues. Keep up on LinkedIn. The harder part is building the mentors. And the first rule of thumb is, don't ask a person to be your mentor. That's really awkward. First, identify them. Say, this is a person I think that could be helpful to me. And then, find ways to be helpful. Everybody needs help. Everybody, everybody, everybody.

Gibson Biddle (42:13):
So, to help you understand the kind of help I need, my greatest fear is aging ungracefully, right? So I'm trying to understand what's going on. Okay, I asked you earlier, should I be on Discord, right? Like, oh, crap, do I have to be on Discord? But in many cases, somebody can help me to understand Discord. That's super helpful to me. And that's how those sort of mentor relationships eventually end up, and between the peers and the mentors, the mentors can help you to see around corners.

Gibson Biddle (42:43):
Actually, my favorite story of somebody who did approach me, they were in data, they wanted to be in product. They kept asking me, "Hey, do you have any startups I can work with on the weekends?" That's a good idea. I didn't have any answers. I got sort of frustrated with them. I said, "Just build me a website, a baby website." He said, "I can't build a website." So I gave him my credit card and said, "Get on Squarespace." If you go to GibsonBiddle.com, that's my baby website that John Lou built for me. That was incredibly helpful to me. Someday I should get a real one, but I've decided it's not that important.

Lenny (43:13):
I also have a baby website on Squarespace.

Gibson Biddle (43:15):
Exactly.

Lenny (43:16):
We're in good company.

Gibson Biddle (43:17):
Anyways, that's the concept of a personal board of directors. It's really important and helpful career advice in the long term.

Lenny (43:23):
Awesome. I'm glad we chatted about that. That wasn't something we planned to chat About. Something else I wanted to dive into, beyond strategy, is prioritization. You have a really great model for our prioritization called the JAM model, that I share often with folks. I'd love to just kind of hear your overview of this model, and when it makes sense, and just roughly how to use it.

Gibson Biddle (43:39):
Yeah, well, it's a lot easier because it spells something, right? As opposed to saying... I'll just give you a good case. I joined Chegg 2010. We were inventing a concept of renting textbooks to students instead of buying them, saving them a lot of money. And my first week was challenging, because on one end of the hall, the CEO, Dan, was saying, "Grow, baby. Grow. The most important thing we can do as a startup is grow." And at the other end of the hall, I had my CFO partner, Greg, saying, "Slow, slow, slow. We actually don't know if we have a business model that works." And I could tell he was sort of, the company's got like 40 people, sort of driving folks crazy.

Gibson Biddle (44:15):
So, as the product leader, what the heck should I do? And the answer was, I got them in a room and I said, "Listen, I just need you to force rank these three factors for me: growth, engagement, and monetization. And I need the two of you to agree." So, you could say growth is most important. When we say growth, it's basically year over year customer growth. Do you want it to be 50% or 10%?

Gibson Biddle (44:40):
Whatever the answer is, engagement is how I think about product quality. A more engaging product is a better product. So if you think investing in building a better product is super important, then you go with engagement, and the proxy metric that I use for that at Netflix was retention. And then, the third is monetization. You have these customers, you have this product, and how much effort do you put into turning that into a business?

Gibson Biddle (45:04):
So, Dan said, "Well, that's easy. Growth, engagement, and monetization." And Greg said, "Yeah, that's easy. Monetization, engagement and growth." He did the flip, right? I'm like, "I'm going to come back in two hours. You guys got to fight this out." Which is sort of what happened.

Gibson Biddle (45:19):
So, they agreed on growth first, engagement second, monetization third. And then, a couple months later, it started to happen again. Greg started to say, "No, no, no." And so, it was that point that Greg actually left the company. Which was, these are the kinds of fundamental misalignments that can wreck startups. I'm not saying that one or the other was right or wrong, but as leaders in the organization, we've got to get some of the basic stories straight, including how do we fundamentally prioritize growth versus engagement versus monetization?

Gibson Biddle (45:56):
This is really the number one source of misalignment that I discover among startups. And startups, you're always flipping back and forth between growth and engagement. Grow faster, build a better product. Grow fact forth, and then later, you get a little later to monetization. But this model, I find it super helpful to get leaders across an organization fundamentally more aligned.

Lenny (46:17):
So, if you're a PM, or maybe a founder, thinking about using this model, would the first step be get your leaders above you to kind of align with you on, of these three things, here's how we stack rank it?

Gibson Biddle (46:27):
Personally, I'd start with a SWAG. I would take a shot, a stupid, wild-ass guess of what I think is right, so at least I started with a point of view before I shared it with my team. And frankly, the next most important thing that happens is, if you're trying to create a metric focused organization that appreciates data and learning through numbers, deciding, I mean, the hardest one is, what is your engagement metric? How do you measure product quality?

Gibson Biddle (46:52):
At Netflix, it's monthly retention, but that's a hard conversation. The growth story's pretty, like, it's usually some percentage year over year of customer growth. I mean, but it's always different, but the only variation on what you said was, have a point of view yourself, and then get everybody's feedback.

Gibson Biddle (47:07):
That's frankly, when I would join a new company, I would give myself two weeks to develop the product strategy for that company, which is a little outrageous, but I would just do it fast. I would develop the SWAG, but then I'd go to one person. "Hey, this is my best thinking, what do you think?" And of course, they had been there for four years. They were much smarter than I, and they would refine my thinking.

Gibson Biddle (47:25):
I'd do that one by one, and then maybe six weeks later, I could share a product strategy across the company. But this is the value of a SWAG, which is a stupid, wild-ass guess. And don't be afraid to start at that level.

Lenny (47:36):
I really like that strategy, versus going in a little hole, spending months just thinking about the perfect answer, and only then presenting. I find this works better.

Gibson Biddle (47:44):
We're hiring a consulting company to do it. Go shoot me, okay?

Lenny (47:47):
I like that you're hiding your mouth as you say that.

Gibson Biddle (47:50):
Yeah. Only Lenny can see. Yeah, but this is a podcast, Gib. Nobody can see you.

Lenny (47:54):
Yeah. I will reveal. Okay, so on that topic actually, I'd love to transition and talk about our last topic, which is around career, or product manager. So, you're the CPO at two very successful companies, or maybe you're called the VP of product, but roughly a head of product. You have these two muckety mucks, right? Chief Muckety Muck. And in theory, this is kind of the end state of a PM career if you stay along the path. A lot of PMs go on different paths, but in theory, this is kind of where your career is heading. What would you say it takes to become a CPO someday? What kind of skills do you think you need to build that are maybe not obvious to someone that's not in that role yet?

Gibson Biddle (48:28):
Yeah, let's take a little step by step. Individual contributor, and then to manager. When you're just starting, you're just trying to learn the job. And I'd say, at a high level, you're just trying to optimize for learning in your entire career. But for individuals, building products is hard, and there's a number of technical skills that are required. So yes, some technical, but a lot of creative skills. There's some consumer science, that's the A/B testing. There's the management. How do you get people working together to actually build stuff? These are technical design skills, right? These are the technical skills.

Gibson Biddle (48:59):
So, early in your career, you're just trying to learn the job. And by the way, the job is hard. And second, it's different from every company to company in different stage. So you, Lenny and I, we're just trying to be helpful in a leveraged way. But the key thing is, the job's a little different in everything. So, just try to become expert in your area, expert in whatever your one thing is that you're building.

Gibson Biddle (49:19):
And then, the next step to become a manager is, there's a lot of, communication is sort of the heart, and that's why I try to... Product strategy is a great way to communicate what's important and what's not, try to demystify it. If you're early in your career, ask if you could be on interview teams, even if you're not hiring, because then you're starting to practice something that's really important as you want to grow your career later, which is it's really hiring and recruiting people.

Gibson Biddle (49:45):
When I was in the thick of that, I spent one to two days a week hiring and recruiting. It's really the most important thing. And then, some amazing opportunity would come along at the company and they'd say, you know what? Maybe somebody on Gib's team should do it, right? Because they knew I could replace people. There's always somebody new to pop in. So, I really was expert in hiring and recruiting later in your career.

Gibson Biddle (50:07):
If you want to be a muckety muck, my theory is the skills of a leader are the same, whether you're head of product, or the chief financial officer, or head of data. When I'm interviewing any of those kinds of candidates, I am looking for leadership skills. Can they do inspired communication of a vision? I do look for product strategy skills. That helps you to frame what that vision is. I do look for management skills. Have they built and managed teams?

Gibson Biddle (50:38):
I look for people who are proactive, results oriented. For me, leaders lead. You can't be a follower. So, I look for really proactive, results oriented folks. And this is pretty nuanced, but later in career, I look for folks who understand how important culture is, because culture helps people to understand the skills and behaviors that are wanted of everyone within the building, and they let you provide leadership in a highly leveraged way, instead of using evil processes and meetings and rules. I look for people who appreciate culture as a tool to help lead organizations.

Gibson Biddle (51:18):
And then, of course, they had to grow up as a builder. They had to learn all those damn technical skills for product manager. If I abstract outside of all that, honestly, the thing that I probably did best, I think maybe I did three things best. To know me, I was an English major. I'm non-technical, and I didn't care. First I was in marketing, and then I went into product, which I just loved.

Gibson Biddle (51:37):
I think I did a good job with sort of optimizing for learning. Actually, one of my hacks was, I started doing talks. I used to call it Topic This and That, on Friday mornings, about something I had just learned. That was the easiest way for me to learn something. So, optimized for learning.

Gibson Biddle (51:50):
We talked about building a personal board of directors, and that has been incredibly helpful for me, and that probably gets to the third thing. I was a pretty good picker, and the reason I was a good picker of companies is, I would lean on my personal board of directors. Some of them were CFOs. I'm like, "Hey, Barry, I'm thinking about joining this startup, Chegg." Hey, as a CFO, as a VC, would you invest in it, right? It's the same question I have to ask, should I invest my time?

Gibson Biddle (52:16):
So, I had people like that who helped me to isolate, was Electronic Arts a good company to join in 1991? Yes. Was Netflix a good company join in 2005? Yes. Was Chegg a good company to join in 2010? Yes. So, I was fundamentally a good picker, and I would really give a lot of credit to that personal board of directors that I had for that.

Lenny (52:36):
What about just day to day as a PM, what have you found to be really good habits, and kind of like a routine that PMs follow, that you've seen to kind of contribute to the success of an ICPM, especially?

Gibson Biddle (52:49):
My short answer is, begin your day with intent, okay? What are the three to five things I'm hoping to do today? Second, minimize meetings, okay? Minimize meetings. That sucks the life out of everybody, including you.

Gibson Biddle (53:03):
Spend a lot of time with your customers. It could be focus groups, it could be usability, it could be looking at survey data, it could be digging the dirt to understand their behavior to the data, and it could be designing and executing A/B test results. Those are all ways of becoming the voice of your customer, and that's a big part of your job as a product leader.

Gibson Biddle (53:24):
Find a balance between doing and thinking. Most of us do, do, do. Occasionally stop and ask yourself, okay, what's important here? What should I really be doing right now, as opposed to the things that I enjoy doing? Self-managing yourself. The only reason people need managers is that we need someone to force us to do the things that are important that we don't enjoy doing. So, I'm always self-managing myself. Gib, you have to do an invoice. Crap, I've got to bill people. That's no fun, right?

Lenny (53:56):
That inside voice, inside Gib.

Gibson Biddle (53:57):
Yeah, that invoice voice. Yeah, our in-voice. Gib, you should write a damn book.

Lenny (54:02):
Or not.

Gibson Biddle (54:02):
We're ignoring that inside voice. Yeah, you and me both. And then, I don't know, for me, exercise is awesome for me. It keeps me happy. And don't watch too much TV, and I watch too much TV. So, there you go. And don't do what I do. Do what I say.

Lenny (54:17):
Right. Yeah. I also probably watch too much TV. Funny coming from someone that helped build Netflix, but I totally get it. So, too good. It's too good.

Gibson Biddle (54:25):
Well, my wife's trying to cure cancer. She's like, "Oh, congratulations, Gib. You helped invent binge watching, you idiot. What good are you doing for humanity?"

Lenny (54:34):
Oh, man. Brings us delight, and that's valuable.

Gibson Biddle (54:37):
Yeah, yeah. Thank you very much.

Lenny (54:39):
Final question. You've had this illustrious career. What's one piece of advice that you'd give a PM in the beginning stages of their career, and then maybe as a bonus, I want maybe mid stage. What comes to mind?

Gibson Biddle (54:50):
Yeah, I think I did the early stuff. Pick the right company. At some point, understand that you are responsible for your career, not your workplace. And that's one of the reasons I encourage people to start building that personal board of directors, so you can compare notes. The other thing I say is, don't listen to your parents, because they're a generation ahead. They really don't know what the future looks like. I mean, I know I would give bad advice to my daughter, and so don't listen to your parents.

Gibson Biddle (55:16):
And then later, ever since I stopped direct deposit, I think of myself as just purely career hacking. So in your career, it's just a lot like building a product. You have theories and hypotheses, you find ways to experiment with them, and then you were successful or you failed. So one of my hypothesis, whenever it was, six years ago, was I would enjoy teaching. I actually tried it. I taught at Stanford, entrepreneurship for graduate level engineers, and I really liked it, but I didn't love it, largely because I was required to be in Palo Alto every fall. I couldn't travel as much as I like to, right?

Gibson Biddle (55:52):
Okay, so on one hand, okay, don't teach in the classroom, and my next vector was, what if I teach outside the classroom? That's what I really love to do. I do talks, workshops, all around the world in the last two years, virtually. I just love doing that, and I have a ton of flexibility. So, that's just a little example of me treating my career like, what's my hypothesis? Finding where to experiment with, and then, based on the results, do the next thing. And I've really been doing that my entire career,

Gibson Biddle (56:16):
So, if you embrace this idea of experimentation, you're like a product, you need to have hypothesis, you need to try see what works. The next thing you need to do in building a product or building your career is be bold. So, don't wimp out. At some point, when I'm working with different companies, they all kind of get attracted to the small, incremental wins, and they sort of forgot what made them a successful startup in the beginning, which is taking on fundamental risk. And so, I just nicely encourage people to be bold, to go a little bit out of your comfort zone, because that's where you learn more, and that comes back to this idea of optimizing for learning.

Gibson Biddle (56:52):
Anyways, and how do you encourage people to be bold? How do you encourage them to try new things? And the simple thing is, just start. Try it tomorrow. For me, the baby step was when I, on talks, I would just ask my friends if I could drop by and do a talk. I just did it. I didn't overthink it. I didn't spend 97 years setting up my display and getting the right clicker. I just gave a really bad talk. But that's how I started, and then I sort of optimized from there.

Lenny (57:21):
What a perfect way to end our chat. Really inspiring and helpful advice that I'm going to try to re-listen to and use myself. Just to close, where can folks find you, reach out to you, and then also just, how can listeners be useful to you?

Gibson Biddle (57:33):
That's a great question. Thank you. The first, I would say that Lenny has been a mentor for me in "Ask Gib" Product Newsletter. So, I reached out to him via a Twitter and asked him lots of stupid early questions, so he was incredibly helpful. So, probably the most important thing is to know that I write a newsletter every two weeks. That's the cadence I'm on now. Lenny knew me at the beginning when I was doing dailies. He's like, "Dude, don't burn out." It's called Ask Gib. I've answered like 63 questions so far. I really have enjoyed it.

Gibson Biddle (58:04):
Second thing would be my baby website GibsonBiddle.com. I have the advantage of being the only Gibson Biddle on the internet. I'm sure you're the only Lenny, but nobody can spell your last name, right?

Gibson Biddle (58:15):
Yeah, and then the third, how can people be useful? I'm a feedback freak, so you'll notice at the end of every talk I do, every essay, whether you find me on Medium, or Ask Gib, wherever, there's a link to give me feedback. And it's always the same question: On a scale of zero to 10, where zero sucks, 10 is excellent, how likely would you be to recommend this to a friend?

Gibson Biddle (58:38):
That has been incredibly helpful to me, and that's how I've learned to slowly get better at everything I do. The insight I get each day from folks is amazing. And I'll ask one follow up: but what'd you like, and what could be better? And it's just been incredibly helpful. So, don't ignore that link at the end. Don't treat it like United Airlines asking how is your flight? This is important, damn it! And your feedback is incredibly helpful to me, so thank you.

Lenny (59:04):
I'm going to go answer some of your surveys now. Thank you so much for doing this. I learned a ton, and I really appreciate your time.

Gibson Biddle (59:10):
That was great fun, Lenny, and thanks a ton for your help with my Ask Gib newsletter, as well.

Lenny (59:15):
Forever and Ever.

Gibson Biddle (59:16):
Okay, cool. I'll hold you to that.

Lenny (59:19):
That was awesome. Thank you for listening. If you enjoyed the chat, don't forget to subscribe to the podcast. You could also learn more at LennysPodcast.com. I'll see you in the next episode.

Hamilton Helmer (00:00:00):
Warren Buffett famously said, in business.

Audio (00:00:02):
I look for economic castles protected by unbreachable moats.

Hamilton Helmer (00:00:04):
Power requires a benefit and a barrier, so he's taking care of the benefit part by saying a castle, you have to have a pretty good understanding of why it's a castle and not a shack.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:15):
So in a lot of decks it's like, "Oh, we have the most amazing team. We move the fastest." You mention how rarely is that actually a power?

Hamilton Helmer (00:00:20):
You're on a treadmill and if you stop running on that treadmill, you get creamed, but it's not power. The things that drive operational excellence can be mimicked.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:30):
Let's actually talk about achieving these powers.

Hamilton Helmer (00:00:32):
There's a thing called power progression. There are times when certain types of power are available. The path to power is where the rubber meets the road.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:44):
Today my guest is Hamilton Helmer. Hamilton is a legend in the world of strategy. He's the author of 7 Powers, which outlines a framework for identifying and developing sustainable competitive advantage. It is widely considered to be the best book on strategy and people like Patrick Carlson, Peter Thiel, Reed Hastings, Daniel Eck, and so many more leaders credit the book and Hamilton's teachings for helping them build durable lasting companies. In our conversation, Hamilton shares what sources of power startups can start developing early, which types of power companies often think they have but they don't, how power relates to strategy and moats, when to start thinking about power as a startup and also what individual product managers and non-leaders can do about these insights about power. Also, how Hamilton sees AI impacting various entry and the sources of power. He also gives a preview of his new book that he's working on currently and so much more.

(00:01:40):
With that, I bring you Hamilton Helmer after a short word from our sponsors. And if you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. This episode is brought to you by WorkOS. If you're building a SaaS app, at some point your customers will start asking for enterprise features like SAML authentication and SCIM provisioning. That's where WorkOS comes in, making it fast and painless to add enterprise features to your app. Their APIs are easy to understand so that you can ship quickly and get back to building other features. Today, hundreds of companies are already powered by WorkOS, including ones you probably know like Vercel, Webflow and Loom. WorkOS also recently acquired Warrant, the fine-grained authorization service. Warrant's product is based on a groundbreaking authorization system called Zanzibar, which was originally designed for Google to power Google Docs and YouTube.

(00:02:42):
This enables fast authorization checks at enormous scale while maintaining a flexible model that can be adapted to even the most complex use cases. If you're currently looking to build role-based access control or other enterprise features like single sign-on, SCIM or user management, you should consider WorkOS. It's a drop-in replacement for Auth0 and supports up to 1 million monthly active users for free. Check it out at WorkOS.com to learn more. That's WorkOS.com.

(00:03:13):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta. When it comes to ensuring your company has top-notch security practices, things get complicated fast. Now you can assess risk, secure the trust of your customers and automate compliance for SOC 2, ISO 27001, HIPAA and more with a single platform Vanta. Vanta's market-leading trust management platform helps you continuously monitor compliance alongside reporting and tracking risks. Plus you can save hours by completing security questionnaires with Vanta AI. Join thousands of global companies that use Vanta to automate evidence collection, unify risk management, and streamline security reviews. Get $1,000 off Vanta when you go to vanta.com/Lenny. That's Vanta.com/Lenny. Hamilton Helmer, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Hamilton Helmer (00:04:12):
Hi Lenny, a pleasure to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:14):
It's even more my pleasure. I want to start by talking about when power becomes important. When do you recommend founders start thinking about power in terms of pre-product market fit, post-product market fit? Is it worth spending time thinking about power early? Obviously it's good to think about a little bit, but how much and how seriously should founders be thinking about it before they found something that people actually want?

Hamilton Helmer (00:04:38):
One of the things that has really surprised me in the last five years has been that my understanding of the answer to that question has changed. And before I thought it was you do product market fit and then you do strategy, and if you try and put strategy before product market fit, it is not much you can do with it. That's wrong. Actually, I mentioned before one of the great pleasures for me in my work is being able to talk to company founders and one of the things that has surprised me is that conversations with them, even at an early stage about strategic matters have a richness and relevance to me that was unexpected.

(00:05:41):
And founders are practical people. I mean it's very hard to do what they're doing and they have to be extremely focused and choose what's worthwhile spending time on. And so in observing their reactions and that dialogue, I could see that there was something going on that was meaningful to them. And this second book we're working on, we'll tease out why that's so more, but the answer to your question is when should you thinking about this? The answer is always. And that's an odd answer. And so even before you have product-market fit, it's worth thinking about strategy. Now it's not strategy in the sense of this fully articulated strategic planning, we're going to do this, these are going to be the competitors, this is how we're going to answer them. This is how we'll price. Not like that at all. At the earlier stage, you can imagine wildly more degrees of freedom and the questions are of the business propositions that you're thinking of in trying to get to product-market fit, what are the underlying characteristics that might tilt them towards the availability of power or not?

(00:07:10):
And those actually are meaningful conversations and certainly by no means certain. You're tilting probabilities, you're not creating a determinative things. And then later on, once you've already have product-market fit, then you have to understand your source of power to understand what competitive position is because then you have to establish that. And then later on in a more stable phase when you're in a stability phase of business, you have to know what your source of power is if you have one, because you have to know how to defend it. And then also it is also the foundational knowledge that you need for if there's another step. Because another thing that's quite surprising about iconic businesses is they often have a second act or a third act or fourth act. I mean think of AWS or Intel going into CPUs or Apple going into iPhones, all not the origin of business. And that's actually common, not unusual, and that's starting the process all over again.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:24):
Awesome. You mentioned this word strategy. I want to set a little foundation here. How does strategy relate to power when people are thinking about these two concepts? And then do you have just a nice definition of what strategy is? Everyone's always just like, "What the heck do you mean when you're talking about the strategy?"

Hamilton Helmer (00:08:41):
As I said, I'm a concept person and so when you develop concepts, you have to be very highly constrained by their usefulness. I'm a great fan of the great mathematician, John von Neumann, and he had a view which really irritated a lot of mathematicians, which is that if mathematics wasn't guided by what was useful, it would become, I think the word he used was aesthetic to aesthetic. And so any concept developments like that, it needs to be guided by usefulness. And so in dealing with strategy, the question is what domain of things do you want to include in that conversation? Because the term is ubiquitous in business. I mean do a Google search sometime. I've done one recently on Google Scholar for the word strategy and you'll get a million, I'm not exaggerating, a million hits. And so strategy for some people might mean everything that gets to the pile, it gets to the top of a pile in terms of what you have to do that year.

(00:09:58):
Everything is... And that's a perfectly legitimate definition, but what I have found is that there is a very important narrowing that makes it much more useful. So that's coming back to what I was saying [inaudible 00:10:17] makes it much more useful to the business. So my view is that you want to focus, it's very useful for a business to focus on the fundamental determinants of business value and that's an arbitrary choice. It could be something else, but I can tell you from decades of business experience that that narrowing is very useful. And then so once you make that... Once you reach that understanding, it tells you some important things. So if you understand what drives business value, I mean if you do the math of it right, it's NPV of cash flow, right? Expected cash flow. And what that tells you is that strategy is a long time concept. You're looking far out in the future.

(00:11:10):
So think of Pearl Harbor, Pearl Harbor for the Japanese was this enormous tactical success. They just destroyed the US ability, naval ability in the Pacific Ocean and the worst possible strategic move because it completely solved Franklin Delano Roosevelt's problem of how he could get the US citizens on board to attacking Hitler. The strategy of it was US's industrial might would eventually win the war and population. And the difference there is time constant, tactical short, strategy long. And so if you focus on value that narrows what you think about and allows you to get rather concise and offer up advice to founders about what they need to pay attention to.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:09):
So then how specifically is power informing strategies? Like the way you think about it, focus on your power and that will inform your strategy?

Hamilton Helmer (00:12:17):
Earlier I talked about these economic structures that provide durability of return in terms of refuge from withering arbitrage of everybody who wants to eat your lunch. And so that's what power is. So you have to understand what is an economics? You're asking me questions that get pretty deep into theory or I hope you don't, this is too conceptual. But you have to say, you have to understand how competition takes place and say what is it that creates some kind of refuge? And what it is is there's something in what you do that gives you either a cost or price advantage over others. So let's say you're lower cost and that's the benefit. And the barrier side is that there's something that is durable about that that makes it over time that you can't, the competitors can't take away from you. So benefit and a barrier, we call it the to be or not to be test. And if you have that, you can think of that immediately translating into a value because that will give you good margins out into the foreseeable future, which is what you're after.

(00:13:44):
I don't know if that's... We're getting into the weeds here, but that's what it's about. And so power is those structures. Let me give you a quick example. So one I use in the book. So Netflix with scale economies, they have more subscribers. The cost of their content is a very large fixed cost, about 50% of their cost structure every year. They can take that fixed cost and spread it over more subscribers so their cost per subscriber is less versus somebody with fewer subscribers. So if they face the same prices for subscriptions as their competitors, they will be more profitable. And that's a scale economy and that's an example of a type of power and a common one I'd say. But these things are hard to achieve, right? Because there's the holy grail.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:47):
So let's actually talk about achieving these powers. Essentially the argument here is your power informs everything you do because this is the thing that'll allow you to stay durable and competitive and last. There's seven powers. We're not going to talk about all of them. If you want to go understand each of them, go read the book.

Hamilton Helmer (00:15:07):
Yeah. Let's not. That conversation always goes too long.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:08):
Yeah, exactly. So what I'm wondering is, okay, so say you're looking at this list of seven powers and you're a specific type of startup, do you have a heuristic that tells you here's most likely the power and set of subsets that will most likely be an option for you? Like B2B SaaS companies, is there a smaller subset? Probably one of these has to be one of your options versus B2C.

Hamilton Helmer (00:15:32):
That's a great question Lenny, because I think the path to power is where the rubber meets the road and it's very complicated and nuanced. But I'll give you a few thoughts along it and frankly our next book, the Second Invention, that's what it's about. It's about power, the entire book.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:56):
[Inaudible 00:15:56] I'll try to read it.

Hamilton Helmer (00:15:58):
So in a book there's a thing called power progression, which says there are... It tells over the cycle of a business, there are times when certain types of power are available and the converse of that is times when they're not available. And so there's some that only are really available in when you reach a stability phase of a business pretty far out there.

(00:16:25):
And so if you're starting a company, take those off the table. So those two are branding and process power. So often I find that there's a confusion about this because brand recognition for a startup may be incredibly important, but you can get brand recognition by buying an ad in the Super Bowl. That's not power, that you paid for it. So take branding and process power and process power is really operational excellence on steroids and usually is imitable, so it's usually not.

(00:17:05):
So take those off the table and then a resource type of power, which is you have something that is of value that if you transferred it to somebody else it would be of value to them, but you own the rights. So the barrier is law for example, or lack of knowledge from others. And there are classes of businesses that are like that. So prescription pharmaceuticals, if you are the first person to come up with Viagra, that's worth a lot of money. If you took that license and gave it to somebody else, it'd be worth a lot of money to them. But that's a different class and it's usually not the types of things that I'm dealing with and it's obvious to everybody. So the key challenge there is can you invent a pharmaceutical that's effective for a large market. So you can take those three off the table and that then leaves counter positioning, scale economies, switching costs and network economies.

(00:18:13):
And the important thing to keep in mind there is that they're sequenced. So almost every startup that you want to deal with starts with counter positioning because remember what product market fit is primarily is a substitution. You are coming up with a way to satisfy a more or less existing need in a novel way that creates more value. Now sometimes you tap into entirely new needs, but it's not so often. I mean Amazon was up against brick and mortar stores, Google was up against Yahoo and so on, and so you're usually substituting and that substitution, so your competition at that point is functional competition.

(00:19:19):
And if you don't have counter positioning at that point you're pretty high risk from an incumbent who already has the capabilities necessary to do that. They just have to extend their product or do this or that, but counter positioning is the refuge from that. And then you go into the other three types of power scale economies, switching costs and network economies, and those depend on your scale relative to competitors. This is pretty cursory, but that's what I'd say. I'll focus on those four and I would recommend that you think pretty hard about whether you think you have counter positioning to start.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:08):
Awesome. I actually want to double down on that thread, but just to summarize, I have the list here. Basically you're saying if you're an early stage startup, the four to really that are actually potential powers for you at least early on, counter positioning, which your point is you could just start with that. That's essentially positioning and business model design, which happens at the beginning and then you can start to think about network economy, scale economy, switching costs as powers.

Hamilton Helmer (00:20:33):
Right. And you've done the right thing by not having me go through and define each of those. But your listeners will need to go back to my book and see what those things are to get... We're going through the shorthand as we should, but all of what we've said won't be completely obvious to them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:54):
Yeah, I think a simple Google search I find just gives you a very simple definition of these.

Hamilton Helmer (00:20:58):
Yeah, that's right. There's some people who have done some really good summaries of this.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:02):
Or ChatGPT, even better in a lot of cases.

Hamilton Helmer (00:21:05):
ChatGPT if they get it right sometimes I find they hallucinate.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:12):
Hallucinate an eighth power. You mentioned how some companies think they have a certain power or it's common to think you have a certain power. If you look at every startup deck, there's always like, "Here's our moat, here's the way we're going to have barriers to entry." I'm guessing in almost every case they're delusional about the power that they actually have and the power they think they'll have. Do you also find that to be true that often founders are wrong about how much barrier they've actually created and is there a power you often find most wrong and mistaken?

Hamilton Helmer (00:21:43):
Yeah, so I agree with your observation, but I don't want to be unkind. So I mean there are two things to keep in mind here in terms of making people feel better about that incorrect slide in the deck. One is that founders have to be optimistic. I think it's an important quality that they maybe understate the risk a little bit, but they're so committed to I'm going to do this thing that they go through that and that may give them an advantage over a large corporation trying to do the same thing. The other is that despite the name 7 Powers, which makes it sound like, oh, you can sort this out. Actually understanding whether or not there is a type of power in place is hard. I mean I did it with my colleagues here at Strategy Capital and we're looking at a well-known company, it might take us weeks to answer that question for a single company.

(00:22:47):
And it comes down to the hard part is industry economics is what really are the economic relationships and it's very hard. So with those caveats that... Give them some courtesy, I'll say some of the obvious ones are I mentioned before, people sometimes think they have branding power, but another one that I think I've heard you mention is people often think that they get scale economies through data. And I'd say that that's possible, but it's rare. And the reason it's rare is not because there aren't scale economies in data, but rather that the range of scale that the existing competitors have are often large enough to be able to put them in shouting distance of each so that the differences in their cost per unit is not that great.

(00:23:50):
The curve flattens in other words, which is typical of any, because the most common scale economy is you've got a big fixed cost and you prorate that. And as you get more and more scale, the percentage cost advantage of a fixed cost advantage like that goes down and that often. So that's a pretty frequent one that we see. We laugh whenever we hear somebody say they have a flywheel, which gives you the idea of network economies. There are often flywheels, the ones that really are material, are rare. The key thing here is materiality, not whether the flywheel exists, but whether the effect is strong enough to really tilt returns.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:39):
I was actually going to ask about that one because in software and social consumer products, network effects is always the pitch. Once we get big enough, we create this huge barrier. You mentioned just now you often find that's not actually true. It's rarely something that'll become a barrier. Is there anything else you find with network? And I know your power is called network economies, not network effect. I guess just to be clear, are these the same thing in your mind with different words?

Hamilton Helmer (00:25:02):
Yeah, kind of. I mean I have called it a type of power. So for me it's only those things which clear the significance barrier, hurdle rather that they're a large material. And so there are lots of things that I would say have network effects but not network economies.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:26):
Oh, interesting. Wait, can you speak to that? So there is a difference between these terms, network economies?

Hamilton Helmer (00:25:30):
Yeah. So for me the difference is materiality is that whether the value benefit is large enough to engender a price delta significant enough to give you materially different margins into the future.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:50):
Basically, does that network effect have an actual impact on your business and your ability to price?

Hamilton Helmer (00:25:55):
Yeah, it's not an impact, it's a material impact. So it could have... If it's a penny to your bottom line, that's one thing if it's a billion dollars or something else.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:06):
Wow, that's actually really interesting. Is there an example of a company that comes to mind, they had network effects but not network economies as a power?

Hamilton Helmer (00:26:12):
I think you could turn almost anywhere and get some modest network effects and any platform business would probably likely have some modest network effects. You asked me earlier and you sent me about Uber and Lyft, I'd say that they probably have network effects involved but not network economies.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:40):
Wow, that's interesting. And the reason you're saying they don't have network economies is because they're still so competitive they still have to spend so much money to stay ahead and so the network is not-

Hamilton Helmer (00:26:51):
Yeah. Right. The advantage that they get, it's not material. Right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:59):
Wow, that's so interesting. Along those lines, it's so interesting to see Uber and Lyft these days. In theory they both had some sort of strong network effect. I was just looking, so Lyft is 5% the market cap of Uber. Is there a lesson from just what it is that allowed Uber to just win and kind of run away with the market essentially?

Hamilton Helmer (00:27:25):
I'm not entirely sure, I'll take a guess, but take it as a unformed guess. I haven't really studied it carefully. I think that over time there, if I had to guess, I'd say they're probably modest scale economies in the business. And over time Uber has just very successfully played a war of attrition. And that's both been in how they run their... They made one initial misstep, which is they misdefined their business. They said it was international transportation and it's not. That business is extremely geographically specific.

(00:28:14):
If you have a great position in the Bay Area, it doesn't help you in London. And so their forays into China and everything really didn't make, but they pulled back on that, focused down on understanding their source of power, which was a geographically specific scale economy. And then they've done interesting things like Uber Eats where they've tried to utilize the platform that they have to get other opportunities for the one side of their platform, the drivers. And so if I had to guess, I'd say it was a well-played war of attrition with modest scale economies.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:02):
And is that attrition coming from a source of power or is that just like a broader, more strict?

Hamilton Helmer (00:29:06):
Yeah, it only works because there are modest scale economies. If there weren't any then if they did all this stuff, they'd still have a global and see.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:16):
Got it. Let me go in a slightly different direction. We've talked about power, we've talked about strategy. There's also, there's this word moat that comes up a lot. Everyone's always trying to build a moat. In your mind, is a moat equivalent to a power? Is there a difference when people talk about these two?

Hamilton Helmer (00:29:30):
Power requires a benefit and a barrier, you have to have something that you do that gives you a better outcome than your competitors, lower cost or higher price, and then something that makes it impossible for somebody else to mimic that. So moat is the second. So it's not synonymous with power because you can have a moat around a very undesirable piece of property and wouldn't get you far. But I think it is pretty synonymous with barrier. I think Warren Buffett, Charlie Munger, I admire enormously. I think I get credit for popularizing those concepts and I think the way they think about it is good. I'd say that 7 Powers is probably more systematic and comprehensive in saying that. I don't think. This is wonderful. I don't know if you've read any of the Microsoft antitrust literature that came out of their-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:42):
No.

Hamilton Helmer (00:30:42):
...lawsuit, but there was a communication between Bill Gates and Warren Buffett where Warren Buffett was saying why he couldn't invest in Microsoft. He just didn't understand it. And so that meant the idea of network economies and what the moat was there he didn't understand. But I think the concept of a moat is a good one. The idea that you have something that gives you a refuge from competing forces.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:14):
In terms of Warren Buffett, I found the quote about moats. Warren Buffett famously said, "In business, I look for economic castles protected by unreachable moats."

Hamilton Helmer (00:31:22):
Right. And so he's taking care of the benefit part by saying a castle.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:27):
Right. He's got it covered.

Hamilton Helmer (00:31:29):
But one of the tricks to understanding power is you have to have a pretty good understanding of why it's a castle and not a shack. So I'll give you a Netflix example. So a company I admire a lot, and I think if some of the things that they had to do to develop their business were so important for their business that don't guarantee a castle. So for example, UI development, it's been an enormous amount of resources on trying to get just the very best UI, I mean a zillion AB tests, all kinds of things. Their recommendation engine, everybody's knows the story about how that went, their interface with the content world and all this. So those things are important. They're things they have to spend a lot of time and resources on, but they can largely be mimicked.

(00:32:31):
So when Netflix in an earlier phase was fighting Blockbuster, when Blockbuster finally threw in the towel, said, "Well, we done. Well, better do a mail or a DVD business." If you look at the Blockbuster site, their UI site, you couldn't tell it different from Netflix. They just copied it. And so all that thoughtfulness about which things you put first and how you structure it and all that to make this suitable was mimicable. So that's an understanding of looking at the properties you have and trying to figure out if they're a castle or a shack.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:06):
I love that. This episode is brought to you by Paragon, the embedded integration platform for B2B SaaS product development teams. Are your users constantly requesting new integrations with other SaaS platforms that they use? Unfortunately, native product integrations take months of engineering to build and the maintenance never ends. Paragon enables your engineering team to ship integrations seven times faster than building in-house by removing the complexities around authentication, messy third-party APIs and debugging integration errors. Engineering teams at companies like CopyAI, Cinch, TLDB and over 100 other SaaS companies are using Paragon so they can focus their efforts on core product features, not integrations.

(00:33:53):
The results, their shipping integrations on demand, which has led to higher product usage, better retention and more customer upsells. Visit useparagon.com/Lenny to see how Paragon can help you go to market faster with integrations today. That's use paragon.com/Lenny. So let's take this concept of 7 Powers. A lot of people listening to this are just like individual contributor product managers on teams building new products or iterating on products they already have. What do you suggest they do with this knowledge of there exists these ways to build benefits and barriers? I'm working on say a new product. What do you recommend they do? What's something they could do this week, next month to infuse these lessons into the products they're building?

Hamilton Helmer (00:34:41):
I'd say they're a few and it's a little bit different. I'm not a great fan of the strategically driven organization because that idea, because it fuzzes over how this knowledge is useful at different stages in the business. And so for somebody in that position, say a product manager in an existing successful business. So it is important in terms of just understanding their business to know what their source of power is because they... And that can inform them about what it is that they're working for. And also they may see things since they're down in the weeds, they may see things that are important to that that they need to bring to other people's attention. Because they're the ones that really have the knowledge of what the heck's going on. There's another aspect I mentioned before, this idea of transforming, of starting up entirely new things. And usually... I wouldn't say, usually I say it's not uncommon for ideas about that to bubble up from down below.

(00:36:03):
And so that's another source. So let's separate a business into three phases, origination, takeoff, and stability. So the answers I've given are more in the stability phase. In the takeoff phase, let's say you've launched a product, you've gotten customer traction, now you're in a phase where there's just very rapid growth, probably other entrants like you, what are you facing? What you're facing is remember that underneath all of this is a change in technology. That's what made the product market fit possible in the first place. But that doesn't just stop. That if you're in a technology wave, often there are all kinds of offshoots both for you and the compliments to your business and everything else going on at the same time.

(00:36:59):
And to win at that stability phase, which is really a market share win, you have to be aware of those and understand, okay, we have to incorporate this new feature. Or maybe now things have gotten to the point where this new market segment is, our product is attractive before it wasn't. This is meat and potato stuff for somebody at that level and it may well be the decisive element in terms of whether you win that market share battle with the other contenders. And so you have a very, very important role at that point. And so I'd say the first thing to do with your question is to make sure you think about the different phases of this and then ask what those responsibilities are.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:51):
What about for people that are just trying to get better at being strategic, thinking strategically something every product leader is always encouraged to do, become a better strategic thinker, build as muscle of strategy, what do you often advise to people just get better at the stuff? Obviously read your book.

Hamilton Helmer (00:38:09):
Read the book, and then have conversations with your colleagues about the topic because as you internalize what that means and how, have conversations with them about do we really have this kind of power? What's going on here? What's important? What isn't. Those conversations tend to allow you to get a better grip on things. I mean in the case of Netflix, Reed actually had me come in and train the top a hundred people in Netflix and strategy. We actually ran classes in the company, but that's unusual I'd say. And I didn't have the book yet. And so I think the book gets people pretty far down that path already.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:55):
And you don't do that anymore, I imagine if someone wanted to do that today, not an option.

Hamilton Helmer (00:38:59):
I sadly don't have the time. I mean I do often do fireside chats at company meetings and that kind of thing, but not a full-blown course and I'm not teaching at Stanford anymore either. And so I don't. I enjoyed that immensely wonderful people to work with. But sadly I don't have the time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:23):
You're about to get a lot of requests for fireside chats. I hope you're ready. You mentioned AI at some point in our chat. I'm curious how you think AI is going to change your 7 Powers framework. Do you think defensibility goes down in general? Will certain forms of power become more important or harder to achieve? How do you think about AI?

Hamilton Helmer (00:39:44):
Yeah, it's a great question. I mean we're all in this phase of wondering exactly how generative AI is going to play out. My own view, currently I don't see any change in seven powers from it in terms of an eighth power or something. But the issues that it brings up, like scale economies, I mean think of scale economies. If you have a fixed cost of trying to develop a model of a billion dollars or something or network effects, will AI models develop so that they learn in a way that for one user's interaction helps another user's interaction? That would be a powerful network economy. Or if it learns, if you think of if it learns about you and becomes a better psychiatrist or something, then that's a switching cost. So all these things are relevant to which business models will work and I find that useful.

(00:40:51):
But I think in general, the way I think about it is it's a standard form of potentially very powerful technology that is being introduced into the business world and just asking how that plays out. I currently tend to think of that there's three types of plays. There's the company that's the technology play itself. So if you think of microprocessors, it would be Intel. There's the companies that wouldn't exist without the technology. So for semiconductors it would be Microsoft. And then there are the companies that utilize the technology, but it had existed before and after. So for semiconductors it would be automobiles. They used a ton of chips, but there were still cars before, after.

(00:41:48):
And so I'm of the view, I'm very much uncertain at this point that generative AI, its biggest impact will be that tertiary class. It will be used in a lot of things that existed before and exist after, but are made better by it like semiconductors and automobiles. And so it reminds me, if you think of really big technology shifts like this, it reminds me of electricity. When electricity came, you could completely reconfigure a factory floor. You no longer had to have... You could have the power source essentially at the operating unit of an operator. But that took a lot of redesign, incorporation, investment, learning, complements, all kinds of stuff. I tend to think this will be more like that. There will be some pure cases. People will want to have them write their term paper with ChatGPT or something. But if you think of businesses, it's hard for me to think of a single functional area in a business that with redesign couldn't benefit. So accounting, HR, R&D all have uses of this but requires incorporation, which is always troublesome.

(00:43:30):
And so that's my view. But there certainly will be businesses that couldn't exist without it. And there's some that are coming up and some of those are in fact the businesses that empower the tertiary need, they're the ones that bring in. But if you go back, this will date me, but if you go back into business history, back in, I guess it was the 90s, there was this thing called business process re-engineering, the idea that you could take a computer sensibility into business processes, redesign them and get these monstrous cost savings. And it was a gigantic consulting opportunity for people. Whole companies got developed based on that and it feels more like that to me, but it's very interesting. I could be wrong, but it feels different than crypto. It feels like there's more of a real ultimate use case. I mean, if it really is true what they say that a 50% improvement in programming efficacy is not uncommon, just that proposition alone is worth an awful lot of money if you think how many programmers are in the world.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:56):
No question. You mentioned eighth power. I just want to check, is there an emerging eighth power you wish you maybe would've included or maybe added in the future that's like, "Oh, maybe this is on the edge," or it's like, "Nope, we got these seven?"

Hamilton Helmer (00:45:15):
It's a great question. I'm always looking for it because if you find it it probably means it's so obscure there, it'll also be a great investment opportunity. We're looking all the time, but so far, no. So far I'm pretty satisfied that seven is an exhaustive set, but never say never. That's an empirical seven, not a theoretical seven.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:37):
If we start seeing you making incredible returns, you've clearly found an eighth power [inaudible 00:45:41]-

Hamilton Helmer (00:45:41):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:43):
I want to close one thread on a power that you mentioned that is often a pitfall, which is around process power and basically execution. A lot of people think so in a lot of decks it's like, oh, we have the most amazing team, we move the fastest, we're earliest. You mentioned how rarely is that actually a power actually being able to execute and create a process that is an actual barrier? Can you just talk a bit more about that to help people understand okay, it's probably not our power?

Hamilton Helmer (00:46:09):
One of the great thinkers in strategy was this Harvard professor Michael Porter, and he in probably 40 years ago, made the very controversial statement that operational excellence is not strategy. He got a lot of people of the Harvard Business School faculty really mad at him because that's what their careers were about and it sounded like he was dissing them. But the point he was making was when you get to this end state, if you already have power that things that drive operational excellence can be mimicked because you can hire a consulting firm who has best practices, knowledges that come in and get you up to snuff. You can hire people from your competitors who know how to do it better. And that's true, but it's also true in this takeoff phase in a business that we talked about before, when you're trying to attain competitive position, operational excellence is everything.

(00:47:14):
And so if you think of strategy, not statically endpoints like Professor Porter was, but if you look at dynamically how you get there, operational excellence is essential for a strategy. So think of those things I mentioned before about Netflix, about their UI and recommendation engine and so on, or international rollout, all those things. They were in a battle to get more subscribers than other people and those were critical for that. But in themselves, they're critical in attaining competitive position, but in themselves, they're not sources of power typically, unless there's some very tight considerations here or very demanding considerations for the... Unless if they have to be material, but they also have to be opaque or some way people can't easily imitate them. Either they don't understand what's going on or they might be opaque. So for example, think of TSMC. So when they put up the latest fab and get that operational, are there a lot of steps in doing that?

(00:48:43):
They know how to do with their staff is trained to do it, but it's not documented necessarily and you can't imitate it. Then maybe they have it. I don't know if they have process power or not, but it takes that level of complexity. In my book, I use the example of Toyota and a car manufacturing is complex enough that you can have this opacity in terms of material steps, but it's not common. So if you're in a stability phase of business, you're stuck with this funny thing, which is most of your day is on those issues and it should be because if you don't do it, a competitor can and they can end up better than you. And so you're on a treadmill and that's the way business is. That's fine. And if you stop running that treadmill, you get creamed. So you got to do it, it's most of your day, but it's not power. And there are those rare cases where it's so material and so inimitable that it can be power, but they're rare.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:02):
I like the heuristic that if you haven't written it down or you can't describe it, that might be a sign that maybe process power is a power of yours.

Hamilton Helmer (00:50:13):
Yeah. And there isn't a consulting firm that offers to bring you up to speed on that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:20):
They'll make you more like Amazon as a service. Kind of along these same lines, you talk about how the only things that create value in a company are power, market size and operational excellence. And I think hearing that will blow a lot of people's minds because they think there's so many things that contribute to the value of a company and you whittle it down to these three things. What can you say about that insight?

Hamilton Helmer (00:50:47):
So I'd say they're right and I'm right. They're right because there are this incredible... I mean business is really hard and there are just a multitude of things you have to pay attention for. I'm right because all those things fall into those three categories. So it's an exhaustive set and it simply comes out of the math. So we're both right I'd say.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:16):
Final question, the intent of a lot of your work is to empower founders. I'm curious if you've noticed any broad economic trends or shifts that you think will make life easier or harder for founders in the coming years?

Hamilton Helmer (00:51:32):
Personally, I am very, very concerned about the debt trajectory of the United States and of many countries around the world, but I'll pick on the United States, but it's a trend going on everywhere. We're on a trajectory for this extremely high indebtedness. And so if you think about the last 30 years, right? There's been a crisis about once every 10 years. So there's the dot-com bust, there's the financial crisis, there was COVID. Nothing makes me think that the frequency will be a lot less. I don't know what, who knows? These are all uncertain events. But imagine if we got to one of those and we had no dry powder and dry powder for us is the ability to heavily deficit spend take on debt. And fortunately our government did that in both the financial crisis and in COVID. And because that people had jobs. My own view about the financial crisis is that if we hadn't done that, plus having Ben Bernanke as the head of the Fed, we would've gone into another great depression.

(00:52:52):
It was that ugly. So this current debt trajectory, you don't know how long it will take exactly when, but eventually that will mean we will not have dry powder. People will not respect the credit worthiness of this country. So that worries me a lot. And it utterly will affect the idea of company founding because if you get into a crisis like that, the capital markets lock up and it gets very difficult to do anything. And to really stretch my credibility here, I'll opine on just how hard a problem this is to solve. The reason this is so difficult for this country to solve and other countries is that it is right at the crux of the delicate dance between capitalism and democracy. So if you think about the problem, of course that's driving all this is entitlements. There's discretionary spending, certain recovery programs and stuff, but those can go away. The underlying trend that people just can't get their arms around is entitlements. And anybody who looks at the numbers can see that. Every economist knows that. But that's not an easy fix.

(00:54:18):
And the reason it's not an easy fix is there are two opposing views of what's going on, and there's no way to resolve those two views. One is that capitalism is rapacious and results in more and more inequality and the government has to do something about it. And the other is that the government is on a path that is creeping socialism that will undermine our freedom and economic sufficiency. And the poster child for the rapacious capitalism. One is, I don't know if you've seen the recent analysis of inequality in the United States just came out, much more robust analysis. And it said that basically inequality in the last 60 years of the United States is unchanged, but that's post-transfer, post-tax inequality, which basically says the amount of taxing and transferring going on was about right. So it says that the amount we're spending is about right from that perspective, that it compensates for the other inequities and we should be spending that much so we should tax more.

(00:55:30):
And the poster child for the other point of view of the dangers of government is the steadily increasing without interruption percentage of the economy that is government. And to levels that 75 years ago, people would've thought absolutely impossible. So there are these two views about what's going on. One is that we're compensating for the normal inequities of capitalism, and the other is that we're headed down a path to socialism and ruin. And that leads to a deadlock, which is you don't tax anymore and you don't cut spending and that leaves deficits. So anyway, a long, long rant, sorry but that trend is extremely politically difficult to deal with and extremely threatening and that concerns me immensely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:32):
Not to leave listeners with a very sad state of affairs.

Hamilton Helmer (00:56:36):
Yeah, sorry.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:37):
No, no. I think this is important. I think it's important people think about this and know these things. Is there anything that gives you hope? Is there anything that gets you excited about either for founders or anyone in general, just to leave folks with maybe on a happy?

Hamilton Helmer (00:56:50):
Yeah, I mean, I am an optimist really in a way, and I do. There's a famous Austrian and eventually American economist named Joseph Schumpeter who wrote this wonderful book Theory of Economic Development way back when over a hundred years ago, where he took the unusual view of saying that the vitality of an economy depended on entrepreneurs. And I ascribe to that. I think that creativity and action are the ways society and people advance. And I think the US's and a free society has huge advantages in that. And I think that I feel very lucky to be in a place I'm in Silicon Valley, but to be in a place in a country where that is vital and active and I think that's ground zero for me. And so I think you see that alive and well, I think. And there are people that are very Enthusiastic about that as I am.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:12):
Beautiful way to close out our chat. Is there anything else you want to share before we get to our very exciting lightning round? Is there anything you want to leave listeners with or any last tidbit of advice?

Hamilton Helmer (00:58:22):
I alluded to it before, but just that remember, action is the first principle of business. You do stuff and my book is very oriented towards that. The idea was not to tell you what to do, but to give you guideposts while you're on that journey. People that are enthused about it, I encourage you to do stuff. That's where it all starts and I can think about it and maybe help a little bit, but it's mostly doing stuff.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:59):
I love that point so much. It was something I was going to touch on but I didn't get to is just there's so many people that just sit around and theorize about a strategy of their business, especially in their early stage. Here's our grand master plan, here's an amazing strategy or just read about startup ideas and don't actually try it. I love this final note of just try it. Just do it. Don't just sit there and-

Hamilton Helmer (00:59:18):
Yeah, yeah, just do it. And life is full of surprises. You'll end up in a place you didn't expect.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:24):
Amazing. Speaking of ending up in a place you didn't expect, it's time for our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Hamilton Helmer (00:59:32):
Oh, sure. I'll do my best here. I'm not very good on lightning.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:37):
First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Hamilton Helmer (00:59:42):
One book that is extremely wonky, and I can only take it in very small doses, but is magnificent, is one called The Road to Reality by Roger Penrose, who's this brilliant mathematician. And it will be very daunting for anybody unless you're a deep math person, but his brilliance in erudition just shines through in this thing. And it's an amazing book. I would say there's another book, boy, I wish I could remember the name. Maybe you can get the name of the author called Gene by this geneticist. And I think he's a Harvard Medical School professor that's about the history of genetics and he is an absolutely luminous writer. I mean, it puts me to shame. I'm embarrassed when I read it because I think how pedestrian my writing is and incredibly knowledgeable about the history of genetics and I think that's such an important topic. So those are two that I would recommend highly, fairly wonky, but I like them both.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:56):
I love them. The author, I just looked him up. Siddhartha Mukherjee.

Hamilton Helmer (01:01:01):
Yes. Just amazing. You read it and you go, "How did he think of that phrasing?" I mean, it's just, he's amazing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:10):
Do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show you really enjoyed?

Hamilton Helmer (01:01:14):
I'm a huge movie fan and have been all my life, and I'm particularly keen on animated films. But the movie that I've recently seen that I liked particularly it was American Fiction. I thought that was... It didn't make any of the easy choices in a movie and as a result was just incredibly interesting and thoughtful I thought.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:39):
Do you have a favorite product you recently discovered that you really love?

Hamilton Helmer (01:01:43):
In my office, just this last week, we actually put a Persian rug in our entry room, and this is what's called a Farahan Sarouk rug and it's 150 years old. And it had an effect in me that I didn't expect, which is it is a work of great beauty. And it was before, it was all hand-done before machines. You get all this wonderful variation of the actual icons in the rug and the different dye colors. And I find that every morning when I walk in, I go, "That's really beautiful," and it's uplifting and it shows you the importance of, or the value of the quality of art. I mean, just blows my mind actually. So that's probably not the usual product discussion that you get.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:50):
No, I love that answer. Recently we've had some really unique choices. One is a very nice Mercedes and a Rivian and a minivan recently. We've got a lot of very nice things.

Hamilton Helmer (01:03:00):
Oh, that's great. I'm a car guy too, so I didn't answer on the car question.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:05):
Oh man, I love that. We have Rory Sutherland coming on the podcast soon. He is one of the leaders of Ogilvy and he has a whole thing about how buying a home is the best value of art to buy art if you live in a home that makes you feel inspired and is beautiful.

Hamilton Helmer (01:03:20):
Yeah, I'm a big believer in that. I mean, I think that your place and how you connect to it has an important grounding effect. And then before I talked earlier about creativity and I think surrounding yourself in an environment that stimulates that is really important. And so I couldn't agree with him more.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:51):
Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often think about, come back to share with friends or family?

Hamilton Helmer (01:03:58):
One is what Clint Eastwood's advice to actors, which is don't just do something, stand there. And so there are a lot of things that are long-termish with low signal to noise. And you can often just do a lot of stuff that you think makes a difference, but it really doesn't. And so that's one. The other one which is somewhat more profound I think was one that I had a famous Sri Lankan journalist was a mentor of mine and very dear friend, and he had a favorite expression that I adhere to all the time, which is everything is always about something else.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:49):
Wow. Deep.

Hamilton Helmer (01:04:53):
And that's so true if you're dealing with this power stuff when if you really dig down, everything is always about something else.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:58):
Speaking of power, final question. People that have a lot of power are leaders in the world. I'm curious, do you have a favorite historical leader?

Hamilton Helmer (01:05:07):
So yeah. I have some that I admire a great deal. I'm a tremendous fan of Winston Churchill's. Most really great people are quirky and he qualified. There are things you could say about him that you might not have liked that so much, but he was a genius and had great fortitude, human sense. He understood things long before other people. I've give him high marks. Some of the great artists I admire enormously. I'm reading a book right now on the last 20 years of Michelangelo, which wonderful book actually, and which is a very interesting period because in his first 70 years he finished up all that, he wasn't going to do sculpture anymore. He just finished The Last Judgment, which was the wall of the Sistine Chapel.

(01:06:08):
And I think the last major fresco he did. And a lot of his friends at that time, he was exiled from Florence and living in Rome and he had this Roman community and a lot of his close friends that had recently died or had difficulties. So he's at this inflection point in his life at 70, which in those days was very old, and yet he went on to do some of the most remarkable architecture in the history of the world. And so you've got to admire that. I mean, just doing that, which is that rare second act. But I think for world leaders, Winston Churchill is very high. I'm a fan of Teddy Roosevelt, I must say too, in this country.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:00):
I love that. Hamilton, you are wonderful. I feel like we have helped a lot of people up-level their ability to think about strategy and moats and power. Thank you so much for being here. Two final questions. Where can folks find more online if they want to dig in further, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Hamilton Helmer (01:07:15):
Yeah, so as I say, I'm an idea person and I'm about trying to empower company founders, and so only thing I can say is read the book, spread the ideas, start your own company. Those are the things that would make me happy.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:37):
Amazing. Hamilton, Thank you so much for being here.

Hamilton Helmer (01:07:40):
Great. My pleasure, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:42):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at Lenny'sPodcasts.com. See you in the next episode.

Richard Rumelt (00:00:00):
Don't call it strategy, call it an action agenda. It's huge numbers of people out there willing to sell you advice on mission and your vision and your values, all these things that have to be in place before you can have strategy. That's not true. Begin to try to identify the one or two key challenges that can actually be addressed and what are we going to do about it? What are the coherent actions we're going to do to take these on? Okay, we're going to go after this and here's the action steps we're going to take to do that. That's the essence of what you're doing when you're thinking strategically.

Lenny (00:00:42):
Today my guest is Richard Rumelt. Richard is an absolute legend in the world of strategy. It was such an honor to have him come on the podcast. He's the author of Good Strategy Bad Strategy, which I've gifted to countless people who wanted to become more strategic. He's been mentioned so many times on this podcast. He's also the author of The Crux, his most recent book, which some consider his best book, which delves even further into his advice on how to craft a winning strategy.

(00:01:08):
Richard was a longtime professor at UCLA Anderson School of Management, was on the faculty of Harvard Business School, and he's consulted on strategy with companies like Microsoft, Apple and Intel, and also with government organizations like the US Army Special Ops Command, and folks like Donald Rumsfeld. In our conversation, Richard shares the concrete elements that make a good strategy, why we'd be better off calling them action agendas rather than strategies, why every great strategy starts with a clear diagnosis of the biggest challenge that you face. Also, how to actually lay out a strategy, why organizational dynamics are often the biggest hindrance to winning strategies and so much more. I could keep going, but let me just say we cover a lot of ground in this episode and Richard shares incredibly thoughtful and deep answers to each question. I'm excited to bring you Richard Rumelt, after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:01:58):
Let me tell you about CommandBar. If you're like me and most users I've built product for, you'll probably find those little in-product pop-up really annoying. Want to take a tour? Check out this new feature. And these pop-ups are becoming less and less effective since most users don't read what they say, they just want to close them as soon as possible. But every product builder knows that users need help to learn the ins and outs of your product. We use so many products every day and we can't possibly know the ins and outs of every one.

(00:02:24):
CommandBar is an AI-powered toolkit for product growth, marketing and customer teams to help users get the most out of your product without annoying them. They use AI to get closer to user intent, so they have search and chat products that let users describe what they're trying to do in their own words and then see personalized results like customer walkthroughs or actions. And they do pop-ups too, but their nudges are based on in-product behaviors like confusion or intent classification, which makes them much less annoying and much more impactful. This works for web apps, mobile apps and websites, and they work with industry-leading companies like Gusto, Freshworks, HashiCorp, and LaunchDarkly. Over 15 million end-users have interacted with CommandBar. To try out CommandBar, you can sign up at CommandBar.com/Lenny and you can unlock an extra 1,000 AI responses per month for any plan. That's CommandBar.com/Lenny.

(00:03:21):
This episode is brought to you by Miro. Do you ever feel like your projects aren't as organized as you like them to be or it's way too hard for people on your team to find all of the documents and files and context that they need for their project? Miro helps you streamline your workflows, organize information, and get your whole team on the same page. If you want to see what Miro can do for you, check out my Miro board that the Miro team helped me create, which includes all of my favorite plug-and-play templates, like a user journey map, my favorite one-pager template plus a brainstorming guide. My board also has a place for you to share suggestions for this podcast and also answer a question that I have for you. You can then take my Miro board and easily create your own to see how it feels. Make sure to check out some of my favorite features, like the sticky notes, the inline comments and charts, and also the really cool diagramming tools.

(00:04:10):
Check it out at Miro.com/Lenny. Your first three Miro boards are free when you sign up today at Miro.com/Lenny. Find simplicity in your most complex projects with Miro. That's MIRO.com/Lenny.

(00:04:29):
Richard, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Richard Rumelt (00:04:33):
Thank you for having me, Lenny.

Lenny (00:04:35):
It is such an honor to have you on this podcast. So many guests on the podcast have mentioned you and mentioned the book. I probably bought your book for, I don't know, dozens of people over the years, and it is just so cool to have you on and to get to delve into the stuff that you teach. So thank you again for being here.

Richard Rumelt (00:04:51):
Thank you.

Lenny (00:04:51):
I thought we'd start at the beginning and then work our way up and kind of see where the conversation goes. What is the simplest way to understand a strategy? What is a strategy, and then what are the essential components of a good strategy?

Richard Rumelt (00:05:05):
Well, a strategy is a design for overcoming a high-stakes challenge. It's a mixture of policy and action designed to deal with a challenge. The challenge could have an upside. It could be, "Oh geez, we were fooling around in the back 40 and we discovered oil, what we do?" Or it could be negative, could be that new innovation is driving us out of the market. But a challenge is the hardest strategy. The work comes from Strategos, which is Greek. The Greeks elected 10 Strategoi to serve as strategic leaders at Athens. And they were elected and they dealt with issues of the day, the Persians are invading, there's a plague in town, we need money for a new temple. And that's where the word comes to us from. It isn't just military, it wasn't in Athens. So strategy is always about dealing with an issue, a challenge, a problem. What are we going to do about global warring? What are we going to do about China wants to reunify with Taiwan?

Lenny (00:06:24):
You obviously have these very infamous famous elements of a good strategy, something you call the colonel. Can you just talk through those pieces?

Richard Rumelt (00:06:33):
Right, sure. So when I used to teach strategy for many years at Harvard and then at UCLA and other places, there's lots of ways of looking at strategy. And so years and years ago, we used to look at the [inaudible 00:06:51] and the matrix and the five forces and all of those kinds of analytical tools. And it began to dawn on me at some point that this is a strategy. These are analytical tools for analyzing the problem, for thinking about things, for looking at competition. But they're not strategy. Strategy is, one, and I started to write a book and the first chapter of the book was... the first part I wrote was the David and Goliath strategy story. And my point in writing about David and Goliath was that the surprise that David is able to beat this giant warrior, and that's a strategy story. Strategy story is about discovered strength.

(00:07:43):
It's about, oh wow, look at how they did that. Look at how he got made in five moves. That's a strategy story. Look at how Steve Jobs changed the world when people couldn't expect it. That's emotionally what a strategy story is. So I want to write about strategy. And my wife Kate asked me, "Well, do you define strategy?" I said, "Oh, it's really hard. I can't define it." And she said, "Well, you can't write a book about it if you can't define it." Because I said I had this other conceptual scheme in my head that all teachers and writers had, which is that there's a bunch of analytical tools. And this is back in 2005, 2004.

(00:08:31):
And I gradually came to the realization all strategy is problem solving. It's a form of dealing with challenges, and that was a basic idea going in the book. So if that's the core of it, what's the basic activity? What are you doing when you create a strategy? Well, you're diagnosing the situation. You're trying to figure out what's going on here. What's the nature of reality that you're dealing with? Now, humans can't understand all of reality. No one can. So part of what a diagnosis is, is a decision about what you're going to pay attention to and the hypothesis for several hypotheses about what's going on, how do things connect together. And that's beginning of the diagnosis. And so diagnosis is an understanding of the situation that you're in. Well, that's not novel. And you can use any of those tools that are famous for that and you can try to find forces. You can do any one of a number of things to try to comprehend the situation. The world is more complicated than 2x2s, unfortunately. I was educated as an electrical engineer and my early years were spent designing spacecraft for NASA. And when I got into looking at business and business strategy stuff, I was always amazed at how unintellectual it was, that I was struggling to master Z-transforms and multiple, and yet these people are looking at 2x2s and little diagrams [inaudible 00:10:19], oh, that's what the company's about. So a rich diagnosis of the situation, but then a guiding policy.

(00:10:28):
The guiding policy is what are we going to do? Now, it's a simple thing to say, a guiding policy, and the guiding policy is sort of the strategy. It's the core of it. It's here's how we're dealing with the situation. And yet, when I say that, it flies in the face of, as I was writing that, I had a client who had 17 priorities. This is what we're doing. We have 17 priorities. And that's the opposite of policy. That's a laundry list of all the things we wish would happen over the next year. We're going to gain market share in China, we're going to cut our emissions, we're going to save energy, we're going to become safer, we're going to cut costs, all these different things that we're going to do. And they're all priorities. Now, lots of people need misuse the word priority when they're trying to do all that. You wouldn't want to be in a commercial airplane and hear the tower say to the pilot, "I'm giving priority to the following three planes on runway five." Right away, you know there's something wrong.

(00:11:50):
Well, that's the word priority, it means the first. It doesn't mean the grab back everything that you can think of that might matter. It means what's first. And so the guiding policy is sort at that level of what do we really have to do here and what are we doing and what are we not doing to deal with the diagnosis that we created?

(00:12:14):
And then the most important part of a strategy, the part that it's so easy to leave out because people like to think of strategy as this high level conceptual thing, is the coherent action. You have to do something. And what you do has to be coherent in several ways. The first way is it has to deal with the problem or the diagnosis and the guiding policy, it has to implement. It has to be coherent in that you shouldn't do things that fight each other.

(00:12:51):
You shouldn't say, "Oh, we are going to burn less oil and at the same time we're going to import more oil." It doesn't make any sense to do things that are self-contradictory. And yet, people do it. Most companies have strategic goals of increasing growth and increasing profit. Magically, that can happen in some cases. Growth and profit, they battle each other. Let's say we define profit as return on equity. If you're going to increase growth and increase return on equity, how do you do that? Because you're basically trying to invest less to get your return on equity up. Or you're going to grow and get your profit margin up. Well, how are you going to do that? You get your profit margin up and grow faster.

(00:13:52):
This is baby talk, but CEO after CEO will stand up and say, "Well, we're going to grow and we're going to make a profit." And so having coherent actions, actions that dump milk on one another is an important part of strategy. All three elements have to be there. There has to be an understanding of the situation. There has to be a guiding policy, how are we going to deal with it? And that could be a long-term sense of how we could change. You don't have to change your strategy every five minutes or every five years. If you're making Almond Joy candy bars or something, you don't really change your strategy constantly. If you're in the tech business, of course you have a shorter time horizon. And then the coherence and action is critical. And so these are the three, what I call basic elements, the kernel that if anyone in three is missing, something's wrong. It's not really a strategy, it's something else.

Lenny (00:15:04):
Awesome. Okay. Is there an example that you could give that makes these even more concrete of just, I don't know, something that comes to mind that's a quick example of a strategy that illustrates these three components?

Richard Rumelt (00:15:17):
If you're Microsoft right now and you're trying to adapt to AI, you have a diagnosis. Well, what's going on? You see the challenge of how do we adapt to it? You create a guiding policy that you're going to invest in one of the major leaders and that you're going to begin to incorporate that into your search engine. And then you have coherent actions. You actually do some of these things. It's not rocket science. The difficulty is that companies don't do that.

(00:15:55):
There are companies that say, "Well, our future is"... let's say something that's not in a software business. That's industry 4.0 for 5.0 that we're going to have... we're investing in the future of robotics and AI and even computer vision and all that. That's going to be our future. And then you see what they're doing. They've bought this company, they've bought this company, they've bought this company, and that's it. It's strategic assembly without any synthesis. So strategy's not mysterious. What's mysterious to me, what was mysterious to me and what remains mysterious to me is how so many organizational leaders don't do it. They create bad strategy. They do something that they say is strategy and then it's not.

Lenny (00:16:55):
You have a whole chapter on this, on what is a bad strategy. Can we just touch on a few of the things you see as signs that your strategy is bad or maybe it doesn't even exist?

Richard Rumelt (00:17:05):
Sure. When I wrote Good Strategy Bad Strategy, a lot of people resonated with the bad strategy. Part of the book, they wrote emails and saying, "Oh my God, thank goodness someone just finally said that these long and terminal meetings I sit through are not actually strategy." Or these documents that the company produces are not actually strategy. And they're not. Bad strategy, the standard bad strategy for a corporation is a set of profit goals or performance goals. A set of goals. Goals are the engineering of how companies work to some extent. But abstract, high-level goals, they're not strategy, they're something else. They're ambitions. And ambitions are not a strategy. A list of all the different things you wish would happen is not strategy.

(00:18:13):
I was asked to help part of the U.S. Department of Defense create a strategy for what's 17 different intelligence agencies.

Lenny (00:18:26):
Wow, how cool.

Richard Rumelt (00:18:29):
Yeah. There's 17 different intelligence agencies. And the strategy basically that these people had written said the 17 agencies should work together more effectively. Now, you don't have to be a Russian spy to see that what they're really saying is these guys aren't working together effectively and it's a problem. But they didn't say that. They said the strategy is they're going to work together more effectively. Just like the RV always comes out with our strategy is join us, meaning we're having trouble with coordinating.

(00:19:08):
But then there's nothing there about that other than this is what should happen, there should be more effective coordination. And oh, we'll have an office of coordination, put a person in charge of coordination. But there's no sensible... why is it hard to coordinate? What are the barriers to this? This has been going on for 34 years now. What's holding it back? What is a problem we have to solve? It's not there.

(00:19:37):
So I was hired to do a foundry for a company and they said, "Well, our diagnosis is not growing fast enough." Okay, let's get into that because that's not a diagnosis, that's a statement. It's a statement of value, you would like to grow faster than you are. I'd like to be taller than I am. I'd like to have more hair. You want to grow faster. Okay, so what's holding you back? And from [inaudible 00:20:19]. But saying, okay, we're going to grow, that's not a strategy.

(00:20:23):
Bad strategy also is fluff. People will use fancy words to describe their situation. Since I wrote that, the term word salad has become common. And there's a lot of word salad writing that people try to use to describe their situation. It sounds more abstract perhaps more abstract. Therefore, it's more strategic, incoherent stuff where we're going to do A, and we're going to B and those two things obviously fight one another. All those things are part of bad strategy. Bad strategy is a document or a set of intentions or a set of verbalizations where it's not a strategy. There's no diagnosis. Of course, I don't doubt that. Started out saying where United States is falling behind in education. And he's looking at the piece of the PISA test scores of 15 year olds around the world. And it's true, the United States is down, number of 30 countries in terms of the scores of our 15-year-old, in math and in general knowledge. Okay, correct statement, we're falling behind. A real diagnosis would say, because. We jumped immediately to therefore, we're going to have more people go to college than any other country. Well, having more people go to college doesn't solve the problem of 15 year olds not being able to do elementary math. Hopefully it doesn't screw up colleges everywhere. So that kind of gap, it's there, where you don't do the diagnosis. Why do we have this? We argue over diagnosis as part of politics and part of organizational politics. That's what we do, and that's important. To do a strategy, you have to resolve the argument. Why do we have a homeless explosion in Portland or Seattle or Los Angeles? And people argue about that. Some people say, "Oh, strokes." Some people say, "Oh no, housing is too expensive." There are different diagnosis. But to deal with the issue, you have to decide on the diagnosis. The politicians right now sort of decided for a few years that the problem is housing's too expensive, we're going to build housing at $700,000 a unit and give it to the all people. Okay. If you build it, they will come.

(00:23:28):
But then the next problem is, well, can't seem to build a housing. And so again, you need a new diagnosis. Why can't you build a housing? You're a rich, powerful country. Why can't you build some housing? So diagnosis is critical to understanding it. And in public policy, we argue over the diagnosis. And in organizations we argue. And unless you resolve it, you can't act. So lacking diagnosis is one of the key reasons for bad strategy. The other, the fluff and the incoherent actions are fun to describe, but they're less common. The second major source of bad strategy is mistaking goals for strategy, saying these goals are our strategy. And that leaves out so many of the important aspects.

Lenny (00:24:22):
Amazing. So just to summarize somewhat, if you're missing a diagnosis, trying to explain what exactly is wrong, it's a sign your strategy is incomplete or bad. If you're missing concrete actions, it's a sign that your strategy is incomplete or bad. There's also I think an element of coherence. The actions have to connect and there have to be a few, very few of them. I always like to think of three as a good number. Is that something you think about, the rule of thirds for actions you want to take or even the guiding policy, or is there a number that you think about just like no more than this?

Richard Rumelt (00:24:53):
A few. A few. Not too many. Not 17. It's hard. Numbers. We work best when we concentrate. We're more effective when we concentrate on a few things, a few people, a few... focus, it's the fundamental source of power and strategy. Trying to do too many different things is defocusing.

Lenny (00:25:18):
I think there's this quote in your book that I think is, and this may be paraphrasing, each time you say yes, you risk turning a nascent good strategy into a bad strategy.

Richard Rumelt (00:25:28):
Yes. Focus is... when I was nine years old, I was at summer camp and I had my parents sent me a magnifying glass and I was out there using the sun to try to cook a piece of wood. I think I had a piece of cloth that I was trying to burn, wasn't having much luck. The magnifying glass focuses the sun's rays on the spot. Counselor came over and he said, "Try this," and he pulled out a black thread from his T-shirt, put it down. And I focused the sun's rays hard, popped out. So stupid little story. But to burn that black thread, there has to be a source of power, the sun. There has to be a focus, that's the magnifying that to the power. And it has to be a target that can be affected. It has to be a black thread, not white thread. And that sequence is part of strategic action. You need a source of power. I say power, I don't say advantage or efficiency.

(00:26:53):
I say power because there are different ways in which power is exhibited and you have to focus the power on a target that can actually be affected or achieved. And this is real simple logic, but it's a discipline to focus power on a target that you can affect. Take American power and say we're going to change China's trajectory and Russia's trajectory and our own and to name all the 30 countries around the world that we're trying... we're diffusing our efforts because they're not the same. They're going in different directions. Obvious when you say it, not so obvious as you live it, because like any organization, like any big organization, US government has different interests. They're pursuing different interests funded for different purposes with different clientele. And so there's gradually a diffusion-

Richard Rumelt (00:28:00):
And so there's gradually a diffusion of effort. One of the big issues in strategy is simply the organization, complex organizations particularly. You have a hard time focusing energy because of all the different interests.

Lenny (00:28:21):
Yeah. Actually I want to talk about both those things, so I'm glad that you teed them up. Let's talk about power. What is this idea of power and how does that play into strategy? Why is it so important? And then what are some examples of power that people can think about when they're trying to think about implementing and adding a power to their strategy?

Richard Rumelt (00:28:40):
Well, in a competitive situation, the fundamental aspect of power is something that's going to give you some sort of advantage. Usually it's in asymmetry of some kind. If two fighters are equally balanced or two horses are equally fetched or two armies are equally... And they meet in competition, it's 50/50. Who knows what will happen. For a strategy you need to exploit in asymmetry of some kind. You hear a little faster. Or they're a little... Something has to be different between now and between things. So that's the beginning of power, is asymmetry. We can think of it as leverage, but sometimes think first is a source of power.

(00:29:43):
Being first to recognize something can be a source of power. Having a reputation of a certain kind gives you some power that someone doesn't have that reputation doesn't have. On the other hand, having a well-established reputation of a certain type can be the opposite of power because people don't expect you to be able to do something new. They expect you to be able to do this, but not that. Having relationships can be a source of power. When Gerstner took over IBM as it was failing in the face of the microprocessor revolution, he recognized that their primary asset, their source of power, was that they were respected and they had [inaudible 00:30:38] into every large corporation on the planet. Nobody else had that as an actual producing company. And so he said, we're going to embrace our customers. Bear hug our customers. We're going to serve our customers.

(00:30:58):
That's our source of our power. That's our leverage. That's the synergy. Now the world begins to change and computing begins to move to the cloud. And IBM's customers, the largest companies in the world, are the most hesitant to do that, because they've got the big IT departments that don't want move to cloud. And so small companies move to the cloud and the big companies are, well, it's insecure in the cloud. We'd have to lay off people. We have these big machines we like to run.

(00:31:39):
And so IBM then becomes disadvantaged in the new world because it inherits this big company orientation and that lagging behind. So the opposite side of power is what you inherit. From [inaudible 00:32:01] can be the wrong thing. But a source of power is that. A source of power can be an invention, a source of power can be a particular customer base that you have identified. It doesn't last forever, power, but all the different sources of advantage that are sometimes transitory and sometimes permanent are sources of power that a company has to use to compete and survive.

Lenny (00:32:35):
I imagine people listening are just like, oh man, I got to figure out the power, the advantage that I have with my business. Is there any advice you could share about helping people figure out where their power might lie?

Richard Rumelt (00:32:46):
That's a good question, Lenny. So how do you figure it out? So I start, as I said earlier, with the symmetries. In what way is my company different than other companies? In what way is my team different? What do we know that other people don't know? What do we possess that other people don't possess? So there has to be some asymmetry to create competitive power, there has to be something different.

(00:33:17):
Sometimes you have to redefine your space down small amount. Then you can actually see it, particularly a smaller company that doesn't have worldwide power, has power in a certain marketplace or a certain set of customers or sometimes it's not customers. Sometimes the power isn't who you can bring in and hire. So if you invented ChatGPT, you can bring in the smartest AI people for a year or two because all the smart AI people want to work at the cutting edge with the current winner.

(00:33:58):
Then they'll start to arguing with each other and in fight and there'll be all sorts of embarrassing personnel things going on and someone else can grab that position, if it's not well managed. Business is exciting in that sense that it's not stable. It's not just as it was when I was first studying it. It's not just IBM and Sears and AT&T forever. There's a constant changing of the guard.

Lenny (00:34:30):
For better or worse.

Richard Rumelt (00:34:32):
For better. Because if you look at government, there is no changing of the guard and they get stultified.

Lenny (00:34:38):
Makes sense. So in your book, you have this whole list of types of power. I'll just read them real quick. Leverage, proximate, objectives, chain link systems, design, focus, growth, advantages, dynamics, inertia, entropy. There's also the book, obviously The Seven Powers, that a lot of people are aware of. I guess how do you think about just the spectrum of types of power you can have? Is this it? Are there others?

Richard Rumelt (00:35:02):
I started to make a list there in the book and I wrote up a bit about chain link systems and today, I mean the power that new business models are exploiting is the power of the user base. What we called years ago, network effects, where the more users you have, the more useful a product is. So I think the idea of network effects first arose with the telehealth system, which the idea was that you don't want to be connected to a telephone system that only connects to two other people. It's not all that useful. It's got to connect to the world to be useful.

(00:35:43):
And my colleague Marvin Lieberman was taking the economics course at Harvard University at the same time that Bill Gates was a student in that classroom. Professor's going on about network effects and of course that's what catapulted him, had his software, MS DOS at the time. Not MS DOS, he had something called basic that... The network effect was huge. He got angry about the network effect because people wouldn't pay him. They kept stealing it and using it and pretty soon everybody in the microcomputer industry had M Basic.

(00:36:27):
Then we get the network effects from not just software, but user base is now with the internet and so you get network effects with big social media. No one wants to be on a social media if only three other people are on. So having a large network...

(00:36:50):
Amazon. Get big fast because the economics are amazing. So we used to say, well, in a department store, economics are that you're saving people the cost of going out of the store and walking down the street to another store. So now it's all in one place. Supermarkets, the same thing. But look at a thing like Amazon where there the ease of shopping on Amazon keeps people from leaving it and going to another website. Now other websites have gotten better and better and some of that is less strong than it used to be and this is a constant struggle with it. Nevertheless, the size of the user bench there is an important source of a symmetry and power for the people that have come out ahead and won that battle for this round, this five years to 10 years. How long does it last before some other thing begins to take precedent. And now we have two-sided markets, whether it's credit cards or places where both buyers and sellers get together.

(00:38:01):
And so here these big forces that companies are playing with right now are these network effects.

(00:38:10):
And when the new generative AI, we have the possibility of stronger effects than we've ever seen before, but we don't know yet. But the suspicion is that size is what matters, that the size of the data that you could put into the learning algorithm is going to make your AI better. And so again, a big... It's going to matter.

(00:38:43):
Just think of Google and their ability to improve search based upon all the searches that go on on their base every day. It's very hard for Bing to catch up because Bing doesn't have as much data to train on. And so unless there's some new innovation there that isn't just the amount of data, the leader again has this asymmetry working for it. Now, the way you get around all that is by being specialized, by owning a particular approach that isn't the market leader's approach. And it's always been that way in business, but our attention is often attracted by these giants.

(00:39:34):
So yeah, sources of power today where we look at the new business models that are part of the fabric are these network effects and things like that that are very, very strong. And people are trying to get those in startups and in small firms within a certain market space and build it as fast as possible to get ahead of others. There's been venture capital available to try those experiments and some of them work and some of them don't, but that's this new age we're in now, where the speed of building a market position with network effects is a dominant game in the tech space.

Lenny (00:40:25):
I feel like Twitter is the ultimate example of the power of network effects, especially recently where if you think about it, everything about Twitter has changed and it still continues to run. You laid off 80% of people at the company, they changed the name, they changed the domain basically, the algorithms changed. I don't know what is still the same.

Richard Rumelt (00:40:45):
How can you lay off 80% of the people and it still runs? I mean you got to wonder.

Lenny (00:40:49):
I love Twitter. I'm on there all the time. I feel like it's never been better, which is kind of wild.

Richard Rumelt (00:40:54):
Twitter's fascinating. I mean I tune into it every couple of days and see what's going on and it is just an amazing rumble of opinions and statements. It's much more interesting than it was five years ago.

Lenny (00:41:11):
There's a lot of diagnosing and not a lot of concrete actions. But anyway, I wanted to come back to the element about power. I think when people are thinking about power, it may not be clear where that plugs into the diagnosis, the guiding policy and the coherent actions. Where should you be thinking and implementing this idea of where my power is when you're laying out your strategy?

Richard Rumelt (00:41:35):
To undertake a strategy that you think will work, you've got to have a reason that it makes sense and that reason is derived from some source of power, some source of advantage. Ultimately, your power or your advantage is something based in history that has the feel of reputation, or institutional skill, or it's some kind of symmetry or knowledge that you have that others don't have. So it's a resource that you can use that your competitors or others don't have equal access to because you've either have mastered it or you own it or you inherited from the past.

(00:42:45):
All those things are sources of the power that you use to make it not an even bet. So when you walk into a casino, well maybe if you play poker with skill, you can expect to make some money, but the general casino games, you're going to expect to lose. And in business, statistically, if you come to me and you say, I'm going to open a new restaurant. What should my strategy be? My answer would be don't open a restaurant. Invest in the S&P 500 because the statistics are that new restaurants fail. So what makes you think that you can succeed? Oh, I really want to succeed. Not good enough. I trained under a chef who's been very successful. Oh, that's interesting. Tell me more.

(00:43:50):
So there, where's the asymmetry here? Where's the source of power where you go from the odds... The standard odds in this game are against people where you think the odds are in your favor.

(00:44:05):
That's the source of power we're looking for. We're looking for this information, this skill, this thing in the field, the way the resources are arranged, that's going to give you this edge. And some of that is sort of part of the situation and some of it's how you shape and focus your actions. Strategy tends to be surprising when we see it, when we see it work, and surprising because we don't expect it. We expect people to bumble around. We expect Arby's to bumble around. We expect nation states to bumble around. We don't expect them to execute coherent strategies.

(00:44:54):
The United States went to Afghanistan and it wanted to catch Osama bin Laden, but at the same time they didn't want to put an army in the shield to actually catch him because it would the embarrassing to have that many Americans in the field. That's what happened in Tora Bora. The Secretary of Defense said, no, we don't want to make it look like we're taking over the country, so they didn't try to catch him as hard as they could.

(00:45:22):
And we want to have the education of women and we want to have a democracy and we want to have a long list that we would have no opium production, but at the same time, our allies are the opiate producers. It was the Taliban that got rid of opiate. Americans didn't do it.

(00:45:44):
So we had all these different objectives. It doesn't work. You need to have a focus on something achievable. What's achievable? [inaudible 00:46:03] Nation-building is hard stuff. It takes a century. Afghanistan, I'm off on a tangent here with Afghanistan, but it's a really interesting subject. Afghanistan was a warlord society, a bunch of different warlords running the place. Well, what's a warlord society? Where else do we look for an analogies? Well, we look at [inaudible 00:46:32] in 1650. You look at France in 1300. You can look at Japan before the modern era. These are warlord societies. Well, how did they go from that to being a coherent government that maybe wasn't democratic at first, but still, there was a government instead of just as much war. It took some [inaudible 00:46:59] to conquer all the rest.

(00:47:02):
And then it took a long time for them to put in the structure itself of government and then maybe became a democracy. Maybe not, but that's the process. It's not like you just go in there and say, you're now no longer a warlord with society because we've decreed it.

(00:47:19):
I don't know. You're going to ask me more questions about what it is people should know and how do you get these sources of power? How do you get these insights? I'm a big fan of history. I'm a big fan of knowing things about what happened. Business history, biographies, war history.

(00:47:42):
If you don't have access to other times and other places and other things that have happened, it's very hard to think strategically about the situation you're in because there isn't a science of strategy. It's not like physics. It's not like engineering where we can write down the equations of stress on a beam and say, how thick does the beam have to be? It's not like that. A lot of it is based on analogy to previous human experience.

Lenny (00:48:16):
That is an amazing insight. Is there anything you find most rich and valuable in terms of history periods, empires, stories that you find most connects as an analogy? Is there anything you find consistently is useful or is it just read as much as you can and you'll often find something in there?

Richard Rumelt (00:48:36):
Yeah, the further back we go in history, the leaner. It's less rich. The best histories are written by the people at the moment it's happening or very soon after. History books and things like that are someone's opinion. But our own history here in the United States, we have pretty good documentation about what went on in the Indian War, why we had these big cycles of economic growth and then depression. We had depressions in 1840 and after the Civil War and there was another huge panic depression in the 1890s. [inaudible 00:49:26]. A lot of people don't even know that these things happen. How did they happen? And of course everybody knows about the Great Depression of 1929, 30's, but go back and how did that happen? When did that happen? And you'll hear professors opine about why it happened, but there's no agreement. The biggest economic fact of the last 150 years, you don't know why it happened.

(00:49:58):
Go back and you can go online and look at the Wall Street Journal of the New York Times from that era and start in September of 1928 and just look at the front page every day, which I've done, and you can see it unfold and it's a surprise to everyone. There goes, well, Ford just laid off the people, but it's temporary. They'll hire them back. This economist says, well, it's a temporary this. It'll come back. And it gradually gets worse and worse and worse and there's no understanding of it. There's not a lot of analysis. And so you got Milton Friedman saying, oh, it's monetary. They didn't loosen up the money supply. You got other people saying things. But put yourself back at that moment in time and see what people saw and realize that no one understood what was happening and to form their own opinions.

(00:51:10):
That's the diagnosis skill or that's the feeling. Now, let's suppose you fall off a boat. You're on a cruise ship and you fall and you're now in the ocean. It's terrifying and it's confusing and there's waves and there's water and I don't want to drown. And you look around and you see, oh, here's a floating piece of wood. Let me grab it. Wow, that feels a lot better. That's how it feels when you look at a confusing situation and the first idea of how to understand it comes to mind. Oh, yeah, I've got this piece of wood. Now I'm not drowning. But is it right?

(00:52:05):
The most important intellectual tool we have is to think again, to say, okay, I came up with this diagnosis because I thought this and I thought this. Is there another way to look at this situation? Is there a bigger piece of wood over there than I can grab onto? That's the hard thing. When I looked at the Great Depression what I saw is the [inaudible 00:52:35]. So if you look at capital goods, most capital goods that the public buys, the adoption curve goes up like this, it peaks, and it declines and then it comes back up again. Because there comes a point where everybody who can afford one has got one, and then the new sales drop off. And in my mind, that's what I saw. 1929, everybody could afford a car, had a car, and the auto industry began... First signs of the Great Depression were in the auto industry.

(00:53:15):
So that was my play that I read. Now I don't see anybody else writing about that, but that's the exercise and to exercise your mind about trying to understand complex situations. It's best to go back. You don't have to [inaudible 00:53:34] to the great Depression, but you can go and try and find situations that other people have to deal with and look at as much data as you can and to practice that. That's what education should be in a business school. It's not. They teach theories now because it's so much easier to teach a theory than intellectual structure.

Lenny (00:53:58):
It's also a lot more work, reading a lot of books and history and studying and thinking.

Richard Rumelt (00:54:04):
Oh, [inaudible 00:54:05]. I had a colleague at UCLA who assigned a book to MBA students and they went to the dean and had him kicked out of the course because of a book. He wants us to read a book.

Lenny (00:54:16):
Oh man. It sounds like you have another book in you writing about the Great Depression and what really happened there.

Richard Rumelt (00:54:22):
Maybe.

Lenny (00:54:23):
Oh, man. Exciting.

(00:54:26):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate your growth. Thousands of fast-growing companies like Gusto, Com, Quora and Modern Treasury, trust Vanta to help build, scale, manage, and demonstrate their security and compliance programs and get ready for audits in weeks, not months.

(00:54:45):
By offering the most in-demand security and privacy frameworks such as SOC 2, ISO 27,001, GDPR, HIPAA, and many more, vanta helps companies obtain the reports they need to accelerate growth, build efficient compliance processes, mitigate risks to their businesses, and build trust with external stakeholders. Over 5,000 fast-growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2 and these other frameworks. For a limited time Lenny's podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Go to vanta.com/lenny, that's V-A-N-T-A dot com slash lenny to learn more and to claim your discounts. Get started today.

(00:55:24):
I wanted to zoom back in on something very tactical. So say you're a product manager listening to this that has to write a strategy for their team. Say it's like they're working on the onboarding experience of their product and they're about to sit down and start to write out the strategy for their team. And say they have a general idea of what they want to do. Do you have any advice for just how to lay out a strategy? As you talk I think of there's a section. Diagnosis, a section. Guiding principles, a section. Actions, and then there's power in there and the guiding policy. Is that how you lay it out? Do you have any advice for how to write this out?

Richard Rumelt (00:55:59):
I wrote the crutch because I felt that.

Richard Rumelt (00:56:00):
The Crux because I felt that that kernel was not sufficiently sharp enough for peak. And even in The Crux, if I could rewrite The Crux book, I would, maybe, write it a little differently today, a whole couple of things I would change. First, it's really important to understand the challenge, the problem. Diagnosis is not merely understanding the world, it's understanding the challenge you face. What makes it hard? So the question I ask client is exactly that. What makes it hard? Client will tell me, "Oh, we want to open up business in Australia. It's a market we haven't tapped." And I'll say, "Okay, so why are you and I talking about that? You're the CEO. Just tell somebody to do it. What makes it hard?" "Oh, well, we don't know anybody in Australia and they kicked us out." If you push, he'll tell you why it's hard.

(00:57:18):
But that understanding hasn't been percolated into a strategy. Part of the problem is that the concept of strategy has been so beaten up by thousands, hundreds of books, and thousands of more websites that people have a hard time trying to figure out how to create a strategy, because they're drawn up, down, left, right. So my two pieces of advice, anybody that's actually trying to do this is, A, state the problem, and, B, don't call it a strategy, call it an action agenda, that you're not creating a strategy, you're creating an action agenda. What are we going to do about this problem? That's essence of what you're doing. When you're thinking strategically, you're recognizing the problem and you have an action agenda to deal with it. It's not five years out and 10 years out. It's not your general mission to build a better world, it's none of that.

(00:58:43):
All of that is a different literature form. There's huge numbers of people out there willing to sell you advice on how your mission, and your vision, and your values, and all these things that have to be in place before you can have a strategy. And that's not true. It's a different model. I start now with ambitions because people want to put ambitions in place. They get angry with me. I don't allow them to talk about their ambitions. So we start with ambitions, and okay, you have all these ambitions. I write in The Crux that when I was 25, I wanted to be a top business school professor. I wanted to be on Fortune directors. I wanted to drive a Morgan Drophead Plus 4. I wanted to climb the great mountains of the world. I wanted to learn to fly an aircraft. I wanted to marry a beautiful woman and have successful children. I wanted to have a townhouse on the [inaudible 01:00:00] of Paris. All and all, I had a lot of ambitions.

(01:00:05):
That's not strategy. We all have ambitions, and every company should have ambitions. If we look at all those ambitions, and let's say I'm 25 years old, well, what's keeping me from reaching them all? "Well, I'm not ready to join Fortune directors. I'm not experienced enough." Okay, so I put that over here. "I can't afford the pen." Okay, put it over here. "How about the ambitions that you have any chance of making progress?" So now, well, beautiful woman. "Yeah, I don't know any, maybe I ought to meet a few." "Well, you can do something about that."

(01:00:52):
So which of your ambitions can you begin to make progress towards reaching, and what's holding you back? What are the barriers? What are the problems? So I approach the question of the problem now through the filter of the ambition, that these ambitions, fine, let's accept them all, and which one can you actually make some progress on today? And what's making that hard? What are the challenges? So you're choosing a challenge. You're choosing, of the possible challenges you could face up to, you can't do them all. So there's a focus thing. You're choosing which challenge to focus on, and that challenge has to be, A, important, and, B, it has to be achievable.

(01:01:48):
It has to be something that you can address. It has to be an addressable challenge. And so the search for an action agenda, I'm not calling it a strategy, is this balance between problems that are important because they're close to your ambition and problems that you can actually address and do something about. And that overlap then becomes the choice you make. "Okay, we're going to go after this and here's the action steps we're going to take to do that." And if it's a big company, the action steps may extend over two or three years. Smaller company, took [inaudible 01:02:32] year, six months to a year. These are things we're going to do, not goals we're going to achieve. These are things we're going to do, action steps. That's sort of the way I put it together today, which is slightly different than the way it's put together in The Crux.

Lenny (01:02:49):
Yeah, I love this advice. That's such a simpler way of thinking about strategy. It's an action agenda. "Here's the things we're actually going to do." And then it starts with the challenge. And just to talk about The Crux briefly, The Crux is named after this concept in mountain climbing of the hardest point of the mountain climb where people, if they get past that, it's all downhill. And I think basically the point there is focus on the most challenging, like the biggest challenge that you need to overcome to achieve these ambitions you're describing. Is that roughly the way to think about it?

Richard Rumelt (01:03:21):
Yeah, yeah, and the idea comes from a design, and it comes from climbing, because I used to be a climber, a rock climber, and a snow climber, and a crux in a climb is the hardest part, the hardest pitch or a pitch, the hardest move is the crux of that piece. And then the basic advice to a climber is if you can't do the crux, don't do the climb, because you're going to fall off there. Now that's not exactly true, because you can try it over and over again until you get it. But in general, particularly if you're looking at an alpine climb, you better not take it on a climb where you can't handle the crux. That's why people go bouldering. The [inaudible 01:04:06] still up to him [inaudible 01:04:08] crux.

(01:04:11):
And so that's what the concept of the crux comes from. Now in business, the crux is the hardest part of the problem. And from the design point of view, the skilled designers, whether they're an engineer or an architect, what else? There's usually a challenge. I. M. Pei was hired to take a look at the Louvre in Paris, and they had a dusty parking lot in the center of this giant palace that had become a museum, and they wanted an entrance to Louvre there. And the problem is he didn't want it, they didn't want a new building that would obscure the Louvre itself. The building itself is part of the story, it's part of the scene. And yet at the same time, they needed to have an entrance, because the entrance at that time was off on the side wall.

(01:05:24):
And you looked at the situation, and the competing needs, and the [inaudible 01:05:31]. And he had an insight into, "Well, build a transparent building, build a building out of glass, so that you see through to the Louvre, it doesn't obscure." And of course, if you can build a rectangular building out of glass, the top will get dirty. So [inaudible 01:05:55] out of glass. Now, that design insight is something that software engineers, hardware engineers, mechanical engineers, base science engineers like I was, experienced, when we look at a dilemma and we try to focus on what makes this hard. And then by focusing on the difficulty, we see a way around it. Elon Musk focused on, "Well, why is it so hard to reuse a rocket?" And it's so hard because as it comes back into the planet at 18,000 miles an hour, it burns up in the atmosphere, or we have to spend a lot of money on heat shields. And at some instant, he said to himself, "Well, why not, like science fiction, just turn it around and have it land on its rocket?" "Well, there's not enough fuel." "Well, why aren't we carrying more fuel?" So SpaceX, when I was designing, I was a conceptual designer, but machine that became Voyager and went out past the planets into interstellar space where it's floating around right now. Well, one of the problems is how do you know where Jupiter is? " It's right there." "Okay, but how do you know where it is, plus or minus 100 miles? How do you know exactly where it is? When we set a mission to Mars, we were off by 500 miles. So Jupiter, how do we know exactly where it is?" Because we can look at it through our telescopes so we can look at it from the right side of our orbit and the left side of our orbit. But still, there was a couple thousand miles error in that. That's too much. And then studying that problem, the simple solution suddenly flashed, and I wish I could claim it was mine, and it wasn't, which is, "Oh, take a picture of it once we're halfway there. We'll send that picture back and we'll see it against the distant stars. And now we'll have a triangulation, know where it is." So designers experience this sense of focusing on the crux of the problem, the hard part, and then seeing a way through. And that's strategy. Strategy isn't picking a strategy out of a list of common strategies. It's looking at the problem, what makes that problem hard, and seeing a way to solve it.

(01:08:54):
Now it's called insight, and insight is scary. It's scary because it's not guaranteed to happen. We want to innovate, but we're scared of insight. We want to be the first, but we'd like to pick our strategy out of a list of common strategies for being first. We want to beat the market, but we don't want to study enough to have an insight. So insight is critical. Insight is not magical. It comes from immersing yourself in the nature of the problem. And you will have, at some point, an insight about how to deal with it. It doesn't always come when we want it to. It can come while you're driving the car, it can come the next day. It can come in the shower. Charles Darwin reports that his insight into the nature of revolution came as he stepped off a carriage into the village green somewhere. Boom, suddenly, he said, "Oh, yeah, it's obvious." It's like how we raise animals, we breed the strongest. "Sure, why was that so hard for me to see?"

Lenny (01:10:14):
So I think one of the big takeaways here is that if you want to get better at strategy or be more successful with how you think about strategy, spend a lot more time on diagnosing the problem and finding the biggest challenge that is keeping you from what you're trying to achieve. And your insight might come the more you immerse [inaudible 01:10:30].

Richard Rumelt (01:10:30):
Yeah, and call it an action agenda, "Here's what we're going to do." Not, "Here's all the things we wish would happen."

Lenny (01:10:39):
I love it. You mentioned this point that some of the biggest challenges to executing a strategy is organizational dynamics, and politics is a part of that. Is there anything you could share for folks to help them through that? You talked about one of the biggest challenges, people just want to keep adding more priorities. There's all these needs. Everyone wants to include their thing in the strategy. Is there anything people can do to improve how this works?

Richard Rumelt (01:11:04):
Typically, I'll say typically, we need hierarchy of power, because there has to be some mechanism for deciding what we're going to do. And there's people with different interests and different private interests and public interests. And somehow, there has to be a choice about putting some of these aside and doing this, that you can't say, "Our strategy is to do everything that everybody wants to do." That's what happens when you form a committee in a city and you say, "What's our city strategy?" They say, "Oh, we're going to paint the park benches. We're going to clean up the grass, we're going to build a new this, we're going to..."

(01:11:49):
They have a [inaudible 01:11:49] that stuff, everything they're going to do with that. And anybody who raised their hand and says, "Well, what about the birds? Can we..." "Oh, yeah, let's put that in, too," that doesn't go anywhere. So we, inside organizations, people have different opinions. So that's part, they have interests that they may not state clearly.

(01:12:24):
I interviewed Secretary of Defense, Donald Rumsfeld, while we were invading Iraq, second time, and I was actually interviewing about budget matters, but he asked me, "Well, what do you do, professor?" And I said, "Well, I do strategy." And he said, "Well, strategy, that's a hard subject." He said, "I've got people here in the Defense Department who have an expert on anything. You want to know the clan structure in Iraq, we've got people who know. We want to know the weather, we've got people to know. You want to know how many [inaudible 01:13:05] we can fly in 24 hours, people who know. I got anything you want to know, we've got someone who knows about it, but they all disagree. And each have their own private agenda. They have a contract they want to get, they have a company they want to support, they have a conceptual idea they want to push."

(01:13:25):
So every little bit of information comes with an agenda, sometimes obvious, sometimes hidden. And how do you put all this stuff together to come up with a strategy? He says, "Do you academics have a solution to this?" And I said, "No, we don't. We don't know much more than, what, 2,000, 3,000 years ago, which is you put five to eight smart people in a room and you tell them to come up with something." But his question is at the heart of what I call a foundry, which is how do you get a group of people to coalesce around an action agenda?

(01:14:11):
And what process would you use and how do you do that? It's a different question than, "What should our strategy be?" The question is, "Well, how should you go about creating a strategy? Should you ask the product manager to write an account, or should you ask the CEO to come up with it? Should you hire a consultant? How do you do this?" In my experience, working with companies, is that the senior executives have to do this. And my experience is that the senior executives know pretty much everything you need to know to do this, that you don't need consulting firms to come in and analyze everything that you do. Yes, you'll gain some insight if they come in and do a competitive analysis, and a customer analysis, and all of that. But the basic issues, the challenges you're facing, they know that. It's not mysterious. They know all that stuff, but they disagree about the importance of different things. And more importantly, they occupy positions of power that, if we go this way, this is going to be hurt. And if we go this way, they're [inaudible 01:15:34] more money for that.

(01:15:36):
And so their interests are not aligned, which is part of what Phil was referring to. And so the problem of strategy inside an organization is diversity of interest and fear of action. Because action, when you do something in an organization of any size, it involves people changing what they do. It involves changing power relationships among humans in some way, that someone who's been the alpha maybe is not the alpha anymore, someone else is the alpha. This is heavy stuff. And this is why we have a hierarchy, because someone in the end has to say, "It's going to be this way." And people are hesitant to do that, CEOs are hesitant to do that. More so today than when I was a young man. It's become hard for people to do this. If you go to the bookstore and look at the management section in bookstore, most of it's about leadership.

(01:16:56):
And the leadership is mostly about perfecting yourself. It's not about beating anybody, but the theory is that if you perfect yourself and somehow rays come out of your head and people will follow you, because you're so magnetic, and you're so perfect, and you're so wonderful, and you're so insightful, and that people will follow you, you won't ever have to say, "[inaudible 01:17:19], do that." It's so embarrassing to tell somebody what to do.

(01:17:24):
And so this is the world we live in today, where one of the problems in doing strategy is that it's somehow been displaced by this literary form about mission, and management is being displaced by leadership, which is the idea that the leader has a vision and people... It happened in the '80s. There's a whole literature there about transformational leadership that is percolated through the system, and those, I'm not against leadership, but you have to tell people at some point, "We're going to do this, and we're going to do it this way, and Bob's going to be in charge of this aspect, and Joan's going to be in charge of that aspect." And there's a hesitancy to make those choices, because that's part of the action agenda.

Lenny (01:18:23):
So the takeaway there is essentially have a decider. It makes me think of, actually, of George Bush. You talked about Rumsfeld, but George Bush's famous quote, " I'm the decider." I don't know if you remember that?

Richard Rumelt (01:18:33):
Yeah, that's true. One of the things we see in government particularly is presidents have a hard time getting advice, because they surround themselves with people who want to please them. Number one, we rarely.,, It used to be, I remember during Woodrow Wilson's administration, when he decided to take some hard action, the [inaudible 01:18:58], and he had to do something, [inaudible 01:19:00], and the Secretary of State disagreed and quit. "Right, that's it. Quit. I disagree." Wow, don't see that so much anymore. All the people, organizations get frozen because of the difficulty of changing positions of interest and power in [inaudible 01:19:29].

Lenny (01:19:30):
Humans are complicated.

Richard Rumelt (01:19:34):
Well, if you look at Nokia, one of the big examples of strategic errors, Nokia was the leading phone maker in the world world, and then somehow it lost its ability to compete. And interesting question, there's been a fair amount of research on this, is how did that happen? One way it happened was they replaced the engineers who used to run the company with lawyers and accountants. Nothing wrong with lawyers and accountants, but they didn't have a feel for this hardware, software set of issues. And another was they put in a matrix organization that so diffused power inside the organization that nobody was actually in charge of anything in particular. I'm exaggerating, but the CEO kept pounding the desk and saying, "Apple's coming out with a smartphone and you have a touchscreen, and somebody here should make one of those." So there was no one in authority to do such a thing.

Lenny (01:20:40):
Maybe a final question on the other end of the spectrum, from an Nokia, from a startup founder's perspective, what is a strategy and what should a strategy look like if you're just a founder, pre-product market fit, just trying to figure out where you want to go? What should a strategy look like there? Do you even need a strategy?

Richard Rumelt (01:20:57):
Well, you're dealing with a lot of uncertainty When you're a founder in a startup, you're making a bet. You're making a bet like an oil well [inaudible 01:21:09] say, "I bet there's oil under this ground. We're going to drill, we're going to find it." There's a certain amount of bet that's going on, and you should be clear about the nature of the bet. The reality is going to be revealed to you in bits and pieces as time passes, whether a certain approach is going to work or not. What we find doing research on startups, Silicon Valley startups, is they start out typically aiming at a particular product market solution. And the idea that you have in your head is, "There's a set of customers who want A, would like to have A, are being denied A, but we have a way of giving them A," something, a product or a service.

(01:22:02):
Now, some people, they aren't that even advanced. They basically say, "I know how to make something and I'm going to try to sell it." You know, [inaudible 01:22:10] approach. Well, if you have any chance of succeeding, you have [inaudible 01:22:17], you have target market, and you have a solution to the target market's problem in mind, and now you're going to go after it. And the research that we have done on the startups is that generally it doesn't work.

(01:22:33):
But the ones that survive and prosper switch. They say, "Well, it isn't that customer, it's a different customer. You should walk from that customer. Oh, and that customer wants a slightly different product," and they switch over a period of a year or two period, bang, bang, until something begins to click, and they begin to grow, and begin to add functions and assets. So there's a search, there's a search like a truffle hound searching for the truffle that's going on.

(01:23:05):
And you've got to be able to think, you've got to be of two minds. Like so many things in business, when you're doing this, you've got to be of two minds. You've got to be convinced of the certainty that you're going to win, and you've got to be willing to shift when things aren't working, and that's a double-jointed exercise that some people can do and some people can't. It's almost a human skill to both commit and to be willing to move. But it's a bet. You should be clear in your own mind about the nature of the situation, the technology that you're betting on. Now, sometimes it's evolving so fast, like generative AI is right now, that you can't be sure.

Richard Rumelt (01:24:04):
... That you're going to take a position, where do you think things are going to be in a year? And that's very, very entrepreneurial, very edgy stuff, but it's not... Go back and read about the beginnings of the electrical industry or the beginnings of aviation or the beginnings of motorize this and beginnings of cars. People had to bet about what this industry would look like. The first cars were electric cars. The first car sold in quantity in the United States were electric delivery vehicles used downtown in cities, delivery [inaudible 01:24:49] produce. They were electric, ran on batteries. That was the bet.

(01:24:53):
All that changed with the First World War. The United States built thousands and thousands of gasoline powered trucks to go to Europe, wrestled through the mud, and people came back knowing how to fix those engines, and those trucks got sold off as wholesale to farmers, who used them on their fields, and we had the gasoline to take off like a rocket. So, you cannot predict the future. There's an Arab saying that I like that says, "He who forecasts the future lies, even if he tells the truth." We're making bets. That's what business is, we're making a bet. And if we're a rich company, we can make a bet and afford to be wrong. But if we're a startup, we have to be fast, we have to adapt as the information comes in, and that's the nature of the story. The action agenda has to be quick adaptation to changing conditions.

Lenny (01:26:06):
I feel like you have another book here where you could adapt a lot of this wisdom to startups. I'm looking at my notes from what we were talking about earlier, and you have this point of when you're trying to write out a... You call it an action agenda, not a strategy, you're basically on the hunt for a big problem and an important problem and an achievable problem. And essentially you can boil that down to that is the job of a founder to find an important problem and achievable problem and then solve it for a lot of people.

Richard Rumelt (01:26:34):
I like that. The other exercise I used to take my students through was what I called value denial. Now, what is it that you should be able to buy but you can't? And at the time I taught this stuff, I was upset because I would lose my baggage on a nonstop flight from Los Angeles to Paris, so I'd like to buy baggage... Sure, so I'd like to buy... How do you get your baggage not to be lost? Now, with security systems in place, it's less, let's call it. Can I find someone to help me remodel my home that's going to be on time and I'll bet you not available. Can't buy it at any price. If I live in Hong Kong and I'm going to the airport, I can drop my luggage off downtown and it arrives at the airport checked in. I don't have to lug it. Why can't I do that in the US? Value denial.

(01:27:44):
And then engineering, thinking about how something ought to be, a channel, salesforce.com got started was, "Well, how should this be? It shouldn't be a computer, it should be a webpage. It should be like Amazon where it has books." And so, that was the beginning of salesforce.com. I asked a group of students once to think about the perfect window because it's physical, something we could think about in the classroom without doing a lot of research. Well, what's the perfect window? A perfect window should be transparent, should let the sun in. All right, so it's let in the light, but not all the time. Sometimes you want to watch the television. So, it should also darken, drapes for shades. It should let in the air, good, but not the bugs, a screen. It should let in the air, but not the noise. That's a little harder.

(01:28:57):
So, you go down a list of things that a window should do. It should let in light, but not light. It should let in air, but not the noise. It should not let in air when we don't want it. It should not let in the bugs. It should maybe have shutters or not shutters. And so I said, "How could you design the perfect window? What would it look like?" And there's some kids at MIT that had developed this thing that lets in air, but keeps out the noise, these little auditory filters keep out noises in certain frequencies. Well, we don't have a perfect window, but think about it, windows could be better than they are.

(01:29:39):
And that's a real simple device that we're all familiar with, and look around you, look at everything you've got and say, well, "How shouldn't it be?" And there's opportunities there. Now, a lot of the times, the opportunities are blocked by the lack of certain materials or regulation. Regulators have decided that you can't sell a car in the United States unless it goes through a dealer. So, that holds back innovation in that business. And so plumbing, how should plumbing actually work?

(01:30:20):
Well, there's a whole surge of rules about how plumbing works and electrical things work. You can't innovate there very easily because of the underwriter's labs and the unions, and a lot of the stuff that's done in home construction is there to create jobs, not to reduce costs. So, how do you get around that? So, you have to look at places where it's possible to innovate first of all, but the idea of how do you make something better? How do you make it perfect? What would the perfect light switch look like, and so on? These are real simple, silly questions, but they lead to new businesses and new firms if you pursue them.

Lenny (01:31:03):
I love how full of startup ideas you are. I also think we came up with at least two new books that you can write. I think you're going to have a lot of work to do after this conversation. Final question, is there anything you want to leave listeners with or take away? Is there a final nugget you just want to share for folks?

Richard Rumelt (01:31:19):
I want to share with you that strategy's not mysterious, that I've spent my life studying strategy, pursuing it, consulting on it, writing about it. It's not mysterious. It's about solving problems. It's about solving the most important problem you're facing that you actually do something about. You don't have to be Sun Tzu to come up with a strategy, but you need to be focused on something doable and be consistent about it. I have a long list of things not to do. There's a fourth book that I'm thinking about writing called Don't Do That.

Lenny (01:31:59):
I would read that. I love that title.

Richard Rumelt (01:32:02):
Can I tell you a story?

Lenny (01:32:03):
Absolutely.

Richard Rumelt (01:32:05):
My wife Kate took up skiing when we got married 24, 25 years ago, and she had this stance that she couldn't get rid of. When you make a turn, you don't turn like that, you put the ski out the step. I made her ski on one ski, I did all sorts of things to her back, she couldn't fix it. And finally we signed up with an illustrious ski teacher in Aspen, a three-day intense program, guaranteed that she would lose her stance, exceeded them all.

(01:32:45):
And so we went there... On the second day, I followed behind the instructor and her to see what was going on, and they had been through some exercises on day one, but in day two they were focusing on this and she would put out her ski like that and he'd yell at her. He'd say, "Don't do that," and after a day of being yelled at, "Don't do that," she didn't do it anymore, she was fixed. So, the secret technique that they had in this program for curing your stance was to yell at you telling you, "Don't do that." And so I'm thinking about a book called Don't Do That about business things where I'm not sure it makes sense, but you have to noodle these things for a while before they begin to gel.

Lenny (01:33:34):
I love this idea. It reminds me, one of my friends is a therapist, and there's this video by Bob Newhart where he's a therapist and someone comes to him and they've got all these problems like, "I get really sad when I think about my mom and I have this chronic pain," and his advice, "Just stop it, just stop."

Richard Rumelt (01:33:50):
Don't do that, just stop thinking about your mom.

Lenny (01:33:50):
"Just stop it," that's the advice. And so, I feel like there's a lot of synergy there. All right, well, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Richard Rumelt (01:34:04):
I guess so.

Lenny (01:34:07):
First question, what are two or three books you've recommended most to other people? I feel like this is going to be a challenging question, but what comes to mind?

Richard Rumelt (01:34:15):
It sort of is. The books that I'm... Clayton Christensen's stuff about The Innovator's Dilemma is always solid. Books on strategy that I recommend to other people on... There aren't that many. So, I like Playing to Win by Roger Martin. I really recommend other kinds of books, strategy books. It's easy to get a list of strategy books, but I think you should read biographies and histories. I think the book about Steve Jobs is brilliant. I like books about business leaders. I'd recommend Andy Grove's book Only the Paranoid Survive, and a few others, but I recommend that people read more broadly about people, Rockefeller's histories, it's fantastic.

(01:35:22):
The stuff about Rockefeller and how he put together... Rockefeller was a robber baron and he built an empire and all that, you learn that in school, but what you don't learn in school is he dropped the cost of a gallon of kerosene from $1 to 10 cents. That's the robber baron, and he made kerosene so inexpensive that he drove all the little mom and pop proprietors out of business, which is why they hated him. So, he was a vicious competitor, but he dropped the price of something by an order of magnitude, fascinating. So, it's important to understand stories, not just theories, but stories.

Lenny (01:36:22):
I love how this always comes back to just being steeped in history and this specific point about biographies is really interesting, and we'll link to all these books that you're mentioning in the show notes. Is there a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Richard Rumelt (01:36:36):
Oh yeah, sure. Well, I like Yellowstone, like everybody else. I'm fascinated by it. Recent movies other than Yellowstone? I'm not sure. We don't have a TV in the house right now, so I'm not connected.

Lenny (01:36:51):
That's amazing, that's the dream. I wish I could do that.

Richard Rumelt (01:36:57):
There will be a TV, but that room is being remodeled.

Lenny (01:37:02):
I see, just a matter of time. Is there a favorite interview question you'd like to ask people you interview, maybe specifically around helping you get a sense of are they good at strategic thinking?

Richard Rumelt (01:37:14):
I like to ask people about, what have you done that was hard that you're proud of? What have you done that was difficult? And what was it and why was it difficult and how did you get it done? I like to ask people about what they think was an interesting strategy from any time in the past they want to call out. Depending on the person's background, I might ask them about a particular company or situation, let's say, why do you think this worked or why didn't it work? So, I don't tend to ask questions about theory, I tend to ask questions about things that happened and part of me, I'm looking, does this person have any knowledge about the world or are they just know what the professor said last year. So, that kind of thing.

Lenny (01:38:28):
Is there a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really like, whether it's an app, some you bought, some in the house, some on the road?

Richard Rumelt (01:38:36):
Well, we've got this new memory foam bed that we like, it's a pretty amazing innovation. I didn't think we'd like that, but we do. I really am fascinated by... I'm about to pull the trigger on buying one of these new smart telescopes.

Lenny (01:38:53):
Smart telescopes? I haven't heard of that. What makes them so smart?

Richard Rumelt (01:38:56):
It's a 12-inch reflected telescope, and it's too heavy to look around, it's too difficult to set up, but there are sort of new smart telescopes that run on a battery and you can put them outside. And the way they work is, first of all, they know where everything is in the sky, which has been around for a long time, but the new thing is, it's like astrophotography. They'll look at something for a minute, two minutes, 10 minutes, an hour, and form an image. You don't look through the telescope, you look at it on your phone or your computer, but you can see now the nebula that maybe the web telescope can see and you can see it now and you can see stuff out there that you couldn't before. And these are new things for $1,000 or $2,000 set that are remarkable in what they can do.

Lenny (01:39:56):
Excellent choice. Next question, do you have a favorite life motto that you often find yourself coming back to, sharing with friends, either in your work or in your life?

Richard Rumelt (01:40:05):
I used to have a final lecture I'd give to my MBA students about little pieces of wisdom, things not to do, things that offend people in other cultures. Don't do this if you're in Turkey, it means something else there. But I'd also say at some point your spouse or your partner will ask you, "Do you still love me?" And there's only one correct answer to that question, which is more than ever. And my wedding ring says that inside it, more than ever. So, I don't know if that's what you're looking for, but that's-

Lenny (01:40:57):
Absolutely.

Richard Rumelt (01:40:57):
... Getting a [inaudible 01:40:58] sense piece of wisdom.

Lenny (01:40:59):
That is really good advice, gave me tingles. I'm going to use that, 100%. Thank you for some marriage advice. Final question, your daughter Cassandra is a writer as well in fiction. She writes fiction. Is there anything that she taught you about writing that's helped you become a better writer?

Richard Rumelt (01:41:18):
Yeah, Cassandra is the... Oh my God, she's got like 25 books on the New York Times Bestseller list for teen fiction now. She started writing when she was 12 or 13. She had a talent for it. She's told me about the tension that you have to create and she writes novels and that it's not interesting unless there's... Well, we started talking about this when she was young, she was 14, and she asked me about, what is romance? I said, "Well, romance is a barrier. Romance is where there's a difficulty back to a couple, and there's some kind of..."

(01:42:12):
She said, "Oh, like he's rich and she's poor?" I said, "Yeah, like that." "Or he comes from the north side of town and she comes from the south." And I said, "Like that, yes." And she said, "Oh, like he's a vampire and she's not?" Okay, so she has alerted me and taught me about ways of creating that kind of tension in writing. It doesn't work as much in business writing as I'd like, but I try to create this sense of it's good strategy, bad strategy. It's a sense of there's a tension between the right way and a wrong way, or if not a right and wrong way, at least there's a tension between, should we go left or should we go right? It makes it interesting, otherwise it doesn't catch people's emotional court.

Lenny (01:43:14):
Amazing. Richard, thank you so much for being here. I think we're going to help a lot more people face bigger challenges and face them head-on and put together their action agendas and overcome this crux. Thank you so much for being here. Two final questions, where can folks find you if they ever want to try to reach out or learn more about the work you're doing these days? And then how can listeners be useful to you?

Richard Rumelt (01:43:37):
I have a little website called thecruxbook.com that has information about me and about the books, so there. Don't write to me at UCLA. I don't pay attention to the UCLA website anymore, but if you go to thecruxbook.com, there's some email addresses where I can be reached. My little company's called General Imagination. It's like General Motors, but a lot smaller. It's just me, and you can reach me at richard@generalimagination.com. You can help me out... Oh, tell me stories. Tell me stories about your experiences, trying to create strategies, particularly inside organizations. How's it worked for you trying to get something done inside organizations? I'm happy to add more stories to my repertoire. Oh, and hire me.

Lenny (01:44:46):
Wait, say more on that. What is it that people would hire you for?

Richard Rumelt (01:44:51):
At this point in my life, I do public speaking. I speak on strategy and growth, and just got back from Korea doing it, I taught there. I do a little bit of teaching, not much. Maybe for the military people, if they want me to come in and do a day on strategy and I do foundries. A foundry is where you commit to a problem-oriented approach to strategy where the organizational leader, the CEO, usually plus another seven or eight people take two to three or four days off and we meet and we try to come up with, in the end, an action agenda and it's an interpersonal exercise.

(01:45:52):
I'm the facilitator. I don't tell them what to do, but I urge them to look more deeply and to understand what these problems actually are. It's interesting to do a foundry. You get quite focused on problems, as I do at the beginning. I'll often get 25, 50 problems up on the board or Post-It notes around, and when people look at that, they'll say, "I haven't ever done this before." When they see the 25 different problems or challenges, they realize you can't do them all. And so, they begin to get this sense of, "Oh geez, we better focus. We better focus on something. We better do something about some of these." And so, then we begin to go through this thing, "Well, which ones are really important and which ones are really addressable?" Well, sometimes we don't know if they're addressable or not. Oh, well, is there anybody in the organization who does know? Is there someone we could fly in here or have some perspective on this? So, we begin to try to identify the one or two key challenges that can actually be addressed and what are we going to do about it? What are the coherent actions we're going to do to take these on? That's the exercise.

(01:47:16):
From time to time, after the foundries, they all say to me, "Well, where's the strategy? Where's the document with the mission, vision, all that?" No, that's not what we do. We're doing an action agenda and the foundry is time-consuming and a bit expensive to some extent, and most of the times we've had foundries, they really help the company gather its wits and its resources and do something, which I'm very pleased with how the foundries work. It's not so easy to figure out how to take the foundry concept and expand it. I've talked to a couple consulting firms about, "Well, the guys like learn how to do boundaries," and they say, "How does it work? It's one guy for three days? That's not what we do. We do 10 guys for three years." It's not a business model, but that's a nice symmetry for me because they're not going to compete with me.

Lenny (01:48:32):
I love that. I feel like you're about to get a flood of interest and requests. For everyone else, make sure to buy Richard's books, I got them right here, The Crux, Good Strategy Bad Strategy. Richard, again, thank you so much for being here.

Richard Rumelt (01:48:45):
Lenny, thank you for a really pleasant time chatting.

Lenny (01:48:49):
It was 1000% my pleasure. Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
Why are so many people bad at strategy?

Roger Martin (00:00:02):
What's taught now in business schools generally sucks. People aren't prepared educationally, and they sure don't get prepared for it in companies. It's intellectually challenging and it's emotionally intimidating.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:15):
You have something you call the strategy choice cascade.

Roger Martin (00:00:18):
You have to have answers to five questions. What's your winning aspiration? Where to play? How can you win? What capabilities do you have to have that your competitors don't? And then, what enabling management systems do you have to put in place? For the most part, in the leading business schools, it's illegal to teach that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:35):
Playing to win, you talked about, and there's kind of these two routes.

Roger Martin (00:00:38):
You have to be either differentiated or low cost, there's no way to protect yourself if you're not one of those two.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:44):
Is there anything else you wanted to just leave listeners with?

Roger Martin (00:00:46):
I have never met this mythical beast called a great natural strategist. Great strategists have all one thing in common, they just practice.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:59):
Today, my guest is Roger Martin. Roger is one of the world's most trusted strategy advisors. He's professor emeritus at the Rotman School of Management, at the University of Toronto, where he served as dean for five years. In 2013, he was named Global Dean of the Year, and in 2017 he was named the world's number one management thinker by Thinkers50. He's also the author of what many listeners consider their favorite book on strategy, called, Playing to Win. I've gotten a lot of requests to get Roger on this podcast, and I can now see why. This is the most tactical and fascinating conversation I've had on this podcast about developing a strategy, and that is a really high bar.

(00:01:38):
We delve into the five questions that you need to answer to help you craft your strategy. How Hamilton Helmer, Michael Porter, and Richard Rumelt's work fits into his framework and worldview, what people most often get wrong when they're developing their own strategy, the two options you have for how to win with your strategy, a very tactical and simple trick for getting started, thinking through your strategy, and so much more. This episode is for anyone who is trying to build their strategic thinking muscle. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app, or YouTube, it's the best way to avoid missing future episodes, and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Roger Martin.

(00:02:21):
Roger, thank you so much for being here, and welcome to the podcast.

Roger Martin (00:02:24):
It's great to be here, Lenny, thanks for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:27):
What I want to try to do with our time together is to help people that are on the ground at a company, say, like the product manager, designer, engineer, data scientists, folks that aren't necessarily the CO, or the founder or exec at company get better at product strategy. At crafting a strategy, evaluating strategy, developing a strategy. Because it feels like there's always tons of advice for the leaders of a company, but less for people on the ground doing the thing. And I feel like, luckily, your stuff applies to everyone. So, how does that sound as a lens for-

Roger Martin (00:02:55):
That sounds great, and can I tell us a little story to that end?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:58):
Please.

Roger Martin (00:02:58):
So, recently there was a newspaper article saying that, pointing out that 10% of the S&P 500 CEOs, 10% are ex Proctor and Gamble people. It's an amazing number, like a stunningly high, high number. Why would that possibly be? I believe it's because at Procter and Gamble there is a view that people way down the organization, like let's just say the head and shoulders brand franchise leader, who reports to the head of shampoos and conditioners, who reports to the head of beauty care, who reports to the CEO, so at least four levels down in the organization, in the guts of the organization, Proctor understands that that individual, not the CEO, not the global president of beauty care, not the head of haircare, not the head of shampoos and conditioners, the brand manager makes super important strategic choices, and if they don't make them well, the brand does terribly. And so, I believe... And not many companies have enough of that attitude.

(00:04:13):
So, I'm a big believer that people down organization have to make really important strategic choices or bad things are going to happen, if they make really great ones, good things are going to happen, and they get trained to be a CEO someday. So, I'm with your thesis. But yours is counter, what I would say is normal. What is most normal is people at the top do strategy, and people down below do something, and it's usually called execution, and I hate that, I hate that term of art, for what it's worth. And so, I think you and I are singing from a bit of the same songbook, even if it's a minority songbook.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:57):
This episode is brought to you by Webflow. We're all friends here, so let's be real for a second. We all know that your website shouldn't be a static asset, it should be a dynamic part of your strategy that drives conversions. That's business 101. But here's a number for you, 54% of leaders say web updates take too long. That's over half of you listening right now. That's where Webflow comes in. Their visual first platform allows you to build, launch, and optimize webpages fast. That means you can set ambitious business goals and your site can rise to the challenge. Learn how teams like Dropbox, IDEO, and Orangetheory trust Webflow to achieve their most ambitious goals today, at Webflow.com.

(00:05:43):
This episode is brought to you by Work os. If you're building a SaaS app, at some point your customers will start asking for enterprise features, like SAML authentication, and SCIM provisioning. That's where WorkOS comes in, making it fast and painless to add enterprise features to your app. Their APIs are easy to understand so that you can ship quickly and get back to building other features. Today, hundreds of companies are already powered by WorkOs, including ones you probably know, like Vercel, Webflow, and Loom. WorkOS also recently acquired Warrant, the fine-grained authorization service. Warrant's product is based on a groundbreaking authorization system called Zanzibar, which was originally designed for Google to power Google Docs and YouTube. This enables fast authorization checks at enormous scale, while maintaining a flexible model that can be adapted to even the most complex use cases. If you're currently looking to build role-based access control, or other enterprise features like single sign-on, SCIM, or user management, you should consider WorkOs. It's a drop-in replacement for auth zero, and supports up to 1 million monthly active users for free. Check it out at Workos.com to learn more. That's Workos.com.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:01):
I just want to ask this broad question about strategy, why is strategy so hard? Why are so many people bad at strategy?

Roger Martin (00:07:09):
Perhaps the thing that makes it intellectually hardest is that it is an integrative activity. It answers to a bunch of questions that have to fit together and reinforce one another. So, that just makes it a little more complicated, it's not like saying, Lenny, what do you want for lunch? It's saying, Lenny, what kind of diet do you want that'll keep you healthy? And that includes breakfast, lunch, dinners, snacks, a whole bunch of other things that you got to fit together. So, it makes that harder to do intellectually. Another aspect of it is, it is intimidating. Strategy involves making choices to do some things and not other things, and it is often intimidating to say, oh dear, I have to cut these things off, and not do them, and actually make a decision that I'll be held accountable for potentially, or I'll even hold myself accountable for.

(00:08:21):
So, that's a second thing. It's harder emotionally, not harder intellectually. And then, there's the training aspect of it, the knowledge aspect of it, which is, what's taught now in strategy in business schools generally sucks. It's gone on a crazy theoretical bend, the strategy academy as a whole has fallen in love with a theory called the resource-based theory of the firm, that silly and nobody uses it out in the world. And so, students are no longer trained on useful strategy. And the other feeder into people learning strategy were the strategy consulting firms, but the strategy consulting firms, the so-called strategy consulting firms, do almost no strategy anymore because it's a little business compared to post-merger integration, digital transformation, and a bunch of other things. So, people aren't prepared educationally for it, and if they're not prepared educationally for it, then they sure don't get prepared for it in companies. It's intellectually challenging and it's emotionally intimidating.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:40):
On this point, you made about how schools are teaching strategy wrong, how do you describe what the wrong approach is?

Roger Martin (00:09:46):
It's a theory that's sort of taken over, called the resource-based view of the firm, that was... In the world of academics, there's a weird place where the number one emotion is jealousy, and people were massively jealous of Mike Porter, who created many of the most important concepts of strategy when he wrote a book, Competitive Strategy, in 1980. And so, they needed to counter him because they just didn't like the fact that he was so prominent, and they decided they would say he was about positioning. So, they called his the positioning school, and they caricatured what he said, which he never did, but they said he said it's all about finding a place that is structurally attractive, and then milking it for everything you can.

(00:10:43):
We at the resource-based view of the firm think that strategy is all about building resources. And if you build resources, it's almost like if you build it, they will come. And that's what you should pay attention to. Now, the problem is, any resource that may be useful somewhere is not necessarily useful elsewhere. So, it begs the question, how would you think through what resources to invest in building? What would be a way of doing that, investing here, versus here, versus here? It's silent on that because it's a dumb theory, and it doesn't have anything useful to say, in my view, about that.

(00:11:33):
And so, when the students go out and say to their company, I'm going to do a VRIO analysis, or a VRIN, some people just roll their eyes at them, and so it doesn't get used. I've only seen it used, I've been in consulting companies for 42 years, and I've seen it used once. And the trust, as is usually the case, is that it's both. And that's why the model I use for strategies says a lot about where you play is important, that's one of the key questions, and your capabilities are important, and you've got to link those things together. But that's, for the most part in the leading business schools, it's illegal to teach that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:20):
Illegal to teach your approach.

Roger Martin (00:12:23):
Yes. I couldn't teach my approach at my own business school.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:23):
What?

Roger Martin (00:12:26):
But when I was dean, the most powerful person, the departments, or areas as we call it, like strategic management is an area, they have 100% control over what's taught in strategic management, in finance, et cetera. The dean may be the most powerful person in the school, and I happened to be a super successful dean, so if anything, I was a super powerful dean, and students would beg me, they'd say, "Roger, you have 20 years of experience, you're sort of a famous consultant in strategy, and you've got these theories, please teach a course in it." Nope. I did do extracurricular stuff, where I had practice of one Saturday a year, teaching everything I knew to anybody who wanted to show up. But for credit, I was not allowed. And if you try to get a job at any business... The only exception might be Harvard Business School, maybe. But if you took the 49 other top business schools in America, and if asked the question, do you swear allegiance to the resource-based view of the firm? If you don't answer an enthusiastic yes, you have no chance of being hired, zero.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:50):
Wow. This academia drama, I had no idea.

Roger Martin (00:13:54):
A loyalty test.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:55):
This is unreal. Makes me even more excited to dive into your world, and your ways of seeing things. Before we do that, just we've had a few other strategy people on the podcast, it might be helpful to frame where they fit in the spectrum that you're describing. So-

Roger Martin (00:14:09):
Oh, okay. I may not know all of them, but you give me-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:12):
I imagine you do. So, we've had a Hamilton Helmer on the podcast, and then Richard Rumelt on the podcast. How do they relate, just for people to get into your stuff versus this dogma?

Roger Martin (00:14:25):
So, one of them is an academic, and one of them is a quasi-academic, or non-academic, like me. I was a tenured professor for many years, but don't consider myself an academic guy. I don't think Hamilton does, though I've never asked him-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:41):
He's an investor now.

Roger Martin (00:14:41):
... that question. Yeah. So, he's written a very, I think, useful book that would in some sense fit into my how to win box, right? I say strategies about how to win, and he has a, what I call, a categorical model. Here are categories of things that you should think about. If you're trying to win, here are seven ways of winning, and I categorize him as a non-academic practical strategy guy. Richard Rumelt is a now retired Tuck professor, and he is this hyper competition thing that he does. He also is of the, I'm jealous of Mike Porter kind of thing. So, I've got to say, Mike Porter is wrong, and here's how I am so right, and the competition doesn't take place in the way Mike says, where it's really stable, and whatever, it's really hyper competition, Mike Porter never in his entire life has said competition is stable, he's repeatedly said the opposite.

(00:15:54):
But in order to say I'm not like Mike Porter, and in fact, I distinguish myself by saying he's wrong, and I'm right, and so... I don't know. He seemed like a fine guy. I don't think that he, like most business academics, he doesn't know much about business. He hasn't gone out and practiced a lot. He came to our school, and gave a lecture because people loved hyper competition because he would blast Mike Porter, and he gave a example of Proctor and Gamble, I've been consulting at Proctor and Gamble, and know everything about Procter and Gamble, basically.

(00:16:42):
And what he said about Proctor and Gamble had zero to do with reality, like zero. It was just completely, utterly, absolutely wrong. And I asked him afterwards, just sort of like, "Why do you say that?" And he said, "Well, I think that's the way it worked." Are you kidding me? So, I'm not a fan of that piece of work. I would say it doesn't fit nicely into research-based view of the firm versus Mike Porter, it's sort of like, here's another lens to take on the world, and I'm going to take that lens, everything's hyper-competitive, and here's how you think about hyper-competition.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:32):
This is fascinating. I love that we're spending some time on this, this is really helpful to hear the landscape of strategy minds. Okay, let's dive into your worldview, and maybe the simplest way is just, how do you define strategy? What is a strategy?

Roger Martin (00:17:48):
Strategy is an integrated set of choices that compels desired customer action. So, the way I think about it is, there's a whole bunch of things a company controls, how many factories to build, how much R&D to do, in what areas, and how much advertising to do, how many people to hire, what to pay them, blah, blah, blah... Those are all the things under our control. What, Lenny, is the thing we have almost no control over? What, if we're a company?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:19):
What customers do.

Roger Martin (00:18:21):
Yeah. We would like them to take some of these out of their pocket and give them to us, can we make them? No, we can't. So, essentially, the job of strategy is to make decisions on the things we do control that will compel, we can't force, but it'll compel them. They'll say, gosh, I should take my hard-earned cash, and whether it's a company or an individual, I should take my hard-earned cash and give it to you, rather than give it to nobody, if there's no product now, or give it to a competitive product. So, the important pieces of it is integrated, it's the whole set of choices that has that one outcome, that it compels desired customer action.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:11):
Amazing. Okay. And to help people define their strategy, you have something you call the strategy choice cascade, which is basically five questions that you need to answer to help you think trough strategy. Can you talk through this?

Roger Martin (00:19:23):
Yeah. And this is the fruits of many, many years of doing strategy work, and trying to figure out, how do you do this thing? Because the fun thing was, I was in the era, I started in strategy in 1981, and that was early in the era, strategy was born in 1963 with the founding of Boston Consulting Group by Bruce Henderson, who was the father of strategy in my view, of practical commercial strategy. So, it was still in the early days, and Bruce Henderson had a theory of how strategy should... What result it should produce for you. Mike Porter then came along in 1980, so '63 Bruce Anderson, and '80 Porter, the two most important figures in the history of strategy, came along and said, a strategy has to look like this. It has to have this as its output. But neither of them was very good on, because again, it was early, they can't do everything right away, of, well, how would you get one of those?

(00:20:34):
So, Mike Porter says you have to be either differentiated or low cost. Good. And if you look through competitive strategy as landmark seminal book, to say, how would you do that? There is no answer. And because Monitor Company, the firm I was one of the leaders of for a decade and a half, was founded essentially to commercialize Mike Porter's work, customers would ask us, they'd say, well, we like Mike Porter, and we'd like to have one of those. We can look at ourselves under his framework, and we can say we're stuck in the middle, and he said, that's bad, and he said, good is this or this. How do we think through creating one of those? We didn't actually have an answer.

(00:21:22):
And it turned out, because I was the most, I don't know, intellectually engaged on this, and didn't mind the hard work of product development from about 1987, when we discovered we really didn't know that, and clients really wanted us to tell them that. Between 1987 and 1995, I did all this work on, well, how could you develop a process for getting yourself one of those, one of those excellent strategies? And I came to the view that you have to have answers to five questions. You have to have an answer to the question of, what's your winning aspiration? What are you trying to accomplish? Because it'll help contextualize the kinds of choices you could make. Then there's a where to play, on what playing field, or if you're like military stuff, battlefield, are you going to plop yourself down on? You're not going to play everywhere, in every product, at every vertical stage around the world, you're going to pick someplace, and in that place, how can you be either better than competitors, in terms of creating customer value, or lower cost than those competitors?

(00:22:38):
To win there, where you've chosen to play to meet your winning aspirations, what capabilities do you have to have that your competitors don't, that would enable you to win that way? And then, what management systems, enabling management systems, do you have to put in place to make sure you build and maintain those must have capabilities to win, where you've chosen to play, to meet your winning aspiration? And so, I came to the conclusion, actually it was in 1995, the end of an eight-year journey, I came to the conclusion those were the five, and you had to do them together, and that is the essence of producing a strategy that compels desired customer action.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:21):
I want to go through an example of a company, but before we do that, something I think that's important to talk about is, if your book is called Playing to Win, you talked about this idea of you need to play to win, and you argue that a lot of people are just playing to play, they're playing to play the game. I'm guessing most people listening, and most people developing a strategy, don't think they're doing that, they don't think they're just playing to play the game. They think they're playing to win. I'm curious what are signs that you're not actually playing to win?

Roger Martin (00:23:49):
It would be mainly signs given to you by customers. So, if you say, we're the most innovative company in our industry, and customers... And let's say the industry distributes through a given channel, and customers come into that channel and they look at the two products and say, I could flip a coin on this one, you are not effectively playing to win. Maybe you thought you were winning, but customers don't think you are better. Or if your competitor lowers their price compared to your price, and you say to yourself, oh my God, if we lowered our price, we would make no money, but your competitor keeps on pricing there, you may think you have the low cost position, but they do, and you have to give them whatever share they desire at that lower price because you can't compete there.

(00:24:56):
So, you'll know you're playing to play if you're not aiming to, and accomplishing, having either an offer where Lenny walks into the store, whatever kind of store it is, and says to the person in the store, I want that brand. An example, Lego, one of the companies I've worked with for a long time, great company. It turns out that if you do market research on kids, a store that purports to be a toy store but that doesn't have Lego is not a toy store. They would define it as not a toy. Mom, why are we here? I wanted to go to a toy store. And she said, but it says toys on here. And the kids said, uh-huh. That's an insane brand. That's an insane, insane, insane brand.

(00:25:54):
And it has a price premium for anything, over any of its competitors by a long shot. It keeps growing, it actually for most years in the last decade it has had 80 or 90% of the entire category growth is Lego. And so, they're playing to win, to be distinctive in the minds of consumers. But Vanguard has got $9 trillion of assets under management last time I checked. Does it do anything distinctive? Not really. The customer bought, do they have the lowest cost position so they can charge the lowest AUMs? Absolutely. And so, there's different kinds of ways, but you'd know by the actions that customers take.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:48):
So, essentially, to mirror back what you're saying, to win, there's kind of these two routes you talk about. One is you're the lowest cost option, the second is you're differentiated. You have a differentiated brand, where it's not a coin flip, it's like, oh, I really need that for this reason.

Roger Martin (00:27:02):
Yes. Yeah, you got it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:05):
And if you can't do that, then the advice you share is go find a different playing field.

Roger Martin (00:27:11):
Well, or get out of business, whatever... It's only a matter of time until you're dead, is the sad truth of the matter, which is the competitors in your industry, who are either low cost or differentiated, can essentially jerk you around as much as they want. It's like Southwest Airlines, right? Southwest Airlines was just a tiny little airline that flew Austin, Houston, Dallas, and now it's number one in passenger seat miles in America, and the only airline that's earned its cost of capital over the last half century, all the rest are losing money for their shareholders over time. They have good cycles and bad cycles. How did that happen? Well, it's just the other airlines had to step aside whenever Southwest came into a route, the other airlines just had to say, well, I guess you're going to get your 30 share, or 35 share of passengers on this route, welcome to town. That's all they can do.

(00:28:15):
They just have to seed position. And that's what happens, if you play to play, you'll end up just being... It's literally like having a bully who can just shove you, and you take one step back, then they shove you, and you take another step back, and they shove you, and you take another step back. There's no way to protect yourself if you're not one of those two. You cannot bully Vanguard, you cannot bully Southwest, you cannot bully Proctor and Gamble, you cannot bully Lego. That's the way the business world works.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:54):
And in the case of Southwest, the reason they couldn't be bullied is they were the low cost provider and the other airlines couldn't meet their prices. So, they're like, all right, there's nothing we can do.

Roger Martin (00:29:04):
Yep, yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:04):
Awesome.

Roger Martin (00:29:06):
So, while I was living in Boston, they entered the Boston to Chicago route, which was a duopoly of American and United at the time, and the price was about, in those days, a $1000 for a round trip because it was a nice duopoly. When Southwest come in, they say, we're going to fly Providence to Midway, not Logan to O'Hare, and it's going to be $200. And they had great advertising, I always loved the advertising that they had when they entered the, they did maps of Boston, and said, if you live in any of these places, kind of the south, the west of Boston, it takes you less time to get from your house to the gate than it does to go to Logan.

(00:29:56):
Because at Logan, you park in a parking garage, and then walk a half an hour, and then when you get through security, you still have to walk 20 minutes... Blah, blah, blah. And at Providence, if you've ever flown out of Providence, you can park about 100 yards from the gates. And so, they just had to say, we can't stop that, not everybody's going to do it, but a whole bunch of people are, and there's nothing we can do to stop that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:24):
What I love is we're already diving into these five questions. So we've been mostly talking about how we will win, basically, here's your options to win. Low cost provider, or be differentiated, or find a different place to win. Let me summarize the five again. What is our winning aspiration? Where will we play? How will we win? What capabilities must we have in place to win? And what management systems are required to make sure the capabilities are in place?

Roger Martin (00:30:44):
Right. You've got it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:45):
Okay, cool.

Roger Martin (00:30:46):
You're a very quick study my friend.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:48):
I got some notes here. So, coming back to the how will we win? Because I think everyone's listening to this, okay, cool, we got two ways to win, we're going to be the cheapest or we're going to differentiate, okay. Okay, how do we differentiate? Is there a taxonomy of options that you think about or tell people, what are the ways and options for exploring, here's how we will be different?

Roger Martin (00:31:04):
It is mainly understanding customers, as well as you can, and then saying, is there a way to be distinctive against that? And there are lots of ways to do it, but it's tied very closely to the capabilities, which is, if you have a way of winning, you say, my where to play is I'm going to sell pet food on the internet, and my how to win is I'm going to be the best. But it turns out that anybody who can build a website can sell pet food on the internet, and in fact, 20 of them do it almost immediately, and they all go bust. You don't have the capability, so you've got to ask yourself the question, can I serve a particular customer need with a set of capabilities that are going to be hard to replicate by my competitors? They either can't do it, or they won't do it. And both are important questions because sometimes it won't.

(00:32:20):
Do you really think Walmart couldn't have built as good a website as Amazon, and at massive scale? I think they could have, right?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:30):
Yeah, probably. I don't know.

Roger Martin (00:32:33):
Did they? They didn't. They said, I hope this online thing doesn't really take off because that would be a pisser because we've got 5,000 stores across America, and we've got all that, and that would be a bummer. And so, they don't do anything for 10 years, giving Amazon the scale, so that Amazon then has this huge scale advantage on this, and network effects, and voila, you've got a competitive advantage that you didn't necessarily completely deserve. You needed the help of the player who stood to lose the most to hope that it wasn't going to happen. Same with Tesla, Tesla got a 10 year headstart, not because the OEMs couldn't, they could have, and of course GM did many, many years ago, create a fully functioning electric vehicle. But they couldn't figure out how the hell you make a buck on it, and so they didn't do it, giving Tesla the ability to establish a brand that people associate with that, electric vehicle equals Tesla, and allow them to jump way ahead, and then have the scale that is hard to hard for others to match.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:54):
You said something that's really interesting that I think is also really important, which is, you said that just being the best or better is not a solution. You can have a better pet food, you implied that's not going to get you there. Can you talk a bit about that?

Roger Martin (00:34:06):
Yeah. You have to answer a second question I guess, which is, here's the way I'm going to be better, and here's the way somebody else isn't going to be able to simply replicate that quickly. One of my favorite businesses, because I was on the board of Thomson Reuters for 14 years, it was Thomson first and then they bought Reuters, so Thomson Reuters. Best business is a business called Westlaw, and it's the dominant provider of online legal searches. So, if you're a litigator, and you're trying to, you're getting ready for a case, and you need to know what are the important precedents for this case, you go on to Westlaw, and put in some search terms using a Westlaw keyword system to help with it, and you get the five cases that really matter. You can Google it, and do the same thing, and you'll get the 500 cases that might matter.

(00:35:11):
How does Westlaw do that? Well, for now over 100 years, they've taken every case that's come out of the US legal system, had a lawyer, a Westlaw lawyer, write a head note that summarizes what's in the case, using these keywords so that they were searchable, and today, to do 2024, takes 1500 full-time lawyers. So, if somebody else said, this Westlaw business is incredibly profitable, and it keeps growing, and it's awesome, I'd like to be in that business... All they'd have to do is hire 150,000 lawyers full time, and you'd have to create a numbering system and a keyword system that's different than Westlaw's, and then you'd have to do what Westlaw has done for the past 50 years, which is give it free to law schools so that they teach their students before they even get out how to use Westlaw, and all...

(00:36:14):
No probs. That'll be easy, right? Nobody's even tried. Why bother? Life's too short. And that's the kind of capabilities you need to be able to say we'll win by having the searches that make the lawyer's job the most effective. And if it saves them time, it saves them money. And you don't need a huge law library. Law firms used to have these huge law libraries, you don't need one, you need a terminal, or actually, now it's on everybody's PC. And you don't need a bunch of librarians to go and find the cases that you need, they pop up on your screen. That's a great case of competitive advantage.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:02):
Today's episode is brought to you by Cycle, the AI-powered feedback platform for product teams. Is your customer feedback a tangled mess of Slack threads, survey responses and overflowing inboxes? Wish that you could know what your customers really need? Cycle unifies all of your customer interactions, from support chats, to user research, gong calls, and app store reviews into one neat collaborative space. Cycle's AI then extracts actionable insights on autopilot. Cycle will learn what you're building so that it can label incoming feedback automatically. That means you'll get a full voice of customer report without manually triaging feedback. Then simply use Cycle Ask to dig deeper into any topic, and generate custom AI generated summaries across your entire feedback repository.

(00:37:48):
What makes Cycle different is the way that it lets you close feedback loops in each release. Feedback is not used just as a way to prioritize what to build, but also as a tool that creates trust with all stakeholders. Sign up for a free Cycle trial today, at Cycle.app/Lenny, and put your feedback on autopilot. That's C-Y-C-L-E.app/Lenny.

(00:38:12):
So, essentially, we're talking about moats. What are some moat that you can create where people can't just copy what you're doing?

Roger Martin (00:38:18):
And Warren Buffett likes that terminology, right? That's what he says, he invests in moats.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:25):
Yeah.

Roger Martin (00:38:25):
Yes, yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:25):
I'll find the quote we used in a recent podcast episode, but he's like, castles with moats. And maybe along those lines, is there a way you think about types of barriers to recreate capabilities? It's like, here's the options we have, is it like... Essentially, the seven powers I think talks about this.

Roger Martin (00:38:43):
Yeah. Yeah. That's why I like Helmer, because he categorizes them. And I've got to look into it some more because I haven't studied it to say whether I would concur that there are just seven, or there are more. My suspicion might be that there are more, but there may not be. They may be all clustered, there may be variants that cluster behind those. But I don't, myself, have a categorization scheme that says, here's how you search for the moat.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:20):
Great. That would be nice. So, here's the quote from Buffet, by the way, "I look for economic castles protected by unbreachable moats."

Roger Martin (00:39:27):
Yes, I like that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:29):
There we go.

Roger Martin (00:39:30):
I like that. And he's smart, he's consistent. Though, everybody makes mistakes, right? And he did too. Solomon Brothers, US Air... Anybody who thinks they can be perfect on strategy is delusional. And so, even the very, very best, like a Warren Buffet, who's outstanding, arguable genius, is going to sort of think, I think this is a moat, and it's going to be ephemeral. But any of us should be pleased to have a track record that would be anywhere close to that, on really identifying moats, because he has.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:11):
We talked about that with Hamilton Helmer, that every startup deck has, here's our moats, here's how we're going to have barriers to entry, and they're all delusional, rarely is there ever an actual moat, especially in the early stages.

Roger Martin (00:40:22):
Yes. Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:23):
Let's go back to the five questions again, because that's so core to the way you think about strategy. What do you think about using, say this FigJam as an example, as a hypothetical, just to think through questions that they might ask to think about strategy, and I can describe what FigJam is so you [inaudible 00:40:38]-

Roger Martin (00:40:38):
Sure, sure. I do not know that product-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:40):
Okay. It's basically a visual whiteboard collaboration tool, where people can put in sticky notes, and put little mocks, and kind of play around with all the cursors.

Roger Martin (00:40:46):
Oh, okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:47):
And so, it's for brainstorming, and ideation, and things like that, and laying out concept.

Roger Martin (00:40:52):
Gotcha. Okay, that would make sense for Figma.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:54):
Figma. Yeah, exactly.

Roger Martin (00:40:55):
Right. Okay. So, you'd asked the question, what are we trying to accomplish? Are we attempting to create something where nothing digital exists, people do this in pen and paper, and so we're trying to invent a category and then be transformative by making the user experience better? Is that what we're trying to do? Or are there players already doing this and they're just not doing it very well? You'd want to say, well, what are we trying to accomplish? And I don't spend a whole lot of time on that because you got to toggle back and forth between those five questions, but you have to have a reason for searching in a given space for where to play, how to win. What do you think their reason for thinking FigJam is worth investing in is? What do you think it is? Is it white space, or is it crummy offerings in the market currently?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:03):
If I had to get to it, I think they're trying to expand their market and they have a stronghold in design tooling, and there's this adjacent market for product teams broadly to be using Figma more. And there are existing tools similar to that, that are good.

Roger Martin (00:42:21):
Okay. So, I don't love it to start.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:25):
Say more.

Roger Martin (00:42:26):
So, there's a big market over there, we'd like to get some, is a terrible reason in my view. The reason should be, customers are bereft, customers are lacking something that we can provide. This is why I hate... And most entries by foreign companies into China, they get their faces shot off. And the reason is the rationale is, it's big, we could get some of that. So, I don't love it, for starters. And I'm not saying that that'll guarantee failure, but if somebody gave me a review of a pitch deck for that, I would not invest [inaudible 00:43:14].

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:13):
Well, I imagine you can also frame it in other terms, like our customers are demanding more ways to work within Figma with their teams, and there's these-

Roger Martin (00:43:22):
Yeah. So, that would be a better one. And you're speculating, I've asked you to speculate, so we don't know. But I like that one better, which is, what's our aspiration? It's to satisfied core customers, who love what we do, but think it's too narrow, that if we could broaden that for them, into this market, our customers would be very happy.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:47):
That is really cool. And so, you want to frame it in the words of how customers would benefit, essentially.

Roger Martin (00:43:52):
I just think those tend to be stronger, strongest, if there's a link. Because remember, what is strategy about? Compelling desired customer action. So, everything ties back to that. So, then the where to play would be, you just want to say, okay, what customers are we talking about, or what parts of our current customers that we don't serve are we attempting to serve with that? And with what product? Is it a finished product? Is it a component of a product? Through what distribution channel would we sell this? This is another self-serve type product. I think Figma is mainly self-serve, right? And so, you choose that where, and then say, how can we solve the problem?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:42):
Before we get to that, before we get to that real quick-

Roger Martin (00:44:44):
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, please. Please.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:45):
So, the things you mentioned there is who specifically are the customers? So, in this case it'd be like product managers, engineers, and other functions, and then there's the distribution channels, how we'd actually get to them?

Roger Martin (00:44:56):
Get to them, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:56):
And then, what other questions are there within this where we will play?

Roger Martin (00:45:02):
To what extent is it a finished product or a component? Because sometimes it could be, we'd like to supply this component that could be integrated into other people's products. That's what Apple apps are, right?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:16):
Got it.

Roger Martin (00:45:16):
We don't sell them an iPhone, we sell them a component within the iPhone, a customer's iPhone, is that what we're doing here? Because then you have to ask questions about, well, how does it fit in with the rest?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:31):
So, the where also implies where in the product it lives? Where-

Roger Martin (00:45:37):
At what vertical stage? Is it an integrated product, where it's the whole thing from soup to nuts? Is it some upstream pieces that some people downstream? Do we take pieces from other people and assemble them? So, we're the integrator? Those are all important where to play choices, from my view, because those make a big difference. Like Four Seasons chose... Four Seasons the hotel company, luxury hotel, chose a completely different choice on the vertical stage where to play, back in the 80s, they said we're going to get out of real estate development... So buying land and getting it zoned for hotels. We're going to get out of construction, building hotels. We're even going to get out of the business of owning the land or the hotel, so that we can be awesome at hotel management.

(00:46:35):
Rich people, like Michael Dell, and David Thompson, and Bill Gates will own the hotels, as an investment, and they will be happy to have Four Seasons brand on their hotel, and we will charge a management fee. That is a where to play choice. Even though somebody could say, well, you're a luxury hotel, you're like the other luxury hotels who serve luxury customers at a high price. Oh no, no, no, no, no, they do it with a stack this thick, we do it with a stack this thin.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:07):
So, it's like a value chain question. Where in the value chain are you going to play?

Roger Martin (00:47:13):
Value chain. Yeah. Where in the value chain? That's exactly right. And everybody has value chain questions. They often complain, after the fact, like all the apps complain about what cut Apple is taking, but they made a choice, a value chain choice. We are going to design something that will appear on an iPhone, or an Android device, if it's that case, and then good luck to you. You can complain like crazy that they're taking so much of it, and this is unfair, and they've got to duopoly... Yeah, but you guys cooperated 100% in building that. 100%, never complained about it, until you wanted a bigger piece of the pie. That was a vertical stage, a value chain stage, that you chose, willingly. Nobody forced you to do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:05):
And Apple's not playing ball, giving it back too easily.

Roger Martin (00:48:10):
No. No. And do I love just how controlling and everything Apple is? Do I? No, but would I say, oh, those poor apps, right? Yeah, no, get your own distribution channel, buddy.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:26):
Cold blooded.

Roger Martin (00:48:27):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:28):
Okay, so we've talked about the winning aspirations, so for FigJam, it would be satisfy customers that are trying to work with their team in these different ways, and make sure they're staying, make sure they get what they need out of Figma, versus go maybe to other tools. And then, where will we play? Let's say, engineers, product managers is trying to target them, distribution through the existing product, and so it's like a feature of the existing product. And then, it's how will we win? How do you think about that?

Roger Martin (00:48:57):
Yeah, yeah. Well, you ask the question, how can we solve... Well, how can we either solve that problem at a much lower cost, so we can always be a sharper price point than them? So, if there are solutions, but they cost 50,000 a user because their costs are 30,000 a user, we can do this for $15 a user, and so we can charge $100 per seat, and absolutely annihilate the competitor by figuring out a less costly way to do it. Or there are other selections, but they make the user do all these things, and it's ponderous, and it takes a long time... We have shortcuts, we use AI to, you just say a few words into it, and they say, oh yeah, I know what you mean, and here it goes in the workflow.

(00:49:54):
Or we're more integrated, like Thomson Reuters, the company I was on the board of, our advantage was we were better integrated into the workflow. You didn't have to get out of your workflow to go use this product, and then you get back in, we just said, what's your workflow? Oh, well, integrated. Is it better integrated into their workflow that makes their life easier? It would be questions, possibilities like that that I would be asking. Essentially, you've got to have a theory there, of how are you going to be better or lower cost.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:34):
On the lower cost front, I think generally the advice is you don't want to go that route, that's a very difficult route. What's your thinking of just when to go that route that you might actually win at lower costs?

Roger Martin (00:50:45):
That's not advice I give. I think they're both completely legitimate strategies. They have implications. So, if you want to be the cost leader, it is rare that you can be the cost leader without having dominant scale in the territory in which you're operating. So, if you want to be a niche cost leader, good luck to you, that's almost never going to happen. So, Vanguard had to make a race to, we're going to do index mutual funds, and it doesn't exist now, we're going to do it and we're going to get gigantic, and we can't let anybody get close to us in size because we want to have the lowest cost position. And so, they are the world's biggest mutual fund company, and you have to do that, and same with Southwest, to really make that model work, they had to keep expanding and expanding to get bigger.

(00:51:45):
M&M Mars... It takes an enormous amount of commitment to say, we're going to go, and we're just going to keep charging ahead on this. Whereas, in differentiation, I think you can differentiate sometimes at lower scale, and build yourself slowly towards higher scale. But the business world is just getting so much more scale sensitive. When you think about the costs of differentiation, it's often spending on branding, spending on R&D, R&D innovation. Those two are of the most scale sensitive elements of anybody's cost structure. And so, being a niche-y differentiator is getting harder and harder in my view.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:35):
I think it's also important to say, either path is very hard, it's very hard to build a business that makes money and is profitable and survives just broadly.

Roger Martin (00:52:43):
Yes, yes, I agree.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:44):
And you're not going to have this formula of how to win, okay, we got it. We got a big business.

Roger Martin (00:52:49):
I agree. I agree. And that's why, if I looked at 100 strategies of major companies, I'd say I didn't like 90 of them very much.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:01):
And then, the other nine out of 10 probably look good, but also don't work out.

Roger Martin (00:53:06):
Yes. Yeah, no, that's true. There's lots of spaghetti thrown at lots of walls in the world of business.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:14):
Yeah, capitalism.

Roger Martin (00:53:16):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:16):
Okay. So, now we're at the capability step of trying to figure out what capabilities you need to win. Can you talk about, say with FigJam, what are the sorts of things you think about here?

Roger Martin (00:53:26):
Well, I guess I'd ask myself questions, like, is there a learning curve to this, where we could have better capabilities because we started earlier than anybody else, and have more essentially cumulative experience? Is there a way that we've figured out how to serve customers that make them feel tended to better by us? So, we've got helpline... We figured out how to do the helpline, because if it's self-serve and that's how they get the product, and then they've got issues with how to use it, they feel that we're just better. We're the best of all their providers at that. How to win is a theory of how customers are going to perceive us better, if we're differentiated. And then, it's what capabilities would we have to have to make that theory come true, rather than just be a wish. So, if we want them to feel like we're the easiest to deal with, we have to have capabilities to do that.

(00:54:47):
It's just like again, Four Seasons said the reason they're by far and away the most successful, profitable, best in all fronts, luxury hotel chain in the world... Biggest, best, most profitable, best employee rankings, best guest rankings, all of those. Well, their how to win was they said, people, if you talk to people who are in luxury hotels, they'd rather not be there. You'd say, wow, they're in the lap of luxury, why would that be? Where do you think they'd prefer to be, Lenny?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:20):
At home.

Roger Martin (00:55:21):
Yeah. Dominantly at home, for their segment, which was high-end business travelers. They've traveled, they've stayed in one luxury hotel too many 20 years ago. And so, we're going to have luxury defined as not grand architecture and decor and [inaudible 00:55:38] service, but rather, we're going to define it as a service that makes up for what you left at home or at the office.

(00:55:44):
Because people would rather be, if they have to not be at home, they'd rather be at the office than in a hotel because they can be more productive. So, we need capabilities, we need staff that can deliver on that capability. What's the problem, for that? The problem is turnover in the hotel industry globally is 80% a year, which means that the average person you meet, the average staff person you meet in the average hotel, is on their way to a 16-month career at that hotel chain. So, how do you deliver that really cool special kind of service with that? The answer is... And now I'm skipping ahead to enabling management systems.

(00:56:26):
You have to have a different way of recruiting, a different way of onboarding, a different way of career development. And if you do all of those things, you end up with a 10% turnover rate, so that your people are there 10 years on average, and you can then get them trained up to deliver that kind of service. So, that's the capability that you build, and the people, to be able to take more decision-making at a lower level, and treat the guests in a customized way that makes them feel that this wasn't by the book, some rule book, that this person just said, no, this is a good solution for my guest.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:01):
It's interesting that these capabilities and even the management systems, which is step five, relate to your moat. Which is the thing you need to achieve, also, ideally is the thing that other people, it'll make it hard for them to do.

Roger Martin (00:57:14):
Yep. So, you're exactly right. You can call if you want, how to win, moat, right? Definition of your moat. And so, capabilities and management systems are what both build and maintain the moat, and the maintaining is an important part because if you are the most successful, people are going to say, I want to do that too. But here's where there's this modern, unfortunately, bull shitty thing that says, oh, competitive advantage is fleeting in this modern hyper-competitive world, and you can't have long-term advantage anymore. And I just say, oh, I see. So, Four Seasons, I guess that isn't very long-term, that has only been 45 years now, since they... No, 35 years I should say. Don't exaggerate. Since they went to that strategy. Oh, and Tide. So, 77 years isn't a long time, I guess either, because they've been the number one detergent for 77 consecutive years. I guess you're right, it's fleeting.

(00:58:16):
It's not. But what makes it fleeting is when you have one thing, and one thing only. So, let's say you build the biggest polyethylene plant in the world, near a good feedstock source, and you have the low cost position, what's somebody else going to do when they see how much money you make doing that? Build a polyethylene plant beside yours, twice the size, and then you're toast. Why? Because the competitive advantage was too simple. But at Four Seasons, you got to sell off all your hotels, you got to fire all the people involved in hotel development and everything, and actually, the people in the business like doing that, you have to essentially get rid of your entire staff, start from scratch, paying them more than you do now by far, giving them more career security, giving them more training, giving them better uniforms, whatever, spending 10 times as much hiring them, with the hopes that maybe someday you'll be able to produce the kind of services Four Seasons does.

(00:59:24):
The competitors basically say, life's too short. Do they give up and die? No, there are other great chains, Mandarin Oriental, my wife loves staying in Mandarin Oriental, even more than Four Seasons often. But they've not said, we will replicate Four Seasons, they've said, we'll pick a different where, and a different how, and that's, in the end, what you want. Is rather than complete overlap, where you've got concentric circles of people picking the same where, you convince people to pick different wheres. That's why people sort of say, Roger, how to win, that's so impolitic, because you're producing losers, and then there's victims, and all that. There's oppressor and oppressive. It fits in the modern dialogue. And I say, no, what I want to do is encourage them to find someplace else to prosper, rather than smash on top of us.

(01:00:27):
And so, if you have completely different capabilities and management systems, it'll encourage people to choose a different where to play, how to win. If your capabilities and management systems are very similar to your competitors, and you're succeeding with your chosen where to play, how to win, what are they going to do? They're going to drive straight to your where to play and try to win exactly the same place and wreck your market for both of you. That's what you don't want. And the more complicated, in some sense... I shouldn't use complicated. The more nuanced and multifaceted your capabilities and management systems are, the more likely they're going to say life's too short. That's what everybody says about Southwest. So, if you're the only airline in the United States that's earning its cost of capital for 50 years, wouldn't you say, gee, I'd love to be like that? But what does it mean?

(01:01:29):
Well, it means selling off most of your aircraft, so that you can have only one kind of aircraft, 737. Tearing up your entire root structure, your entire hub and spoke structure, and make it point to point. Changing your complete labor relations strategy, from fighting the unions to paying them a lot, as long as they're highly flexible. People think Southwest is non-union, it's not unionized [inaudible 01:01:55], but they do different... You have to essentially fire all your travel agents, and convince your customers to book online, by themselves, to save more money. Life's too short, it's just too short. So, they try things like Continental Light, or Ted, that do half the things that Southwest does, and then you're what? A crappy Southwest. So, to me, that's the ultimate. The ultimate is, it's like the ultimate weapon is the one you never use. The ultimate way to compete to win is to never actually be forced to compete.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:38):
Wow, that's a great quote. This story about Southwest makes me think about Hamilton Helmer's counter-positioning, I don't know if you've heard that term, but basically, you position yourself in a way where the competitor can't do the thing that you're doing because of the way their business is already structured.

Roger Martin (01:02:57):
Ah, that's sounds right. The can't.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:00):
Yeah, can't.

Roger Martin (01:03:00):
The can't thing. Awesome. Yeah, and Mike Porter, and he may quote Mike on that, Mike was very big on that. He said, it's fault lines. You're trying to find fault line, where it is so painful for your competitor to come across that fault line, into your side. And so, a great example of that would be Olay, at P&G, and it's in the book, when we did the repositioning of that. The competitor that could have killed us, absolutely killed us, was Estée Lauder with Clinique. If they would've brought Clinique into the mass channels... Because we were doing a Clinique kind of thing, in the mass channels, rather than the prestige. Prestige is like the first four of the department stores, which [inaudible 01:03:51] or Sephora, or Ulta. If Estée Lauder would've taken their Clinique brand and brought it into mass, they would've killed what we were doing. Simple as that.

(01:04:05):
And in fact, Clinique was the biggest brand in all of skincare, we became the biggest brand in all of skincare, and they didn't do it. Why? Are they idiots? No, they're not, Estée Lauder's super smart. But Estée Lauder also has Bobby Brown, and Mac, and the Estée Lauder, its own brand, and a half a dozen more, all in prestige, and the prestige channel, if they'd have taken Clinique, and taken it over into mass, would've done what? Shot them in the face. Killed them, right? They would've been just apoplectic. And so, Estée Lauder had to stay... If that's counter-positioning by Helmer's terms. They had to stay there. Was that stupid? No, they're still, with all of their brands combined, the biggest in skincare. But Clinique has lost leadership to our brand that they would've considered kind of nothing. Oil of Olay became Olay Olay ProV, Regenerist, all of these higher priced products than they could ever imagine being sold in the mass channel. But our biggest friend was, in some sense, their distribution channel, which would've killed them if we... Literally. They would've just punished them so, so, so bad that they didn't do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:38):
I love that I'm learning all this strategic thinking about makeup and skincare, I also love just the idea of you leading strategy for skincare and makeup brands.

Roger Martin (01:05:46):
Yeah, no, I got Proctor & Gamble into color cosmetics.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:51):
So funny. [inaudible 01:05:51] love that. I don't know if you're following the AI Google stuff that's happening, where there's search engines competing with Google by just answering the question versus giving you a bunch of blue links?

Roger Martin (01:06:02):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:02):
And there's this question of, we'll Google Shift because people seem to really like it, versus they're making trillions of dollars running ads when they share blue links, and it's this super innovator's dilemma position they're in.

Roger Martin (01:06:14):
Yeah, no, no, I am very interested in what's going on in AI, and I'm writing some stuff on that. But it's hard. I've seen the inside of this for many of my clients, it is super hard when the guts of how you make money is under threat, and you just don't want that thing to go away. The big auto OEMs make money selling cars with ice engines, it's simple as that. And there's no surprise, they've been doing it for 100 years, they're way down the learning curve, they have scale, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And so, these damn electric vehicles are kind of no fun. And so, the Google situation you've described, I think it's similar. But my general advice is always the same, which is, it can take a while, but in the end the customers will triumph. And A.G. Lafley, my friend who I co-wrote the book with, great CEO, was very good on this. And one of his big customers, big [inaudible 01:07:27] customers came to him and said, if you don't stop cooperating with Amazon, we're going to de-list all your products.

(01:07:35):
Big threat. Big threat. And A.G. just said, "If customers want to shop there, we just can't not be where our customers want to shop. And so, if you feel you need to do that, you're going to have to, because customers want to shop there, and we are not doing that. But what are you offended by, that we're doing there?" And they said, "Well, you are allowing them to ship products to their customers from your distribution centers." And A.G. just said, "Yeah? Do you want to too?" And they were like... And he just said, "We don't do anything special for them that we wouldn't do for you, they ask for things that you don't ask for because of their business model. But if you come to us with ideas of how we can help you serve our joint customers better, we're all in. But we're not boycotting a place that customers have shown they want to shop," as long as it's an honest, if Amazon was sleazy and dishonest or whatever, but an honest, upstanding place where customers can get our products.

(01:09:06):
And so, that's where I'm at, which is, you may have to scramble like hell, you may have to suffer from economic downturn, but if you think you can... I always think of it, I don't know if you did this as a kid, Lenny, but when we went to the beach on family trips, we would, I have four brothers, we would build... Plus then a baby girl later. But we would build sand castles and try to hold back the tide, this would be in Florida or California, and we'd try and hold back the tide, and we'd come the next morning to see if our castle... And it was always gone. It's gone. But we'd keep trying doing it, and it's sort of like, you can't hold back the tide. Maybe you can for a while, but you can't forever. So, you just have to figure out where are the customers going. And if they're going someplace...

(01:10:07):
And Vanguard did this, Jack Bogle, the late Jack Bogle, he died now, a couple of years ago now, he did not like ETFs. He said ETFs are not as good for customers as mutual funds. And he had all sorts of good reasons for that, but the index ETF business started to grow like crazy, and Jack had to relent and say, I don't think it's good for them, but they want it, and so they went whole hog into it, and are the leading index ETF provider, as well as the index mutual fund provider. But for a while they weren't, but he realized it was the tide, and he was attempting to hold back the tide. So, good luck. Good luck to you on that. So, to me, if Google thinks they can, because of their power and the fact they've got a multi-trillion dollar market cap, and they've got a near monopoly position on something, they can hold back the tide.

(01:11:09):
You see, the water finds a way to flow. Think about Microsoft and its monopoly on PC operating systems, or it's near monopoly on PC operating systems. And I would argue that they abuse that kind of monopoly. I often asked people, when's the last Windows update that got you as a customer excited?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:38):
Yeah, Windows 95.

Roger Martin (01:11:39):
The answer, I think is really clear, Windows 95, right?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:43):
Yeah.

Roger Martin (01:11:44):
Because that's when he took the graphical user interface that he bought rights to from Steve Jobs and put it on, so you didn't have to do backslash backslash... You could actually point and click. That's a long time ago, last time I checked, that's now almost 30 years. And so, they just abused their customer. Is their share of PC operating systems much lower than it was then? No. But that's not the right measure of share. The right measure of share in my view in that industry is your share of minutes spent staring at a smart screen. That's what the share of operating systems that you should care about. And so, what kind of smart screens do people now stare at most? Most? And what other one do a lot of people stare at who really like them? Pads. And so, if you added up all those and said, what do you think... So, what's their share of smartphone operating systems? Microsoft?

(01:12:55):
Last time I checked it was 0.4 of 1%. Yeah, so effectively zero. How about pads? Apparently it's 4% there. So, their share of people staring at a smart screen has plummeted. Plummeted. Why? Because water finds its own level. People said, there are these other ways of getting around this, and I'm going to take those ways. And I think the degree to which people use their smartphone for more things, as the function of that smartphone is advanced so much faster than your PC operating system, because more people are using it. So, that's what I'd say to Google. I don't care how painful it is, water flows downhill, the tide comes in, and you cannot stop that, even if you're one of the most powerful three firms on the face of the planet.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:59):
And it may take time, but eventually the customer tide pulls, that's a, I think that's really important.

Roger Martin (01:14:04):
But yeah, start now. If you don't start now, it's too late.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:11):
Yeah. I want to end with one very tactical question for people, that may feel overwhelmed, they're just like, oh my God, I don't know what we're going to do, this is so hard, all strategy stuff. You have this really cool idea called betterment, I think you wrote a media post about it, thinking betterment over perfection. And it gives you a first step of like, okay, here's a way to move forward. Can you just talk about that approach?

Roger Martin (01:14:32):
So, for me, strategy, this thing called strategy, with people, oh my God, oh my God, how am I going to do strategy? Whatever. I just think of it as a problem solving tool. And what problem should you attempt to solve? You should attempt to solve something where your current outcomes that you're getting are lower than the outcomes you wish you were getting. That's what I call a gap. There's a gap between those two. And you should just conceptualize it as, your current outcomes are a natural result of all the choices you've made interacting with the competitive environment. And so, you should reasonably assume that probably those outcomes aren't going to get a whole lot better, because they are the way they are for a good reason. So, you're going to need to make a different set of choices to make that gap go away. That's what I would work on.

(01:15:31):
I would just ask the question, what is the single most painful gap currently that I'm facing? Customers used to do this, and they're doing this, I can't find this kind of resources, our distribution channel has abandoned us... Whatever is the most painful thing, and then just tackle that. And say, what different choices could I make? And I'd say, use my cascade. Could I change where I'm playing? Could I change how I'm winning? Could I change my capabilities? Could I change my manage systems, in order to achieve a different aspiration? And so, don't try to solve the problems of the world, or even all the problems of your company, that's perfection. Betterment is making that gap go away. And guess what happens if you make that gap go away? You can turn your attention to the next gap, and the next gap, and the next gap.

(01:16:28):
And if you do that all the time, you're always working on the next gap, the next... They'll get smaller and smaller over time. I don't know if this is a great analogy, but I was dean of a business school for 15 years, the guy who won the professor of the year award more times than anybody else, and did it sort of teaching tough courses, often executive MBA courses, and the like, had a simple formula for doing it. Which is, he taught second-year courses, and second-year courses happened to be 13 two hour lectures, or sessions, [inaudible 01:17:10] or another. He just polled the students on what they thought of each session as they went along, and regardless of the reason, regardless of anything else, simply chopped number 13 every year.

(01:17:26):
Because in some sense, it's the biggest gap, the gap between what the customers, students, wished for, and were getting. And he would just replace it with something. He would try something else, and replace it with that. And you'd say, and that gets you professor of the year every year? And the answer is yes, betterment. Because if you're teaching for 25 years and you just keep doing that every year, every year, the course keeps getting better and better and better and better and better and better. So, betterment, it doesn't make purists feel awesome, but I'm not here to make purists feel awesome, I'm here to help people get better.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:21):
This makes me think about your water metaphor too, of just water eventually finding a way through. [inaudible 01:18:26] iterating, [inaudible 01:18:27] things better.

Roger Martin (01:18:27):
Yeah, lots of what I think about in strategy is natural, if you will. I try to ask, how does the world generally operate, and is what we're doing consistent with the way the world generally operates or not?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:42):
Roger, this was so much fun, we covered everything I was hoping we'd get through. I think we're going to help a lot of people with the way they think about strategy. Is there anything else you wanted to just leave listeners with, or say before we wrap up and let you go? We covered a lot, so there may not be anything left.

Roger Martin (01:18:58):
Well, on strategy, there's one piece of advice I'd say. People often ask me about people who are natural strategists, or they say, I'm not naturally good at that, I'm more of an operational guy or gal. And what I tell them is, I have never met this mythical beast called a great natural strategist. And they often throw back in my face, Lafley. They say, look, Lafley, he was known as a strategy genius. And I say, yeah, but when I interviewed him in depth about his background, for a paper I was writing, what I discovered was when he was in the Navy, as a whatever, I don't know, probably 25-year-old in the Navy, he had a job where he had to think about strategy, and was testing things out, and doing things, and the like. And then, I realized that he had been practicing strategy for decades before he became the CEO, decades.

(01:20:04):
And so, he just had more reps when he became CEO than almost anybody else that I've ever met. There's another guy, [inaudible 01:20:15], ex-CEO, now he's gone on to a higher level of Lego brand group, would be similar. So, great strategists that I have met have all one thing in common. They just practice. And anybody, there's no such thing as a person who is willing to practice strategy, who will end up saying, I'm operational, I don't do strategy well. Which links to our last thing about betterment. Just work on making different choices to solve problems. Not problems that I say, I'm not going to define your gap, it's one that you feel in your heart, I wish this were better. Work on it, if you do that, you'll be a great strategist. So, be encouraged, don't be discouraged. And the worst thing to do is to wait. People say, well, I've got all these operational concerns right now, and then I'll get to strategy later. You'll never amount to anything. Nobody who says that ever amounts to anything.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:22):
Wow. I love this, I love how empowering it is, I love the real talk. Roger, you're awesome. Thank you so much for being here.

Roger Martin (01:21:29):
You're most welcome. Thank you for making it a fun journey for me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:32):
I learned a ton, and that's always a good sign, and it was a lot of fun.

Roger Martin (01:21:35):
Well-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:35):
Thanks, Roger.

Roger Martin (01:21:36):
Good.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:37):
All right. Bye everyone.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:39):
Thank you so much for listening, if you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at Lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
I generally value the reference check over interview signals. If I had to stack rank in interviews, what is the best signal? The reference check is the top of the list. Those people, they worked with this person sometimes for years, their knowledge, what you're going to get out of 30 minutes of artificial scenarios it's just like never going to compare what a good reference check will give you.

(00:00:25):
Shishir Mehrotra is the co-founder and CEO of Coda. Before starting Coda Shishir led the YouTube product engineering and design teams at Google, where he spent over six years. Before that, he spent six years at Microsoft. He's also on the board of Spotify. As you'll hear in this episode, Shishir is an incredibly deep and very first principles thinker on all kinds of topics. And in this episode we cover growth strategy, specifically a framework that he calls Blue Loops and Black Loops.

(00:00:51):
We talk about the rituals of great teams, something that Shishir has been passionate about and has been collecting from all of the best leaders in tech for the past two years, and which will soon turn into a book. We talk about Eigenquestions, which is not a German game show. He shares how he evaluates product talent and gives some really great advice on doing reference checks. We go into so many other topics, this is the longest episode that I've recorded yet, and you'll see why. Shishir is so full of wisdom and we could have kept going for at least another hour. And so with that, I bring you Shishir Mehrotra. Hey Casey Winters, what do you love about Coda?

Casey (00:01:29):
Coda is a company that's actually near and dear to my heart because I got to work on their launch when I was at Greylock. But in terms of what I love about it, I love loops and Coda has some of the coolest and most useful content loops I've seen. How the loop works is someone can create a coda and share it publicly for the world. This can be how you create OKRs, run annual planning, build your roadmap, whatever. Every one of those codas can then be easily copied and adapted to your organization without knowing who originally even wrote it. So they're embedding the sharing of best practices of scaling companies into their core product and growth loops, which is something I'm personally passionate about.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:05):
I actually use Coda myself every day. It's the center of my writing and podcasting operation. I use it for first drafts to organize my content calendar, to plan each podcast episode on so many more things. Coda is giving listeners this podcast, $1,000 in free credit off their first statement. Just go to coda.io/lenny. That's coda.io/lenny. Hey Ashley, head of marketing and flat file. How many B2B SaaS companies would you estimate need to import CSV files from their customers?

Ashley (00:02:38):
At least 40%.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:40):
And how many of them screw that up and what happens when they do?

Ashley (00:02:43):
Well based on our data, about a third of people will consider switching to another company after just one bad experience during onboarding. So if your CSV importer doesn't work right, which is super common considering customer files are chock-full of unexpected and formatting, they'll leave.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:02):
I am 0% surprised to hear that. I've consistently seen that improving onboarding is one of the highest leverage opportunities for both signup conversion and increasing long-term retention. Getting people to your aha moment more quickly and reliably is so incredibly important.

Ashley (00:03:17):
Totally. It's incredible to see how our customers like Square, Spotify and Zuora are able to grow their businesses on top of flat file. It's because flawless data onboarding acts like a catalyst to get them and their customers where they need to go faster.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:34):
If you'd like to learn more or get started, check out Flatfile at flatfile.com/lenny. Shishir, welcome to the podcast.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:03:48):
Thank you for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:49):
I don't think I've actually shared this with you, but you're actually the very first CEO that I've had on this podcast. I actually have a rule of no founders or CEOs on the podcast, at least at this point. And you're the first person that I've let break this rule. And so how does that feel?

Shishir Mehrotra (00:04:04):
I've always been a rule breaker.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:08):
Perfect. So bio for listeners just briefly. So you're the founder and CEO of Coda. You spend six years at Google where you're a VP of product and engineering for YouTube, basically leading the YouTube product team. Spent six years at Microsoft, you're on Spotify as board of directors, you're also a prolific online writer. And that leads to my first question, which is I hear that at Coda there's a contest internally for people who actually... So maybe a little context, you encourage people to write a lot of stuff externally within Coda. You want people to be writing and you have this contest of who gets the most views and likes of people internally. And so is that true and who's winning?

Shishir Mehrotra (00:04:47):
By the way, yes, it's true. We did a similar thing at YouTube and YouTube creators. I mean obviously kicked our butts, but we made a good way to make sure we understood our tools and learned how it worked. And I think for a while at YouTube I had one of the top videos, it was a really cute video of my daughter taking everybody's orders when she was like three or four years old.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:11):
That's not fair.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:05:12):
Yeah, super cute kid is an easy trick for YouTube, but I get to learn all the tools and so on here, the equivalent at Coda is you can publish Coda Docs, they show up in the gallery coda.com/gallery, you can see lots of them. And at this point, thousands of docs when published from lots of different people, it gets millions of views. And like at YouTube, the most popular ones are not ours, but it is sometimes helpful for us to make sure that we understand how the whole system works in order to do it. So I think that the current winning doc at Coda is one in a pretty deep niche. It's from a guy named Kenny Wong on our data team, and it's an orange theory workout doc. So it turns that orange theory has this deep subculture that they all hang out together on Reddit and so on. And this doc just took off as... I don't really understand the doc, I'm not in that subculture, but it's similar to YouTube in some ways. It's like the niches are actually much bigger than people think.

(00:06:17):
Of the ones that are more work related, I think Lane Stock on two-way writeup still outranks all of mine, but I have a couple of good ones on there too. And I would say this competition exists in my family too. I don't usually even win with that in my own family, my older daughter, Annika, who also had that great video on YouTube has two docs that do really well. One is Family Quarantine Olympics, which is a thing she put together at the beginning of COVID, like a fun game for families to play. And the other one is a score tracker for a game called Ticket to Ride, which I don't know if you've ever played the game, but it's...

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:51):
Heard of it.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:06:51):
It's about the most complicated scoring system on the planet because you play the whole game and you spend 10 minutes scoring it. And she built this whole scoring calculator and that turns out to be super popular too. Anyway, but my docs do okay. But yeah, the interesting variety of what people end up doing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:07):
I love that. Which of your docs has been the most successful? Hopefully we end up talking about it.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:07:12):
I think it goes back and forth between two docs I've written one called Eigenquestions, which I think you intend to talk about, so we will get back to that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:20):
Yeah, absolutely.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:07:21):
And the other one is one I wrote a while back called Four Mitzvot Bundling. That's all about how subscriptions work and it's how I ended up on the board of Spotify with Daniel and I geeking out on bundling theory, which is a super weird hobby, but I have normal hobbies too. But I liked it. I like to explore bundling as a fun hobby and people enjoy that doc as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:41):
Yeah, you've shared a lot of good thoughts on that and we're not going to cover that because covered that in depth in many places. But just to clarify, did you write that doc and then led you to being on the board of Spotify or is that after the fact?

Shishir Mehrotra (00:07:52):
The conversation led to... It was a napkin sketch at YouTube that turned into a really fun lunch I had with Daniel, Daniel at the Spotify founder and CEO. And then he encouraged me to write it down. And for me, you write prolifically and writing for me is actually surprisingly hard. I feel like I have to think about it.

(00:08:22):
You make it seem really easy. For me he's like, "Could you write that down?" It's like, "Great. Now I'm going to take a year to write this thing down." Because you think through each part of it and you kind of come up with the right framing. I have a little review process I use for my docs that allows other people to help me make it better, which is always really helpful. But yeah, so that's how that started. So it got written down after. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:47):
So we were talking about writing and content and things like that, and that's a really good segue to the first thing I wanted to talk about, which is Black Loops and Blue Loops, which to folks that haven't heard this before might sound like some ultimate fighting nightmare scenario, but it's something that is really important to you and Coda. And so to set it up, can you just talk about what Black Loops and Blue Loops are?

Shishir Mehrotra (00:09:08):
Yeah, and it's probably worth mentioning. I think a lot of businesses have a diagram that describes their ecosystem and how it works. Sometimes it happens a little later in a company's journey. For us, we're probably three or four years in before Matt Hudson's runs our data finance teams here. He came up with this diagram and it really stuck for people. But I highly encourage drawing a diagram like this for your business. I'll flash it up on screen for a second and I'll describe it, but this is what the diagram looks like, black loop, blue loop, and it's basically the two different ways that our product spreads. The Black Loop is someone comes in, they make a doc, they share with a group of people, some subset of the people turn around and make another doc, and the process repeats itself over and over again.

(00:09:53):
The blue loop is someone comes in, makes a doc, and instead of sharing it with a team or with the collaborators, they publish it to the world. And in that process expose it to, they can choose how it should appear. What publishing in Coda is a lot like building a website. So you pick a URL, you tell us whether or not Google should be able to find it show up in the gallery and so on. And what ends up happening from that is they turn into broad promotion of Coda, but really it's about that person what they're trying to get done. And I'll stop sharing so I can talk a little about the dynamics. So I sometimes refer to them as the Microsoft Loop and the YouTube Loop because those are two inspirations for it. The Black Loop feels a lot like how documents naturally spread.

(00:10:36):
The viral actions of a document platform are shared, create, share, create. It happens over and over and over again. The best way you learn about Office or Google Docs or so on is somebody shares one with you and you're like, "Oh, that's pretty cool. I bet I could create one." And that loop can happen very, very quickly and it really drives for us a lot of how we think about how we work mostly within companies and teams, but sometimes across them as well. And so for an example, it led to our pricing model. So our pricing model is a little different than most companies in the space that we do a thing called Maker Billing. So basically all document products, all products with the document metaphor have three personas, people who can see things, people who can change things, and people who can create new things.

(00:11:18):
Basically everybody charges for the top two. They charge for editors and makers. If you can make changes then you have to pay. And that's like every document product you can think of, including ones do drawing or so on. They all do the same thing. And we decided that we're only going to chart for people when they make a document. So you think about it, you get a Coda doc, you only need one If you are using any of our paid features, you only need one paid license for doing it. And the reason we do that in terms of that diagram is I wanted no friction on the share edge. I mean the share edge for us is like that's the moment of, "Hey look, I'm doing this thing, it's so cool." And that's the moment where the line I gave to the team is I want no dollar signs in the share dial going into that, every product has its moment of how he's for growth.

(00:12:04):
And going back to YouTube, imagine you had to pay for people you shared with. Nobody would ever share anything. But that's how basically every productivity product works is the moment they charge you is when you share with somebody. The Blue Loop, I often call the YouTube loop because the emotions of publishing a doc are incredibly close to that of publishing a YouTube video. And people have all sorts of reasons why they do it. I mean sometimes people do it, there are people who do it for money, but a lot of people do it for exposure, for brand building. They just want to get an idea out in the world. They want to get feedback. Some people do it for fun, some people do it as a charitable contribution. There's lots of reasons why people do it, but the net effect of what happens is for YouTube, the vast majority of how people found out about YouTube was through a video that was shared with them.

(00:12:51):
That's sort of the impact, but it changes the dynamic that allows everyone who publishes a Coda doc, now it's a very natural incentive to go share it with the right population. If you're an orange theory, you share it with the orange theory population. If you're into plane ticket to ride, you share it with the ticket to ride population. But if you're into bundling, you try to find a small group of people that care about bundling, tell them all about that. And what happens for us is that then becomes a loop. That means that most people's exposure and almost a third of our users come through this loop. They're not actually exposed to Coda, they're exposed to a great idea for how to run an offsite or how to win ticket to ride or whatever it might be. And in that process, they learn about the product. And so then they come in through this vehicle.

(00:13:45):
And one reason it's very important is because for products like ours that are very horizontal, you get different types of users. There's some users that I call the building block thinkers, they like to build up from scratch and the blank surface of Coda is really amazing for them, but for most people that's intimidating. I don't really know what to do. Most people in the world are problem solvers. And so they start not by, "Do I need a new document?" They start with, "I've got a problem, we don't make decisions fast enough at our company," or, "My family can't figure out what to do on the weekend," or whatever it might be. And then when they find a solution to that problem, they then pick the right tool. And so the blue Loop allows us to go after that and it changes how the motion of the ecosystem works as well. But that's what Blue Loop and Blue Loop is.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:31):
Awesome. I have a bunch of questions I want to ask. The first is for founder listening to this and they're like, "Oh man, what am I loops? What's my flywheel? How do I think about my business?" Can you talk a bit about how you came upon this way of thinking about the company? And then also how do you structure your teams to work in this way if this is the way you're thinking about growth?

Shishir Mehrotra (00:14:50):
Maybe on the first part, and I think you just hosted Casey Winters, he is pretty famous for talking about loops, not funnels. And I do think there's a very natural thing when you're building a product or building a business to think about your funnel and you think about things as being linear, that somebody comes in, they go up to your signup process and then they see your onboarding and then they get exposed to the first magic moment in your product and the second magic moment, so on.

(00:15:13):
But the truth is, it doesn't really work that way. Almost all products have some form of loop. That person turns around and maybe sharing is built right in your product or maybe it's not, or maybe there's a way that it happens through advocacy, but understanding that the way products actually grow and spread happen through some type of loop not funnel, is I think pretty fundamental. So first piece of advice I'd give is you probably do have a loop. Whatever the product is, there's probably something about it that causes that loop and understanding how that works really important. I mean in terms of what it is. In our case, I'd say if you take Black Loop and Blue Loop, the Black Loop is every product in our category has that. We didn't invent it. You build a document, you put a share button on it, every product has that.

(00:16:01):
Sometimes it's just recognizing what's there. It's not that interesting. The Blue Loop on the other hand, is not something that every product in our category has. It's not really a thing that you expect to do with Google Docs or Office or so on. It's our unique take on, "Hey, we're going to build a publishing platform that isn't just for sharing ideas and building things with your team, therefore putting things out in the world." I mean, one of the best compliments we hear about the Coda Gallery is I had this user tell me, this line I really love is said that the Coda Gallery feels halfway between Medium and an app store. And you can come and you can read about anything interesting in the world and you can go shopping and say, "I need one of those. I need one of those and I need one of those."

(00:16:40):
And it's my view that this category, we call the all-in-one doc category, I think this is going to be critical. I don't think that there's enough people out there that are looking for a horizontal new blinking cursor. I mean, they exist and you can get through your first million users that way. But I think to get to the level of impact we want to have, we've got to find this problem, see here. So you probably have a loop, not a funnel, and it might be hiding in plain sight or it might require invention. That's the bounder dance and the fun of it, but finding it, writing it down I think is really helpful. Second part... Oh, how do we organize team?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:18):
Yeah, but let me ask one quick question. You said this, I think it was a data scientist that first imagined and diagram this out because I'm curious, as a founder listening, they're like, "Oh, how do I find something like this?" I imagined part of this was, "Oh, this person brought you this interesting way of thinking." And there's this process of, "Oh wow, this is cool. Let's think about this." What was that like? Just over high level, that process.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:17:41):
He currently runs data and finance for us. He's actually one of the early founding members of the team, Matt Hudson. So he is getting every job here around the go to market team. Very insightful. But honestly, the idea can come from anywhere. I mean there's a really famous loop diagram for Uber that I think one of the board members drew it or Travis drew it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:59):
Built early.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:18:01):
Yeah, right. Yeah, that napkin sketch, who knows how true that is. Probably lots of dispute on that. I think Airbnb had a similar diagram. I'm trying to remember.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:12):
We tried, we had some sketches.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:18:15):
Right. So it can come from anywhere. I do find that the most natural place to see it is just when you're talking about your business to someone, when you're pitching a customer or a candidate, I actually think candidate... I think we're going to talk a little bit about energy, but I think talking to candidates is one of the best ways to hone what your business is about. Because those people are in some ways even more critical than investors. I mean they're investing their time, not just their money. And so your ability to get across to them why this thing is going to be interesting and how it'll grow.

(00:18:50):
And they're the most discerning investors out there in a lot of ways. And they're actually not that easily confused by metrics and so on that could be temporary. And they put themselves in that picture like, "Can I see that happening?" And so for us, the black loop part is pretty obvious, but the blue loop part, you had to squint a little bit to think, "Will people really do that? Will people come and publish these documents like some hybrid between websites and blog posts and templates? What are they going to going to do and why?" And so it required a little bit of creativity, which forced me to get better and better at pitching why that's going to happen and what that role is going to feel like. And this analogy of halfway between Medium and an app store is that helped people crystallize what that promise has to feel like. So I think that... And this idea can come from anywhere, but if you want mine for your own loops, go look at what you told the last few candidates you talked to.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:48):
I like that. And then just take some attempts at drawing some kind of diagrams. That's how I thought about that when I was thinking about it. Do you find that the quality of user is different amongst the loops? I imagine one is like 80% of the growth, but maybe the other is a different type of user, maybe higher quality. I think about a little bit with Airbnb referrals drove higher quality hosts, even though it was still a small portion of all hosts. And so it was a really lucrative and interesting channel. Do you find anything like that?

Shishir Mehrotra (00:20:14):
So I mean quality and activation are a little bit different. I mean the Blue Loop definitely, there's actually three entry points on that diagram. Those people come through the Blue Loop, those people get shared through the Black Loop and those people come through the top of the funnel. There has to be like your seat population, somebody starts with blinking cursor. Nobody shared anything with them. Either a Blue Loop, a template to document or Black Loop a way the team is running. If you look at activation, retention, so on, certainly the highest is the black share. Somebody shares the document and says, "Hey, this is how we're running the staff meeting." You're just going to use it. So the job or retention there is a all different, and actually one thing that is... Actually, let me come back to that evolution. Second best is through the blue loop and then the third, the worst, the hardest is activating through the very top. And from there, roughly one in five people make it to what we think of as our activation moment, which is hard.

(00:21:14):
It's like you're going to hand somebody a new product that they didn't start with a problem on and nobody handed them a document to say, "Just work in." That's hard now. Now all our flows are really important and so on. But if you think about these three different dynamics from how you asked about how you struck your team, they're incredibly different mindsets. Because coming to the top of that diagram, we get to own the conversation. We have our opportunity to tell you what the product's about, what you should do with it, here's the minimal set of things you need to know in order to be productive and gradually reveal the other things that you might need to know, meaning the order of those things wrong, real trouble. But it's actually a minority of how people get exposed to Coda because in the black loop, the person who owns that conversation, the person sharing the document with you. If that person does it and mispositions it or doesn't just makes a crappy document or so we have to help them onboard their users, which become our users.

(00:22:11):
Same thing in the Blue Loop, that conversation is now owned by the publisher. They're really not that interested in teaching anybody about Coda. They're mostly interested in here's this really cool way to do Orange Theory, or here's this interesting way to run a meeting. And so, one of the interesting things about building platforms, which I think is a little bit different than products that get to be direct. For better or worse, most of the products I've gotten to work on are platform products. And I find that there's two very different kinds of people that like that challenge. So some people, and I think Steve Jobs was the quintessential example, if he didn't really like being a platform, the iPhone ship without an app store, they locked down the screws on the back on all the devices that nobody could open them. And his viewpoint was, " I'm going to control every element of what my users see." And on...

Shishir Mehrotra (00:23:00):
I'm going to control every element of what my users see. And on the other hand, platform thinkers, you sort of assume that my connection to my eventual user is through someone else. Like YouTube, regularly they come to work at YouTube and somebody would say, "Well, here's what happened last night." And sometimes it's heartwarming, like, oh, my gosh, this kid bit this other kid's finger and it took off like crazy and this Korean pop star just broke through the billion view mark before everybody else did. And sometimes it was not heartwarming and you don't get to control that because that's part of being a platform.

(00:23:37):
And so it does change how you think about the way you run the team because if you have a loop where your community ecosystem users on control that narrative, then you have to incorporate that. Another close analogy I think is Airbnb and the famous story of them taking pictures of people's apartments. It's like they had to reach out and try to control that and eventually you can't do that. You had to sit back and let people market their hotels. And thankfully the ecosystem got good at it, but they kind of had a similar dynamic, I think.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:12):
Absolutely. With Airbnb, pricing is even more of a challenge where a lot of hosts don't really know what to price. They think their place is worth a lot more and we can't tell them the price. There's laws around that. And so it's like, hey, maybe you want to price it at this rate if you know what's good for you. So it's a lot of encouraging. So yeah, I've seen that in action. So you talked about teams and how you think about structuring them a bit and that's a good segue to our second topic, which is around a book that I hear you're writing called The Rituals of Great Teams.

(00:24:40):
And I think what you're doing there is exploring rituals that have emerged at some of the more successful companies. And so just a question there, one, how'd you get interested in rituals, so much so that you decided to write a book, which is such a trudge and endless amount of work? And just yeah, where is it at, how's it going? And then I'll ask you a few more questions there.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:24:59):
The writing a book, so I'm writing this book, it's called Rituals of Great Teams. And when I signed up to do it, I thought it was going to take six months. I'm now almost two years in [inaudible 00:25:11] my manuscript in four months and I am probably half done. So there's a lot of work ahead of us in building, but it's one of the most fun projects I've ever done. So the history behind this was, as in many cases, is a lot of sort of odd luck and happenstance. I got hosted right at the start of the pandemic. I was interviewed for a different podcast called Masters of Scale by Reid Hoffman. And the way Reid records, which I'm not sure I would recommend this, but he does it a little bit differently than you do. You sit down with no idea what you're going to talk about and you talk for three hours.

(00:25:49):
And then he has a group of editors, the same group that actually at its head, and they come in and they pick 20 minutes of it and they turn and one episode. And you have no idea what it's going to be, so you talk and talk and talk and gets 20 minutes out and they're pretty good at getting to a nugget. So they picked out of this whole discussion this part that I thought was really small and it was Reid had asked me for one of my favorite quotes and I talked about this quote from a guy named Bing Gordon. People don't know Bing. Bing was one of the founders of Electronic Arts. He's a famous investor, Amazon, Zynga, so owns lots of great companies. And I happened to sit on a board with Bing and he used this line. I think Bing's one of the best non-linear thinkers in The Valley. Always learned something with Bing.

(00:26:29):
And he used this line that really stuck with me. He said great companies has a very small list of golden rituals. And there are three rules of golden rituals. Number one, they're named. Number two, every employee knows them by their first Friday and, number three, they're templated. And he has great examples. Amazon has six pagers and Google has OKRs and Salesforce has V2MOM and there's all these different rituals that people do. And I ended up sharing on the podcast a little bit about what Coda's golden ritual is. If you were to ask a set of Coda employees on their first Friday what Coda's golden ritual is, they would almost certainly tell you about this thing we do called Dory/Pulse. It's sort of the key of how we run meetings and do write-ups and so on. It's a pretty simple idea, is that in our write-ups and in our meetings, instead of going around the room and hearing what everybody thinks, we do this thing called Pulse.

(00:27:26):
Everybody writes down what they think and we hide everybody else's until you're done writing. So you force yourself to be eloquent about your opinion, on the record about it, and unbiased. And then the second thing we do is called Dory, which is instead of randomly asking questions, we ask people to put the questions on the table and then we take a round of up quoting and down voting them to actually figure out what we're going to talk about. Dory's named after the fish who asks all the questions. It's a tool we use a lot at Google that we kind of turned into this mini tool. If you were to ask a set of Coda employees on the first Friday about Coda's golden rituals with Bing's three tests, they'll certainly talk about Dory and Pulse. And it's not because they're meeting wonks. It's because it's indicative of the culture of the team.

(00:28:08):
And so I'll regularly hear employees say things like, "I just joined Coda. It's been a week. It's amazing. The culture is so open that I got to ask a question in a meeting and it outvoted the CEOs." Or they'll say, "I got asked for my contribution to this really hard decision we're making and it was thoughtfully presented. I had space to be able to do it well without bias and it was actually read and considered as part of the decision making process." Reid's podcast did pretty well and I got all these questions about rituals and so I decided to do a dinner which turned into a dinner series. And basically every third Wednesday we would host a group of people to share the rituals with each other. And I learned a bunch of stuff in this process.

(00:28:54):
I've now interviewed over 1,000 people for this book and There's lots of really interesting rituals that come out of it, but first thing I learned is people love sharing their rituals. I've interviewed people from many companies that everybody's heard of, Nike, Disney, New York Times. It's all the way down to many startups that maybe people haven't heard of or companies in industries that people don't talk a lot about. Book authors, pundits, lots of different people that have come through this process. Everybody loves sharing their rituals. Everybody has little secrets to how they run their business, but for some reason the how we work part everybody's very willing to share. People also love hearing about them. And I was like, "Is this going to be interesting for a dinner, geeking out about how a team works?" And it turns out not only do people like hearing about it, it's the littlest details that matter. It's like, yeah, we kind of do that, too, but we have this issue.

(00:29:46):
How'd you get past this? And you start discovering that actually those little details are what would make or break a thing, that you can't quite do it the exact same way. And then the other thing I realized, which is probably the most important point, is that rituals are, I like to say that they are, a mirror of culture. That one of the attendees, Dharmesh Shah, founder of HubSpot and very thoughtful person, he talked a lot about this thing that is virtually presented as something called flash tags, which is a really cool example. But Dharmesh talked about how when we're building companies, we actually build two products. We build one for our customers and we build another one for our employees. That's actually how we work part of it. That's the term he uses for that, is culture. That's the product we build for our employees.

(00:30:29):
I think it's a very interesting way to define what culture is. Interestingly, when you ask people about their culture, hey, what's the culture of Google, or Airbnb, or so on, the way they'll answer the question is through rituals. They'll say here's what we do and the way you know this is what we do is through this ritual that's in place. So I thought that was pretty interesting. Started off just building a little listicle of here's all the great rituals and then I started realizing that actually the comparison between them is kind of interesting. And so I started sort of filling in the gaps between them of like when would you do X versus Y and what did I learn through that process? Publisher asked if I would turn it into a book and I agreed without really contemplating how hard it would be. And it's become what most of my evenings end up being on this.

(00:31:17):
I have a wonderful co-writer, Erin Dame, who's incredibly gracious with her time and helping me sort through the best ideas and the worst ideas, but it's a really fun project.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:29):
What are some of the more wacky and/or impactful rituals that you've come across that you can share?

Shishir Mehrotra (00:31:36):
Boy. I'd sort it down the list. I'll tell you some that are interesting and recognizable. One of the most fun ones is from Arianna Huffington and she shared a ritual called Reset. And there's a bit of background on Arianna, she's well known for Huffington Post. She now runs Thrive. She had an accident a few years back and ended up going through a period of doing a lot of research on how the brain works and ended up coming to this set of conclusions about how you can affect your own brain chemistry. And one of the things she does as a sort of personal ritual is I think called a reset.

(00:32:13):
It's basically the ritual is you make a one minute video that is personal. And they have a little template for doing it, but it's a breathing exercise. It's like you are supposed to play it while you do this breathing exercise, but it's personal. So it's like her video, you go search YouTube for Arianna's reset, you'll find it. It has pictures of her kids, it has quotes she loves, it has videos of her hometown in Greece and so on, but the way she brought it to the team was they start meetings by randomly picking someone. They call it spin the wheel. They randomly pick someone and they play their reset. And the idea is you get this two for one where everybody gets a little bit the brain chemistry rewiring of 60 second breathing exercise. Everybody gets back into that sort of zen state a little bit and you learn a little bit about each other.

(00:33:05):
And she was saying that the pictures people pick and so are interesting, but actually the music people pick is probably the most interesting. A lot of people pick calm music, some people will pick something they rock out to, but everybody does their reset a little bit differently. So that was a really fun one. Another really fun one that I was surprised by, Gusto does this thing in their hiring calls. So you get an offer from Gusto and apparently when you get on the offer call of congratulations, you got an offer, instead of just meeting the recruiter, which is what most companies do, they have the entire group of people that interviewed you join the call and they all say something about why you're amazing and you should join Gusto.

(00:33:46):
And it's such an interesting ritual in so many ways. For the candidate, obviously what an amazing experience. To use an Airbnb term, that's like a level 11 experience of what that feels like, but also for the company. One of the questions I get asked, "What if I voted no? What if I'd said this person is a no hire?" And I said, "It doesn't matter. You're on the call, you're going to work with this person, you're going to help them feel welcome and you're going to help them understand where they stand." I think it obviously takes a bunch of time, but it also is a signal to the company of how important hiring is and something that obviously we all prioritize. Those are maybe a couple of the maybe different ones that people might not have heard of before.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:31):
Those are amazing examples. Have you integrated any of these rituals from other companies doing this research into Coda?

Shishir Mehrotra (00:34:37):
All the time and it's the cheapest form of research. I mean, I get to borrow all these great ideas from all these companies. We just added one to our decision making process. This is a good example of a little detail that really matters, is Coinbase has a ritual that's formed around ... This is a decision-making ritual they call ... It's actually amazing how many companies have a decision-making ritual with a name, with a bur. So at Square, Vocal called them Spades. He kind of verbified it. There's a template, but you use Bing's three tenants. It's got to be named, every employee knows it by the first Friday and it's templated.

(00:35:18):
So Coinbase does a thing they call rapids and rapid is a framing around what the roles in it are, the responsible approver, participating, informed and decider, but their technique of doing it was really interesting. They have this subtle nudge thing that we weren't doing that I've now incorporated at Coda. So at Coda we have Dory and Pulse, like a very common ritual. It spread through a lot of different companies that use Coda. You don't really have to use Coda to do it, but I think Coda is pretty good at it. But one of the things we were facing was that you would do this pulse and so you'd have a meeting. And if you did it wrong, it could feel like voting and it could feel like consensus building.

(00:36:04):
And so we would get this, people would talk about it and every ritual has its pro and con, but people would look at it and say very open culture, you're allowed to share whatever you want. But on the other side for the person that's trying to make a decision, it can feel like, oh, my God, I now have 30 pieces of feedback. Am I supposed to wait for all 30 of them to be yes? Am I supposed to wait for it to be a majority and how do I know? What am I supposed to do here? And so Coinbase had this really simple idea that we sort of smushed together, which was at the top of their rapids they named who all the people were and then next to each one they put a little box that said what is the decision from that person?

(00:36:44):
They just organized. It's very similar to Pulse, but they kind of organized them and said everybody that's in the inform bucket, they can comment, that's totally fine, but we really care about the approvers, the responsible and then of course the decider, the one that really matters. And so we just added a column to our Pulse, which is what is the role? And we grouped the table by that. And the other thing that Coinbase does, which it sounds really subtle and small, but really in detail it really matters, is the person running the meeting pre-fills that with what they want from that person. You are an approver. Maybe I have three approvers because I have a budget approver and I have a marketing approver and I have a sales approver, whatever it might be, and I need you to give me this answer. I don't need you to comment on everything I'm doing, but I need you to tell me do we have the budget or not?

(00:37:31):
Or I need you to tell me am I authorized to make this change in this part of the product that we generally don't change, or can I change the onboarding flow, or whatever it might be? And we took a process that I think was doing a pretty good job of getting rid of groupthink, which is really the heart of what we were doing with Pulse, but had this danger of being overly leaning towards consensus building to a fault. I think consensus building is a good thing, but consensus building to a fault is not. And we sort of stole this one from Coinbase and we switched it in and it got better. And that's a good example very recently.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:05):
I feel like you have a clear bestseller on your hands here and I can't wait to read this. I almost feel like you have an unfair advantage right now having all these insights before you share them, being able to execute so much more efficiently.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:38:17):
Well, yeah, it's interesting. I'm obviously not trying to keep any of it a secret, so the whole point of publishing it is because I think other people will enjoy it and can get benefit out of it. But if people are interested, one of the other choices I made in writing this book is I decided to do it somewhat in the open. So there's what I call the rituals of great teams brain trust. And so if you just search for me and Rituals of Great Teams, you'll find it. And I'm sure we can add the link to the show notes, but you can sign up. And basically, as I finish a chapter, I put it out to the group and there's now a few hundred people that are helping me co-edit this thing.

(00:38:55):
Some of them just because some of them come in and give me help on storytelling, grammar, so on, but a lot of them are contributing where they show up and they say, "Hey, you missed this one. We actually do that, but we do this other thing a little bit differently and you should really talk about that." Because I kind of view it as it started as a dinner series. It started with everybody's going to give to each other. And so I kind of wanted to bring that into the writing process. It's also a cheap way to get some pretty good editors and it pretty helpful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:23):
I love that. That is really smart. This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation AB testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like Netlify, Contentful and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern grow team stack. This leads to wasted time building internal tools or trying to run your experiments through a clunky marketing tool. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved about our experimentation platform was being able to easily slice results by device, by country and by user stage. Eppo does all that and more, delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytic cycles and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover.

(00:40:14):
Eppo lets you go beyond basic click-through metrics and instead use your north star metrics like activation, retention, subscriptions and payments. And Eppo supports tests on the front end, the backend, email marketing and even machine learning clients. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com, get E-P-P-O.com and 10X your experiment velocity.

(00:40:36):
And How have you found these rituals form for someone that's listening and are like, "We need some rituals, we need to move more effectively." How do these come up? Are they just organically organized? Do they come in from other and they evolve? Is it founder driven? What have you found so far? I know you're still working on the book, but curious.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:40:53):
There's a whole section of the book on ... I get this question a lot of how do I find the rituals we have? How do I adjust the rituals to match? Are they supposed to change? There's lots of things you see because some rituals are great when you're 100 people and they're terrible when you're 1,000. And you should actively change those things. Some are great in what sometimes people call peacetime versus wartime. You should do this during this time, but you should actively not do it when you're in this other time. And actually, that in itself is a ritual. I mean, every company has some form of a war room ritual that is ... I guess Facebook I was learning. We did a dinner last night, so I learned a little bit about it. Facebook apparently calls them lockdowns, which is a term I hadn't heard before, but apparently it's well understood. When they say lockdown, everybody knows exactly what it means.

(00:41:37):
It's like we no longer do the goal setting process, you drop this type of work and everybody just knows this is what it means. But I would say that when we talk to people about rituals, a set of rituals that happen organically. I mean, those are the easiest. Dory and Pulse for us was one of the product managers running a meeting just thought it was we're a distributed first culture, but hadn't really adapted to it properly. And this product manager is just annoyed at waiting around on Zoom for everybody to go around and say their piece and it just took forever. And by the end everybody's like, "Can we just pause? Everybody just write down what you think." And he just happened to do it in this thoughtful way and it just took off. And so some rituals grow organically and you just got to wait for them to do it.

(00:42:24):
But there are cases where companies actively form a ritual to drive a certain behavior. And the best advice I've given on this topic is to read one of my other favorite books. It's a book called Switch. It's by Chip and Dan Heath. All their books are amazing, but they also wrote Decisive and Made to Stick and Moments and so on. But this one is, if I could recommend five books, this would take two slots on the list. And the subtitle of the book is How to Change Things When Change is Hard. And the basic idea of the book is they use this analogy of a writer on an elephant on a path. And when you're trying to change things, you have three options for what you can do and it actually kind of maps to Bing's analogy. So you can direct the writer, so you can tell people what to do.

(00:43:13):
You can motivate the elephant, so you can give this thing a kick in the butt and it's going to move. You don't know exactly where it's going to move, but it's going to move. And you can shape the path. Shape the path is I'm going to set this way up so that you can only do these things. The way I think about it is direct the writer, tell people what to do. That's why if you look at Bing's tests, that's why you teach employees this before the first writing. You tell people this is what we do. And so some rituals, how do you get this ritual to work? You put it in your new hire onboarding and you make it work that way. Motivate the elephant, a lot of that's about branding. So what do you do with rituals? It's an amazing number of rituals where I'll tell people that seems like a great ritual.

(00:43:51):
I would highly encourage you to give it a name. Give it something that lets people anchor ideas to. Names a very powerful thing. If I said, "Yeah, at Coda we do voting and sentiment writing or something," I don't even know what you would say. It would sound boring. It wouldn't sound like something you could brag about, something you could form identity around. And so it's very important to give it a name. And then finally, why do you shape the path or you set things up? You templatize, make it as easy as possible to follow this ritual. And make it just a part of what we do enough, then if you're at Gusto and you're like, "I don't really understand that hiring cult thing," where it's like guess what? You're going to be invited to one soon.

(00:44:28):
You're going to see it and then you're going to have to do it. Or if you're at Square, you're going to see the spade template and you're going to learn how to do it. So I think Switch is ... I recommend this book for lots of purposes, but as you're thinking about rituals for your teams, it's a particularly relevant frame.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:45):
Awesome. By the way, that's a little plug for the YouTube version of this podcast, which is now a thing we do. So if you're like, hey, I don't see what you're talking about, just search for Lenny's podcast, YouTube, and I think you'll find it and we'll probably link to the ad in the show notes. I'm also reminded of Airbnb's rituals, which you probably already know about, but they're kind of all hilarious and weird. One is formal Friday, where people dress up in suits and gowns on Fridays. Another is a human tunnel for all new employees, where every new employee has to run through a human tunnel and jump into a beanbag or something. And then there's a new hire tea time, where new hires drink some tea with some veterans and chat about where they're from and things like that. There's a bunch more, but those are the ones that are my favorite.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:45:27):
Those are great. I also included some of the level 11 thinking as well. I think that's also a good Chesky favorite. Brian also has another one that's in the book that's about how to rank your to-do list by finding leverage. That's a really fun one as well. They're like don't rank your to-do list, but a lot of people do importance versus urgency or so on. And I guess he sorts his by which of these is most likely to create leverage of getting rid of the rest of my lists, which I thought was very ... I started doing that in my to- do list and it's very interesting and impactful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:02):
That's actually an incredible segue ...

Shishir Mehrotra (00:46:00):
... you listen, it's very interesting and impactful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:02):
That's actually an incredible segue to our next topic, which are eigenquestions.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:46:06):
Ah, yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:08):
And so eigenquestions, one of your most classic posts, you mentioned this at the top, maybe your one of the most liked posts, other than maybe bundling. It sounds like some kind of German game show, eigenquestions. Can you tell us what eigenquestions are, and then I'm going to ask you a few more questions around that?

Shishir Mehrotra (00:46:22):
I've thought about the German game question.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:26):
Yeah, sorry [inaudible 00:46:27].

Shishir Mehrotra (00:46:29):
I didn't know this would be a very interesting game, but we could try to create one. Okay, so I'll describe what eigenquestions are, but maybe I'll start by telling you a little bit about where the concept came from. And, this is actually a YouTube-ism that... Maybe just to place ourselves in history, so in 2008 I joined YouTube. And many people don't remember this, but YouTube at the time was seen as a mistake. It was seen as Google's first bad acquisition, everything else had worked, but this thing kind of seemed like a disaster. It was grainy videos, we were losing lots of money, we had billions of dollars in lawsuits, none of it really seemed that obvious. There's lots of discussion on how to reorient it, fix it, and so on. And so everybody outside, that's what they saw.

(00:47:14):
If you stepped inside a YouTube staff meeting in 2008, actually one of the toughest questions we were answering was this question we called the Modern Family question. And it may sound small, but it actually was very perplexing. And the question was pretty simple, the question was if you looked at our search traffic at YouTube, one of the top five queries basically every week was for a show called Modern Family. And Modern Family was number one show on television at the time, by far the most popular. And we were second-biggest search engine in the world behind our parent company Google, so search traffic was very important. There was one big problem, people would come search for Modern Family, one big problem, we didn't have Modern Family on YouTube. And so we'd give them some pretty crappy responses. And the question was... And by the way, ABC.com had decided to post every episode of Modern Family live on their website.

(00:48:06):
Which nowadays is kind of typical, but in 2008 that was not typical, no is it kind of a big gamble they made, and they're going to post all these shows. So the question was, should we answer the query Modern Family by linking off to ABC.com? Do we link out or not? And the company basically divided. And so there's half the company, mostly the product team, vantage team and so on kind of aligned around a viewpoint that was, "That's what the user wants, link them off to ABC.com. We're not owned by Google, Google tries hard to prioritize, do right by the user, the rest will follow. That seems like the right thing to do, so let's do that." And then the other half of the company, most of the business function, sales, marketing, especially content partnership said, "Please, please, please don't do that. If you do that and you start linking off to all these other places, nobody's ever going to put good content on YouTube, and we're just going to get the stuff that doesn't deserve to live anywhere else. And that's not a very good path to be."

(00:48:59):
And you can imagine that those two mindsets, it's almost like it was good versus evil debate, which is do right by the user or the business. These are all almost impossible to solve problems. And this would happen meeting after meeting after meeting, did we make a decision yet? Modern Family, what are we going to do? So we had this offsite, we said we're going to spend the whole day, and we're going to figure this problem. And we went up to this hotel in Half Moon Bay, and the executive team all sat down, and I was asked to frame the discussion, go collect everybody's opinions, and collect all the data, and just ground it all in facts. And then we're going to have a discussion, we're going to reach a decision. And so the night before I'm sitting and thinking about, how the hell we going to have this discussion not just be a shouting match of this good versus evil position?

(00:49:46):
And I happened to read a analysis that was being done by a different team at Google, the Google shopping team, where they were facing this interesting challenge of they were in this deep fight with Amazon, and they were getting their butts kicked, and they were trying to figure out why. And the walking in theory was, the Google shopping team's view was why would anybody ever go in to Amazon? You could come to Google, and we had indexed all of Amazon and the entire internet, why would you ever pick Amazon? And the feedback that was coming back from users was they'd say, "I picked Amazon because I value consistency over comprehensiveness." They would say things like, "I really value that I go to amazon.com and I understand how the reviews work and how the ratings work, and I know that the returns work the way I want and I understand the shipping is going to work. And it just felt consistent. I know it doesn't have everything, but it has enough. And I value consistency over comprehensiveness."

(00:50:43):
And so the night before this YouTube meeting, I decided to reframe the question and say, let's not have the discussion about linking out at all. We're going to start by having a theoretical discussion about, in a decade from now, is the online video market more likely to be about consistency or about comprehensiveness? And that is a question that you can have a very reasonable debater. What are the reasons why a market evolves towards consistency over comprehensiveness? And we basically have this discussion and we all came to the conclusion this market is going to value consistency over comprehensiveness.

(00:51:17):
And by the way, I think, I mean now almost 15 years later, I think we're right. If you go look at video market obviously it exploded. There's so many great video properties out there, none of them are comprehensive. There is no one-stop shop or a place where all the video exists. And so I think we were right. But what happened was by answering that question, the link out question all of a sudden became super easy. We value consistency over comprehensive. We definitely don't need to link out. In fact, we should make a whole bunch of other decisions as well. So we went and at the time we used to, this was the days of flashed players and so on, we embedded other people's players on YouTube. We stopped doing that as well. Probably the most famous decision we made was with the iPhone.

(00:51:56):
As I mentioned earlier, the iPhone when it first shipped had no app store. And so they built all the first few apps including YouTube. And so here we were a few years later, iPhone the most popular phone on the planet and the YouTube app on the iPhone was built by a team at Apple and they had not been able to keep up with what we were doing. Almost half the catalog didn't play back on the iPhone, they were missing a bunch of features and so on.

(00:52:17):
So I drove down to Cupertino and I sat down with Scott and Phil and said, "Hey, we're going to have to take back the YouTube app." And they said, "I don't understand. Why would you do that? You have default distribution on, as far as they were concerned, the most important operating system in the world. Why would you do that? You're going to have to rebuild all this from scratch and it just seems like a really bad choice." And I said, "No, no, it's actually quite an easy choice. We value consistency over comprehensiveness. We would much rather be on fewer phones with a more consistent experience than be on all of them with an inconsistent experience." So what, this is a choice we're making and it worked out fairly well.

(00:52:51):
So this decision, the Modern Family question ended up becoming named as the example for a term called eigenquestion. So eigenquestions, it's not a German game show, it is a made up word and it's named after a math concept called eigenvectors. And the math is not really necessary, but for people who are curious, go back to linear algebra, eigenvectors are in a multidimensional space. They're the most discriminating vectors of the vectors in that space, the dimensions of that space, it's a concept that gets used a lot in machine learning and so on, but actually the math doesn't really matter. The eigenquestion, the simplest definition of eigenquestion, it's the question that when answered also answers the most subsequent questions.

(00:53:35):
And it's a very simple idea that when you sit down and you say, hey, here's all these questions we ought to answer, how do we all usually rank them? Sometimes we rank them just by what order we came up with them. Sometimes we rank them by importance, which is the most impactful decision we're going to make. But this methodology says don't rank them that way. Rank them, like you said, [inaudible 00:53:53] thing about about leverage, same idea, rank them by which ones would eliminate the most other questions of the list. So you take that list and you said, should we link out to Modern Family? Should we own the YouTube iPhone app? Should we do... mind you, those were really hard questions to answer. But turns out if you answered just one question, do we value consistency over comprehensiveness, you answer all the others. They all of a sudden become very simple.

(00:54:13):
And so this idea of eigenquestion became part of our vocabulary, became a clear ritual for YouTube, that is, what is the eigenquestion, here at Dish for Coda as well, it sort of spread through other places, but that's the basic idea.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:26):
Amazing. What a baller move with Apple.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:54:30):
Pretty scary move, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:31):
Yeah. But I was just going to say, I think YouTube's probably in the top five, 10 most downloaded apps. So it worked out.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:54:38):
We'd go for that meeting and I bring along the product manager for the iPhone app named Andrey Doronichev, and he's the one having to explain what we're going to do and so on. And it's a hard contentious meeting. And as we're leaving the meeting, he says, "Hey, can I get a selfie with Bill and Scott?" Andrey, what are you doing? There's this great picture of him with us asking for, take this back. And clearly he's very starstruck. There's a lot of people with view as like, Apple would do a better job of building the YouTube app than us. Who are we to tell them to not do that? Of course, in retrospect, that was a silly way to think about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:17):
Wow. I would do the same thing. That's amazing. Who's this person? Because that's awesome. I love that as a leader you bring the PM of the team working on it versus just the big shots at the top.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:55:29):
Yeah, Andrey, he's now a founder. He started a company called OPTIC, basically building content ID for NFTs, which is a much needed thing in the Web3 world. But yeah, I mean the team building it, I mean, that meeting I brought my partnerships lead and I brought the ENCH lead that was covering the area too. And yeah, I think that some of it is, if I had to be honest, some of it is like they really wanted to come and meet with Apple. Some of it is like, for my own sake, I kind of wanted some backup. I'm about to make this kind of bold ass... And to Apple's credit, I mean they could have been pretty bad about it. I mean they could have not allowed us on the store and so on.

(00:56:09):
And they said, "Okay, well we don't like it, but we understand your choice. You have to know that you're going to start from zero. We're not giving you a single download for free. You're going to have to start from zero and we will brick the current app right on the agreed upon date." And the negotiation was can you please just tell those people that there's a new app? And so that's what we negotiated out of it and they eventually did that and that was fine. And in the end, YouTube is now one of the top downloaded apps on iPhones I think. I mean, it was like six months after launch, we had like 80% share. Everybody downloaded the app. And so it kind of ended up not being that much of a comprehensiveness choice, but it was a clearly hard decision made much easier by asking the right eigenquestion first.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:55):
Wow. Speaking of eigenquestions, are there other examples of eigenquestions that come to mind to make this even more concrete in people's minds? I don't know if that's the right way to frame it or is it more just when you have a list of questions, look for the one that'll answer the most. How do you operationalize this concept?

Shishir Mehrotra (00:57:13):
There's lots of them. I mean for Coda, the sort of most conceptual eigenquestion for Coda was, we use a line a lot for Coda, that Coda allows anyone to make a doc as powerful as an app. You can reverse that statement and say, allow anyone to make an app as easily as a doc. And those two sound similar, but they're not. They're actually quite different statements. And so our most commonly debated eigenquestion is, are we more committed to being a doc or being an app? And which way do we want people, if people are going to misunderstand Coda, would we rather them perceive it as a document or perceive it as an app? And we decided on doc, which is actually... And the way I cemented that decision when we made it was I named the company that way, where Coda is a doc backwards.

(00:57:56):
I said, "Well, we're definitely not revisiting this one. Coda is a doc first." That's a good example. I mean, another one, by the way, I would say eigenquestions is a term that a guy could resonance itself, but it's a hard technique. It's not always easy to know how to do it. And one of the things I get asked a lot it's like, is it a skill you can learn? I absolutely think it's a skill you can learn. It's a thing that once you observe it, you get better at it, you can learn it, but it's not easy to learn it. And one of my observations by learning skills like these is, you want to learn them in non-pressure filled environment. To use an analogy, if you were trying to learn a sport or learn an instrument or so on, imagine if you never did practice, every time you played basketball was in a real basketball game and every time you played the piano was in a recital, you probably would never get better.

(00:58:50):
And I think one of the troubles with the concept like eigenquestions is, we tend to only practice it in real world scenarios that are high stakes. And so one of the things I encourage people to do is to practice eigenquestion in completely almost frivolous situations. So I have an interview question I ask, which I think, and maybe we'll get to this a little bit later as well, but it's a very simple question and it's a coded eigenquestion test. And the question is, a group of scientists have invented a teleportation device. They've hired you, Lenny, to be their sort of business counterpart, bring this to market product... Well, this question actually worked well for any role. But say you could be a product manager for this thing, bring it to market and what do you do? That's the whole question.

(00:59:40):
Usually people will start asking a bunch of questions and say, "Well, tell me more about this device. What does it do? How does it work? And is it big? Is it small? Is it vast? Does it disintegrate things or not? Does it need a receiver and a sender? It's safe?" And all these different questions come out and at some point I'll just let those questions come out and at some point I'll say, " Okay, nice job generating all the questions." Turns out these scientists, they kind of hate talking to people and they're kind of annoyed by all your questions. And so they've decided that they will answer only two of your questions and after that they expect a plan. What two questions do you ask?

(01:00:16):
And interestingly, all of a sudden the sharp product managers, engineers, so basically every role, they very quickly find what are the one or two eigenquestions on this topic. And there's no right answer, but I'll tell you one of my favorite ones is as a product manager said, "Okay, if I had to ask two questions, the two question I would ask, one is, is it safe enough for humans or not?"

(01:00:39):
And I would say a very crisp way to get to just safety, how reliable it is, they didn't ask how reliable it is, how many bits in middle, just tell me is it safe enough for humans or not? And the second one is, is it more expensive CapEx or OpEx? Is it more expensive to buy them or to run them? And then he took those two questions and he said, "Just with those two questions, I can form these quadrants." And you can say, oh, it's safe enough for humans and they're very cheap to buy, but expensive to run. Then you probably run them like human fax machines. You put them everywhere you can and you say, "Hey look, it's expensive to use, but you'll have the ability to teleport anywhere you want and this is how we're going to run it."

(01:01:17):
On the other hand, they're very expensive to buy, but cheap to run. You probably have to place them very strategically, in which case what you'd probably do is replace airports. Because airports are pretty strategically placed in places where people are trying to get around places. If it's not safe enough for humans, then you've got a whole different class of use cases where you go value what goods are transported in very costly ways. And people come up with, do you do the most expensive things or is teleporting people's replacement hearts, is that a really demanding thing? But these two questions kind of get to the heart of it. The question's totally made up. No teleportation device exists, at least not yet. And I find that people's ability to learn the method is significantly higher if it's low stakes.

(01:02:05):
That question by the way, if you ask a kid that question, the hey new teleportation device, you get to ask two questions, almost every kid will quickly get to two pretty good eigenquestions. Again, kids are incredibly good at simplifying these things down. It's actually a skill we remove from ourselves. I'll hear candidates tell me things like, well, I guess I would ask them what size it is. And they're like, "Why would you ask them what size, what decision is that going to allow you to make, to know what size it is?" And sometimes I can explain it, but sometimes not, don't get hired.

(01:02:36):
But then actually the thing I'd say about it is there are eigenquestions everywhere. You can take any product out there. I'll do it with my kids a lot and they'll say, I was just riding with my younger daughter and she said, "How come there's three gas stations in the same corner? Why do people do that?" That's a really insightful observation. What's the eigenquestion? How do you place a gas station? And it's like a bread nose. And you can almost take anything and say, what is the question that really drives this answer?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:08):
I love that. Do you actually still ask this question because you're sharing it in all the answers?

Shishir Mehrotra (01:03:13):
No, I don't. And I have a new one that I can't share, but we've written about it. In fact, one of big debates about publishing the eigenquestions thing is, in order to bring this to life, I needed to answer your question, how do I test this? How do I practice this? And it is much easier, nobody can repeat the YouTube one. Nobody has that choice sitting in front of them. So it's kind of a useless, it's entertaining, but as a teaching tool, it's kind of useless because you can't really go reinvent history and decide consistent versus comprehensive.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:40):
Yeah, had to sacrifice one.

Shishir Mehrotra (01:03:42):
We sacrifice one, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:44):
So pull on that threat further and dive a little deeper into evaluating talent and product talent. I hear this is one of your superpowers and so I'd love to learn from you and what you've seen around how to evaluate talent. So you talked a little about interview questions you ask, so maybe we could either go in that direction or just what do you look for in people that you're hiring, interviewing that maybe other people aren't?

Shishir Mehrotra (01:04:05):
I have a technique for it. I'll show a quick picture.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:09):
YouTube plug?

Shishir Mehrotra (01:04:10):
Yeah, YouTube plug. I mentioned it before the call, you can put video on Spotify now too, but the-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:16):
Spotify plug. All your platforms that you've worked on now can plug my videos.

Shishir Mehrotra (01:04:21):
That's right. So I'll talk through this diagram that has two axes scope, this acronym, PSHE, and this line. So I'll stop sharing and describe it and we can come back to it. But I'll tell a little bit of this technique sort of changed how I think about evaluating not only product talent, but it actually turns out you can use the same set of rules for evaluating basically every role. But I'll tell it from how you asked it about product talent.

(01:04:44):
So 2011, Larry Page took over at Google and he made a bunch of changes to the company, mostly quite positive. And one of the ones he did was he moved us from being a functional organization to being a business unit organization. We call them product units, but roughly the same thing. And there were eight product units set at Google, YouTube and Search and Ads and Chrome and Maps and so on. And that's very positive. It's hard to believe that we were already like 20,000 people were still functional, like all of engineering, all the products on reported into the CEO just seems like totally crazy with the breadth of products that we covered.

(01:05:16):
One of the downsides of it was, like in any functional to business unit switch, as you lose some of that what does the function mean. And in particular things like what is a good product manager was a question we were at risk of losing. So at the time I was running product for YouTube, the group of the eight product leaders around the company got together and said, "Hey, we need to keep some level of consistency amongst how we think about what's a great product manager or it's all going to diverge and it's not going to mean anything anymore."

(01:05:48):
Actually, as a fun aside, we did a ritual that I've repeated a few times, but it isn't done often enough is, we said, "So who's going to drive this process?" And we did it in an election. I don't know why we do elections in the public world, but not in the private world, but it's actually quite effective. We used to do them on YouTube where we would elect into certain roles and you got a one-year term, you gave a little speech you like [inaudible 01:06:08]. We did an election. Anyway, so I got chosen to be the first sort of leader of this challenge, keeping the product management function together at Google. And the most obvious job we had to do was come up with a speech for the Calibration Committee. So Google does calibration a little bit different or promotion a little bit different than most companies.

(01:06:32):
Most companies your boss decides you get promoted or not. At Google, there's a committee that decides, and it's supposed to be a committee that doesn't actually work directly with the person, so it can be a little unbiased and so on. And it gets done. The ritual was to do it in a hotel near the airport here in San Francisco and everybody get in these different rooms. And there was always a speech given at the beginning that used to be given by Jonathan Rosenberg who ran product for Google for many years. And now it had to be given by somebody. So I'm going to give this speech, now I've got to figure out what the hell am I going to say, what's a good product manager.

(01:07:02):
And as I was going through this, I decided to run this little exercise. So this group of eight product leaders, we took the level guides, we had a level guide for product managers, every company does, and we took it, we printed out a sheet of paper, cut it into little slices, one per level, and we cut off the title and the number and I handed them out and I said, "Can you reverse identify what level you're holding?"

(01:07:22):
Then turns out nobody could do it. And it's not easy to do. The level guide had been kind of added to over time and not really that refined. And so it's full of all sorts of things that were whatever at that time was the priority of the team, they stuck it in a level guide. And so it would say things like, this person can manage a medium-sized project and they interview at least three people a week and they always send the notes out on time and their expense reports are always filed. And it'd be like, oh, that's a director. And it's just whatever we were trying to incent was sort of stuck in this thing. But we noticed that if you took all these sheets of paper and laid them out side by side, you could order them by exactly one statement, which was one that corresponded to scope.

(01:08:12):
And so there's some word in there that was an escalating adjective that mostly correlated to how big is the thing you run. And so we decided, okay, well we're going to standardize. We're just going to focus on making that clear. And so we said we're going to define scope and so that we all use it the same way. And we came up with some stopping points and basically said, you own a feature, you own a group of features, you own a sub area of a product. You own multiple sub areas of product, you own an entire product, or you own multiple products, you own a product line. And that's going to be how we think about scope, go forth and evaluate your teams. We had the next meeting a couple weeks later and everybody comes back upset. It's like, this didn't work at all. Why? What happened? And said, "Well, the search team is super mad at the ads team because search is one product, the entire thing is one product. The ads team, they went and invented all these products, because it's like every little thing.

Shishir Mehrotra (01:09:00):
... the ads team, they went and invented all these products, because it's like every little thing you do in the ads platform has a SKU, has a P&L, has a... Because you have lots of products, so [inaudible 01:09:11] worked. The second issue was they said the scope is actually an input, not an output. We're talking to our manager and said, "Well, this person should get promoted. They've managed this huge scope." And then they would say, "But you gave them that scope. We should be judging you, not the person. How do we judge what they're doing with the scope?" It's actually very different. And the third issue was in almost every team, some of our best people were working on things with odd scope. They were risky projects. We didn't yet know is this thing going to work or not work, is Mike canceled. And if we put in place a system that only rewarded scope, we would heavily disincent people from working on these riskier, more creative things.

(01:09:52):
So we were stuck. And then we ended up set... We went through lots of frameworks. We ended up settling on this one called PSHE, and it comes from old mentor of mine, [inaudible 01:10:01] Clark, who's my boss at Microsoft for a number of years. And it stands for Problem, Solution, How, Execution, PSHE. And I will say it's a... I've tried many times to come up with a better acronym and I have not been able to come up with one. So it's push. That's the word. That's as good as I can get. But here's how... It works good enough. So push, that's all you have to remember. It doesn't roll off the tongue, but maybe... I did better with [inaudible 01:10:28] questions I think, but... So here's how it works. So if you're a junior product manager, what happens? You get handed a problem. You get handed a solution. You get handed the how. "Go talk to this person. Write this document. Run this meeting," so on. And all you have to do is execute, run that playbook, and that's all we expect out of you. You can become a little more senior. We hand you a problem. We hand you a rough solution. You figure out the how. You figure out the, "How are we going to organize this? What are the milestones? How are we going to get it to market? How are we going to do the meetings? What are the rituals?" All those things show up in the H.

(01:11:03):
At some point you become a little more senior. We hand you a problem and you come back with the solutions. You come up and we judge you on the creativity and the effectiveness of the solutions. And at some point you're senior enough that you tell us the problems and you say, "Hey. I know you told me to go work on activation, but actually I think our issue is brand," or, "I think our issue is quality," or, "I think our issue is..." whatever it might be. And that's the pinnacle of this way of thinking about it.

(01:11:27):
Now just back to this picture for a moment, one of the interesting things that happened was that the teams went and they evaluated their teams on these two axes and they end up with this curved line between them. It's not linear as you work your way through. And what happens is early in people's career, they mostly sit at that E point. You get handed a problem and handed a solution, handed a how and you just execute, and they gradually grow in scope. Later in people's careers, similarly, you're at that P level. You just do bigger and bigger products. And the job of being an entrepreneur or CEO or an owner or so on is just do bigger and bigger projects. But in the middle, the slope changes and all of a sudden, it's not really about scope. It's about PSHE. And there's a circle drawing in here for what I like to call the trough of dissolution.

(01:12:14):
And the reason... I'll stop sharing so we can talk about it, but what happens in that phase, and I was talking to the calibration committees about this, the reason we call it the trough of dissolution meant is for the employee, for the person, this is a confusing time. Everything about leading up to this moment from high school and college has been about scope. And at this point you're all of a sudden told, "We're not judging you on scope anymore. We're judging you on this PSHE thing that's very confusing." To the calibrator or to the manager, it's also very confusing because all of a sudden, the difference... The way I would put it is the difference between a level three and a level seven may not be scope. They may do the exact same job. It's how they do the job that matters and here's some language for how they do the job.

(01:12:56):
And so PSHE became a very sticky way of thinking about it. It turns out that this way of evaluating people is actually not that specific to product management. It's really easy to see why you do the exact same thing for engineers and designers and so on, but to pick one that may not be as obvious, I'll pick salespeople. A very common thing people do with salespeople is they evaluate them based on quota attainment. It's the easiest thing to do is take the salespeople and rank them by who hit their quota and who didn't. You go ask the sales team who's the best salesperson, and what you'll realize is they'll say quota attainment is just a signal for how good you negotiated your quota and picked the right territory. Really, you want to know who's a best salesperson, they say, "Well, so and so, I mean she can sell anything and she can be in the region that's growing or the region that's shrinking or the new product or the old product or..."

(01:13:45):
And if you think about that terminology, it's very similar to PSHE thinking. This is the person who can come into a new space, identify the right problems and solve them. That's what makes a really great salesperson. So it could become my framework for evaluating talent in all sorts of ways. And you might recognize a pattern of being a great P thinker is very correlated with being good with [inaudible 01:14:06] questions. Can you spot the right problems? It's very similar to can you spot the right questions? Can you decide what's important? And so that's been my main framework for value.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:15):
Wow. There's so much there. A couple quick questions. Is this basically your calibration ladder framework for PMs at this point? And then is this also just like your interview guide, just interview at each of these pieces to level the person?

Shishir Mehrotra (01:14:29):
Yeah. So it's definitely how we do. Our version of leveling is PSHE, and we use a set of Radford levels. Radford has this really interesting way of describing that as you grow in a profession... He uses the analogy of someone, of a sailor and that a junior sailor is learning to tie knots and then you gradually can tie all the standard knots and then you can tie the advanced knots and so on, and so you work your way up and at some point the way you're judged is you invented nylon and there's list between there. It's like a way to evaluate every role. It's very similar to PSHE. And so we look at a similar list. But yeah, basically all of our roles are evaluated on something that corresponds with PSHE.

(01:15:17):
And in terms of interviews, yeah, you look for the same thing. And by the way, I should say interviewing is one part of this. And you talk about interviewing. You talk about calibration. There's one other really important one which is reference checking. And I think the best way to assess PSHE is actually through references. And so the most important guide we write isn't the interview guide. When we call this person's references, what do you ask to actually get at these questions? Because people can often confuse them.

(01:15:46):
Just to pick product managers as an example. We all know some really amazing H level product managers. And one of the reasons, one of the hallmarks, of an H level product manager is that their counterparts usually love them and they'll say things like, "Oh, my gosh. The person runs such efficient meetings and all the communication is always clear. [inaudible 01:16:07] always buttoned up. Execs know what we're doing. The market knows what we're doing. Sales team know what we're doing." That's great H. And then you'll ask them a question about, "Okay. So when you're deciding which problem to solve, who is the leader of that? And are they picking the right problems? Or when there's a hard problem, who is regularly coming up with the best solutions for them? Who do you turn to? Who is the most obvious person to turn to say, 'This is really hard problem. What's the right solution?'?"

(01:16:31):
An amazing number of people will tell you, "No, they run a great meeting but actually solving the problem, designer does that," or, "What are the problems? No. The CEO tells us what to do. That's not what this person's really good at. Yeah. I'm not sure we're solving the right problem, but boy, we run a great meeting." And it's not meant to diminish any of that. I mean, we spent a while talking about rituals, which mostly happen at that H level, so I don't think it's unimportant, but it's actually quite hard to assess in an interview but incredibly easy to assess in a reference check. And I think getting good at that is really important.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:01):
You may have mentioned this, but what's the question there? Is there a question that you could recommend?

Shishir Mehrotra (01:17:05):
The absolute ideal case is you get to the person that you're doing the reference check with and you don't even tell them who you're asking about and you just say, "When you think of your teams, who is best at..." And this obviously only works in cases where you have a pretty deep relationship with the person you're getting referenced from and so on. So you can't always do that. But ideally you want to mimic that behavior. One of the things I think that's hard about reference checks is people have... They have perverse incentives in a reference check. They're not really... Some of it is for good reason. Some of it is for bad reason. People generally don't like criticizing people and they also feel judged themselves and they don't want... There's legal reasons that things can blow back and so on.

(01:17:55):
And so what I try really hard to do is to draw contrasts. So you try to say things... There's a couple of techniques I've used for this. In the best case you say, "I'm not going to even tell you who I'm asking about, but when you think about this team who regularly identifies what problems they should focus on? Who is most reliable at coming up with the solutions to the hardest problems?" And you work your way through it. The other way I like to do it is to provide contrast to give the person an out to not make it obvious to them that I have this ranking. And so I'll say things like, "When you think about this person, and I'll give you four different personas. Someone who's regularly coming up with the problems that the team should be focused on. Someone who given a set of problems is constantly solving them in this really creative way. The person that is just really good at getting a team moving. Or the person who can take a playbook and execute it with high precision and high quality and stuff."

(01:18:47):
And I won't tell them that I have a qualitative judgment that one is better than the other, but you want them... Because you just want your reference check to talk and you want them to say what's on their mind of... You want to give them an opening to not feel like they're judging. Obviously, another question I always ask people is, "Would you hire this person again? Or how excitedly would you hire this person again?" I always ask them, "What questions should I have asked that I didn't?" Another key technique for reference checks is you just need people to... Once they start talking, they'll reveal what they really feel and often the little things will come out. But for this particular thing, if I want to know where they stand on this axis, don't tell people what you value. By the way, I will say I value P over S over H over E. I've seen many companies that would reverse that scale. And by the way, there's industries where it's very required. You don't want a bunch of people running around and constantly telling you to solve some different problem. I just need people that can do this job that we give them super, super well. And it depends a bit what your personality is and what your company's culture is and so on. So it's not actually that unbelievable that I might value the E over the P. Anybody who knows me, that's probably not true, but for a reference check, you can probably not give that away.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:04):
Wow. That was gold. I hadn't heard these reference check insights. And so I'm really happy we got to that. Maybe one last question on reference checks. How often do you find that a reference check leads to you not hiring someone, just ballpark? Or is that hard to say?

Shishir Mehrotra (01:20:19):
All the time. And I will say I try to do them as early in the process as practical if it's possible. Because I think it's actually the worst feeling for an interviewee to go through a process and then get dinged at the reference check stage. It's a really crappy experience for the candidate. And obviously you have to be careful about not ruining anything for them. You can't always do the reference check as early as you can. When you're inside a company, when you're inside Google or Facebook or so on, you can generally do them even before you enter. It's an expectation of we're going to hear a little bit about people in that process. And I generally value the reference check over interview signals. If I had to stack rank in interviews what is the best signal, the reference check is the top of the list. Those people, they worked with this person sometimes for years, their knowledge, what you're going to get out of 30 minutes of artificial scenarios, it's just never going to compare with what a good reference check will give you.

(01:21:12):
And then the second best thing I value is anything that feels like a real work exercise, which is also... Even that is hard because some people, their skillset doesn't naturally lead to a compressed time work exercise. But we do a thing for basically all our roles where at the start of the interview loop, the candidate presents to everyone on the loop and we invite some other people in the company to attend too. For a while it was open the whole company. Now we're big enough where that's not practical. But the original is very simple. At the beginning of the loop, the person presents. And generally for most roles, there's a exercise that they do, but about half the time is spent on them presenting whatever they want. They can talk about themselves. They can teach us something and then another half is we've given them a prompt, something that we want to direct.

(01:21:58):
One of the things that I think when you're doing interviewing, one way to think about it, I call it home court, away court, neutral court, you want interviews to balance in all those different spheres. So a common mistake people make is they do all questions in home court. "Hey. If you're joining Airbnb, what would you do about X?" And what is the candidate going to say? They clearly can't be as thoughtful as you. They haven't thought about it nearly as much as you have. So really what you're testing is, "Did they come to the same answer that we did?" which is a pretty crappy way to judge someone. Home court questions tend to be tough. You have to be very careful about how you do them. Away court questions can also be tough. This person, you say, "How did you solve this problem?" And they say, "Well, we did this thing." And you don't really know was that problem actually hard? Was it somebody else was telling them what to do? Are they just not telling you the whole story of what happened and so on?

(01:22:50):
So you try really hard to make... Most of our interviews are done neutral court. So the vast majority [inaudible 01:22:54] teleporter question is a very neutral question. You don't have to know anything about Coda. I don't have to know anything about Airbnb or wherever. I can just ask you this question. But this one thing, the presentation is the away court question. You now have an opportunity to talk about yourself in this new way. And it's super interesting what people do. I mean, I've seen people use that time... I often tell people it's the brag session, but this is like... And for product managers... We do it for every role, but it's like recruiters, salespeople, marketers.

(01:23:23):
We tell them, "We're going to go through this whole interview process. And at most companies you talk to six different people and six little segments. And at the end of the day you say, 'Gosh. I really wish they had learned this about me.'" And I tell them, "Don't leave this with that feeling. What do you want us to know about you? All our questions are... In some cases we're trying to lower bound you, like, 'How bad could this be?' I want you to upper bound us. I want you to tell us what's really amazing here." And so we'll have the presenter go through that process. And what they choose to talk about is very important. How they choose to present it is very important. But I do it as upper bounding. But if I had to stack rank in interviewing, what do I look for? Reference check at the top, work, product and presentation next, and then all the interviews. When they disagree, that's the order we judge.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:12):
Shishir, I feel like you have five books in you that you need to write on so many of these topics. This is such good stuff. I wish I could keep going. I know you have to run. So we have this final lightning round. So I'm going to ask you five questions. There's one at the end I didn't tell you about ahead of time, so it's going to be a surprise. And so I'm just going to ask you these quick questions. Let me know what comes to mind. Okay. First question, just what are two, three books that you find that you recommend most to other people? Oh, pulling out the bookshelf.

Shishir Mehrotra (01:24:40):
Pull up [inaudible 01:24:40]. One I already said and we talked about. So this would take two of the slots. The next one on my list is Switch by Chip and Dan Heath, How to Change Things When Change Is Hard. The other one, this is probably a surprising one, it's called Understanding Comics by Scott McCloud.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:53):
Wow.

Shishir Mehrotra (01:24:54):
Super fun book. It's a comic book about comic books and you don't have to like comic books at all to love this book. It's basically... The starting point is over time communication has drifted at two extremes. So one is we've gotten very good at written form and the other is we've gotten very good at art, single pieces of art. And comics are the hybrid. They are drawing mixed with writing. Sometimes I think he calls it... Oh, God. He had a good term for it that I'm now forgetting, but he describes comics really well and he goes through the actual reasoning of why comics are structured the way they are. And one of the reasons it's so important to me is, and you could probably tell from how we talked about different things, is often a diagram that crystallizes something. The art of storytelling, diagramming, so on, I think is so critical for basically any part of life. And this book, it's so thought-provoking on how to do it. Understanding Comics by Scott McCloud.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:48):
Understanding Comics. Wow. Good choice. Okay. Favorite recent movie or TV show?

Shishir Mehrotra (01:25:52):
Okay. Couple that come to mind. Only Murders in the Building is a really fun one. And my family got really into the Marvel series during the pandemic. And so WandaVision, if anybody hasn't seen that. If you're not into superhero stuff and so on, which I'm not really that... I'm actually more of a DC comics person. I like Superman. But WandaVision is one of the best pieces of art that I've seen done in a very long time. Very well done show.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:19):
I feel with that show I had to... I gave up initially. I'm like, "What the hell is this? What is going on?"

Shishir Mehrotra (01:26:19):
I know.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:23):
And then it gets good.

Shishir Mehrotra (01:26:24):
It gets good. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:25):
And on the flip side, Only Murders in the Building. I don't know if you've seen the second season yet, but I'm just like... I'm done with it. I'm just tired of it now. I don't know what they're doing.

Shishir Mehrotra (01:26:33):
Oh, yeah? We're only one episode into the second season, so we'll see. Maybe we'll give up too.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:33):
Good luck. Okay.

Shishir Mehrotra (01:26:40):
The preseason was so good. [inaudible 01:26:43]. And it's all about podcasters.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:45):
It's like so meta around podcasters. Oh, man. Okay. Good segue. Okay. Favorite interview question/ you may have already answered this.

Shishir Mehrotra (01:26:53):
The teleporter one is definitely my favorite. My second favorite one, if I was going to give you a different one, is I have a series of questions around... Let me pull it here so I give you what the real question is, but is basically around a dashboard prompt. And the starting point of the question is, "Pick a product." I [inaudible 01:27:15] say, "Your favorite technical product." And the constraint is, "It can't be something that you built, worked on or competed with. It's got to be in the space that you're not an expert in." And I generally ask people why, which is actually a really interesting passion test. And then I'll ask people, "Design the one- page dashboard for that product. If you're the CEO, general manager, whatever, you run that product, what's on the dashboard? Why?" It's an interesting [inaudible 01:27:39] question, E type question of like, "Can you tell what's important for this product or not?"

(01:27:43):
And then I ask them to basically redesign the product. And the way I do it is, "You've been hired by a competitor to design a me too version of product. I'm going to leave aside for a moment that why you would want to build a me too version. What is the bare minimum of what you need to build?" And then I tell them, "You ran out of resources. You get a quarter of the scope and a quarter of the..." Or, "You get quarter of the time and a quarter of the team. What do you actually build?" And then I get down to the other side of, "You've decided you can differentiate in only one place. What do you do to differentiate?" And so there are a series of questions that are basically a form of PSHE, but just formed around a new problem space that lets people wander a little bit. I've seen some really amazing answers to that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:27):
There's also a lot of [inaudible 01:28:28] question elements to this sequence. Wow. Excellent. Okay. Who else in the industry do you respect as a thought leader? Who comes to mind?

Shishir Mehrotra (01:28:37):
Other than you? I have to ask. Present company excluded?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:40):
Yeah. That's great. [inaudible 01:28:41].

Shishir Mehrotra (01:28:43):
By the way, your newsletter is one of my top reads.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:45):
Oh, wow.

Shishir Mehrotra (01:28:45):
I think that yours and Ben Thompson from Stratechery are two of the ones that... I think you both have a very natural instinct for writing and synthesizing things that people are feeling with a clarity that's really helpful. So I really appreciate that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:05):
Appreciate that.

Shishir Mehrotra (01:29:06):
I mean, I think the rituals process has exposed me to some really amazing leaders. Talked about Ariana. I always learn a lot when I talk to Ariana. [inaudible 01:29:14] has contributed a bunch. I think he's really helpful and is... And I can't believe he basically had no Twitter followers at the beginning of the pandemic. And his tweet are just total gold and so insightful and well put together. Fidji Simo is someone that I learned a lot from. She now runs Instacart. Daniel from Spotify, Daniel Ek. I think he's got this really unique way of thinking about the world, and he's also one of the few people that can hold a very long-term view and a very short-term view at the same time. Fantastic ethics. I'd also say my entire board, Reid, Reid Hoffman, [inaudible 01:29:51], Mamoon Hamid, Quentin Clark, Sarah Guo. I think they're all amazing and I'm super lucky to have a group of people I can call with questions.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:00):
Awesome. Someone's going to have a lot of work on these show notes. That list. Okay. Final question. What's your go-to karaoke song or dance move at a wedding?

Shishir Mehrotra (01:30:09):
Karaoke song is If I Had $1000000 by the Barenaked Ladies, and it's a... If people don't remember the song, part of the reason it's my favorite is I'm a very mediocre singer and you don't have to be that good a singer and everybody can sing along so you can bring everybody into it. And it's just such a fun song, If I Had $1000000.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:28):
You're as thoughtful about your karaoke songs as you are about everything else you're doing. Shishir, thank you so much for being on this podcast. You've set a really high bar for CO guests, so we'll see who comes up next. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out or learn more? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Shishir Mehrotra (01:30:44):
Okay. I'll give the same answer to both. Well, I'm easy to find, one of the benefits of having a not very common name. It's easy to find me on basically every platform so you can find me on Twitter. It's easy to DM me, Shishir@Coda.io. It'll get to right to me. But in terms of being useful to me and also finding me, I would highly recommend joining the Rituals of Great Teams Braintrust. And I think it's a pretty fun experience to get a chance to contribute to a book like that. And hopefully if you've made it this far in the episode, then you probably are interested. And so I think you'll find it interesting. And I'm having a lot of fun with the people in that Braintrust.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:18):
Amazing. I'm definitely going to join. Thank you, Shishir.

Shishir Mehrotra (01:31:22):
Yeah. All right. Thank you so much, Lenny. That was really fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:24):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

