Jason Lemkin (00:00:00):
Here's the mistake that 99% of founders and sales reps make. We're not really selling in B2B, we're solving problems. Our job as sales reps in SaaS is to not sell a used car, okay? We are selling a Tesla Model 3 performance. It has competition, I might not need it this week, but it's pretty darn good. Let me help you get you into that Model 3 performance today. I've even got a special discount for the end of this month, and let me just help you. I've spent four calls answering all your questions and I've explained to you all the things and why the supercharging network is better than the regular one that doesn't really work at the charger near your house. I've gone on Google and I've seen there's no charging network near your house. There's only Superchargers. I got you, don't I? That's the job of SaaS and sales because we're not selling commodities.

Lenny (00:00:48):
Today, my guest is Jason Lemkin. Jason created and runs Saastr, the world's largest community for SaaS and B2B founders. He also runs two of the biggest town conferences every year, one in the Bay Area, which attracts over 15,000 people, and one in Europe with over 3,000 SaaS executives, founders, and entrepreneurs. Before Saastr, Jason was the CEO and co-founder of EchoSign, which he grew to over 100 million ARR and then sold to Adobe where he ended up as a vice president of their web services business. If you follow Jason on Twitter or LinkedIn, you know how much wisdom he has to share about all aspects of building a successful SaaS business. 

(00:01:27):
In our conversation, we focus on what I find most product leaders have the least experience in, building a sales team. We get very practical and tactical on how long you should wait to hire your first salesperson, what your one to two first hire should look like, why you should actually hire two salespeople, not just one initially, how to comp them, how to interview them, when it's time to hire a VP of sales, how to avoid your salespeople flaming out and burning through all your cash. We also get into how to make the product and sales relationship healthier, including how to push back on sales and feature requests, why your head of product should be super involved in your sales process, how long you should make your trials, why you should avoid annual contracts, and so much more.

(00:02:09):
Jason also shares advice for running a conference, which I found super interesting. This episode went long because I just couldn't stop asking Jason questions, but as a result, I'm excited to bring you this incredibly rich episode on building your sales team. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow this podcast in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. This helps tremendously and I really appreciate it. With that, I bring you Jason Lemkin after a short word from our sponsors. 

(00:02:36):
Let me tell you about CommandBar. If you're like me and most users I've built product for, you probably find those little in-product popups really annoying, "Want to take a tour? Check out this new feature." These popups are becoming less and less effective since most users don't read what they say, they just want to close them as soon as possible, but every product builder knows that users need help to learn the ins and outs of your product. We use so many products every day and we can't possibly know the ins and outs of everyone. CommandBar is an AI-powered toolkit for product, growth, marketing, and customer teams to help users get the most out of your product without annoying them. 

(00:03:10):
They use AI to get closer to user intent, so they have search and chat products that let users describe what they're trying to do in their own words and then see personalized results like customer walkthroughs or actions. They do pop-ups too, but their nudges are based on in-product behaviors like confusion or intent classification, which makes them much less annoying and much more impactful. This works for web apps, mobile apps, and websites, and they work with industry-leading companies like Gusto, Freshworks, HashiCorp, and LaunchDarkly. Over 15 million end-users have interacted with CommandBar. To try out CommandBar, you can sign up at commandbar.com/lenny and you can unlock an extra 1,000 AI responses per month for any plan. That's commandbar.com/lenny. 

(00:03:59):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate your growth. Thousands of fast-growing companies like Gusto, Comm, Quora and Modern Treasury trust Vanta to help build scale, manage, and demonstrate their security and compliance programs and get ready for audits in weeks, not months. By offering the most in-demand security and privacy frameworks such as SOC 2, ISO 27001, GDPR, HIPAA, and many more, Vanta helps companies obtain the reports they need to accelerate growth, build efficient compliance processes, mitigate risks to their businesses, and build trust with external stakeholders. 

(00:04:36):
Over 5,000 fast-growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2 and these other frameworks. For a limited time Lenny's podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Go to vanta.com/lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A dot com slash Lenny to learn more and to claim your discounts. Get started today. Jason, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Jason Lemkin (00:05:03):
Hey, I'm so excited. Long time. What's the expression? Long time fan, first time dialer or something?

Lenny (00:05:03):
Caller? 

Jason Lemkin (00:05:09):
First time caller, yeah, first time caller. 

Lenny (00:05:10):
First time guest. 

Jason Lemkin (00:05:11):
I don't know if that exists in 2024 or not, but yeah, that's me. So thank you so much for letting me come.

Lenny (00:05:16):
It's absolutely my pleasure. I feel like you're the kind of guy that I knew would be on this podcast eventually, and I'm glad that we're finally doing this. I also feel like we can go in so many directions. I feel like you have so many insights on so many parts of building a business, especially a B2B business, but I thought it would be most interesting to dive deep into building your sales team, essentially trying to help people figure out how to start their sales team, scale their sales team, and all the elements they go into it. How does that sound?

Jason Lemkin (00:05:46):
I think it's great. I think it's an evergreen topic, but I think there's remains a consistent set of confusion, fears around how to build a sales team, and it's evergreen. The tools change and the pace has changed, but the issues, I love to dig into them because we keep making the same mistakes as founders and executives again and again and again.

Lenny (00:06:09):
100% agree. It's such a black box to me. Sales, I've never done sales, and I'm always just like, "I have no idea what's going on here." So this is how I learned from folks like you. You touched on this now. Now, I wasn't going to get on this, but I think it'd be interesting just this question of, does everyone need a sales team? Will you need a sales team if you're listening as a founder? Is it simply, if you're a B2B business, you'll need a sales team? How should people think about, "Will I need a sales team?"

Jason Lemkin (00:06:34):
If you truly build a self-serve product, you can either never have a sales team or Slack defer it or Canva really defer it. Canva didn't really build a sales team until they were well north of 500 million in revenue because it's epic self-serve. Slack started all self-serve, and by the time they went public, the majority of their revenue was enterprise sales. So you can sequence things. You can have hybrid models like a third of Asana's revenue is still from self-serve, and two-thirds are from a self-serve motion. So there's all different hybrid things. 

(00:07:06):
The most important thing though I've found is however you get those first 10, 15, 20 customers, be honest, be honest, and if you've talked to them as a founder and you know that they need a sales type motion, they need effort to deploy it, they have questions about security, they have questions about competition, they have onboarding requirements, and you say, "Hey, I don't like sales, so I'm going to do a PLG motion," you'll fail.

(00:07:34):
One of the things that I've done with so many founders over the years, and it shocks them at first, is your first 10, 15, 50 unaffiliated customers, the ones that find you from the ether, they're the next 50, 100, 200, 1,000, and you can either embrace them or run for them. Too many producty founders find that, "Hey, gosh, I'm going to have to do sales," and they exit it. They exit it. 

(00:08:00):
I'll tell you a company I invested in 18 months ago when things were easier, maybe 20 months ago, they were doing 5 million in revenue, growing over 100% with the sales like motion. Things got harder, things got harder as they did for many of us, and they decided to fire the whole sales team, and now they're doing less than one from 5 million with beloved customers. If I told you the logos, your jaw would drop. Over 5,000 20 months ago to 1 million today because they fired the sales team because the founders didn't like sales, they thought it was icky, they didn't want to do it, they were tired of doing it. I can tell you several stories like this. 

(00:08:34):
So you've got to be honest about the ... Sometimes we get it just right on day zero. Sometimes we know exactly how our company is going to work or Lenny's podcast is going to work. We can predict the future perfectly, but I find in B2B, a lot of times the industry, we end up winning. The segment of the industry, the type of customer is not what we initially thought and either lean into it and be a success or run from it because sales is icky and risk failure.

Lenny (00:09:00):
When you talk about being honest, what you need to be honest about is that you need sales help to close customers?

Jason Lemkin (00:09:07):
Be honest about that. Just be honest about, yes, the motion that it will take to get those first 10, 15, 20 customers, and if they were able to find you by putting their credit card and no one had to talk to them, then that's your DNA today. It doesn't mean you won't go up market later like a Slack or a Canva, but if you can get them all to do that and you never have to talk to them, then get really good at viral loops, get really good at almost B2C type motions, get really good at this kind of stuff and hire growth hackers and do the whole almost B2C-ish motion, which we have at self-serve, but if your first 10 customers come in and say, "You know what, Lenny, I'll pay you $5,000, but you've got to solve this problem I have with online video," that is not a self-serve motion. It is not a self-serve motion.

(00:09:51):
Even worse, sometimes worse is your first 10 customers, five of them sign up online, but it takes a huge amount of effort for 19 bucks a month, and then five say they'll pay you $5,000 a month. Some founders are like, "I'm going to work on the five that pay us 20 bucks a month, not the five that'll pay us $5,000 a year." I find too many folks that don't like sales, too many folks that have not had any life experience in a sales-led environment flee from those customers, and I've never seen that lead to success. We're surprised who our niche is sometimes. We talk about nailing our niche, but sometimes we're surprised that niche that finds us.

Lenny (00:10:28):
There's a lot of startups I've invested in that start off product-led growth and quickly realized, "This just isn't working," and many of them move to, "We need to actually hire salespeople and start to go top down."

Jason Lemkin (00:10:40):
Most companies are a hybrid. Even there's weird hybrids like there's folks like Mongo and Snowflake. Mongo has, well, maybe Mongo's much better example, Mongo has a free low end version, and there's open source too. It's a little confusing, and then there's not a lot in the middle, and then there's a lot of big. There's all different ways to combine a product-led or self-serve motion with sales-led. Too many founders in the beginning think it's either or. It's not either or. 

Lenny (00:11:06):
So I think the big takeaway here is sales is not a question of if you're going to need a sales team, it's a matter of when. The Canva example is crazy. Maybe that's the [inaudible 00:11:16]

Jason Lemkin (00:11:16):
But they still have one. But they still have one now. 

Lenny (00:11:18):
They still have one. I think Notion, I think at 10 million ARRs when they hired their first salesperson.

Jason Lemkin (00:11:23):
That makes sense.

Lenny (00:11:23):
So I think the question that leads to is, what is a sign that you should start to hire your first salesperson?

Jason Lemkin (00:11:31):
Even if you hate sales, even if you think it's icky, even if you don't like it, as a founder you've, 95 times out of 100, you've got to find a way at least to close the first 10 customers yourself. You've got to find a way. We could dig into how to do that if you don't like sales. The hack though is that even if you don't like sales, customers love to talk to the CEO. The customers love it. Here's the other thing, as a founder, you're really good at the product in the market, hopefully even in the early days. So what's important is even if you don't know how to do outbound, even if you don't know how to send a cold email, even if you don't how to do any of this stuff, and even if you don't know how to ask for a check, even if you don't know how to open or close, almost all founders are A+ middlers, A+ middlers, A+ middlers. Before we started, you and I talked about podcasts and content, and immediately it was an A+ conversation. Maybe you don't know how to close a big sponsor, I'm just making that up, and maybe you don't know how to find one, but once you have someone in your spider web, letting the conversation, you and I just had was A+, and any founder should be there by day one, by day one, and prospects love it. 

(00:12:40):
If I want to buy CRM, I don't get to talk to Yamini at HubSpot or Marc Benioff, but I get to talk to you and your CRM company. It's magical for early adopters. So bear in mind, no matter how bad you think you are as a founder, you're pretty good at the middle part of sales. So find a way to get any prospects, get really good at the middle, and then work up your courage. Work up your courage, and find how to ask for next steps and money. What would it take, Lenny? How can we get going on Riverside? What would it take? We would love to have you. What would it take to get you going next week? You've got to learn that little motion, but you don't have to learn all the stuff you think is smarmy other than how to go from middle to just ask for how we can get going.

Lenny (00:13:19):
I like this term, middlers. So just to make sure I understand what that means, in the middle of the conversation, you're not great at initiating, you're not great at closing, but you could talk about it.

Jason Lemkin (00:13:27):
Yeah, and this is where sales reps are terrible. Most sales reps, once you go beyond the five basic questions, they can't tell you how a database works or how to eliminate hallucinations from your product or how to do payroll in Eastern Southern Guam. The sales rep, and we can talk about this, they need help. They need help from the founders in the early days. They need help from sales engineers or product people, which is my favorite place to get the help as you scale, but they need help. 

(00:13:56):
The beauty to founders is they don't need help in the middle. You can be 10 times better in the middle than any sales rep at your bigger competitor. If you're running, I am just making up CRM, but if you're running a new CRM startup, you can run circles around 98% of the sales reps at Salesforce or HubSpot. They have the brand, they have the partners, they have the integrations, but they cannot answer the questions you can answer.

Lenny (00:14:21):
Okay. So you close the first 10 customers. What are other signs that, "Okay. Now is really the time we need to start hiring sales"?

Jason Lemkin (00:14:26):
I think as soon as you've got those 10 customers and more than 20% of your time is booked up with customers, you need leverage. You need leverage. You've got to get ... If you do it too early, if you're not spending 20% of your time in sales and 20% of your time in recruiting, you're failing as a founder. You need 20% of each, 20% in sales and 20% recruiting. Nothing else really matters at some level as a CEO, maybe not as founders, but as CEOs. Once you cross the 20%, you need leverage or your calendar will die. So you need to hire one rep and you've got to hire two because otherwise, there's no A-B test. You have to A-B test humans. You have to A-B test humans. You've got to hire two as hard as it is, and there's just one cheat code to those first two. There's one cheat code. 

(00:15:13):
I talked to so many founders that screwed up their first sales hires, and they always nod when they hear it. Those first couple reps have to be people you would buy your own product from. That's it. Now we can talk about other criteria. We can talk about normalizing for deal size. We can talk about industry expertise. We can talk about all this kind of stuff, but when you go out as a first time founder and interview 30 reps, and you're going to have to interview 30, and 20 are just going to break your brain because they don't do any work and they don't do any prep and they didn't even go to your website. Then eight of the next 10 are okay, but you know it's not really going to work, but you might hire them if you get tired.

(00:15:50):
If you're lucky, one or two of them, they're like magicians. They ask the right questions, which we could talk about. Then take a pause and say, "Look, no matter how strange their background was, whatever they did, it's not the right background. It's not our same deal size. It's not our industry. They actually weren't very good at their last job. They got let go at their last job, but I would buy from Lenny. I know. I've been doing this for a year. Every day, I would buy from Lenny because Lenny just explained to me my product and my customer's problems in a way that I actually believe. Forget about what's on her LinkedIn or his LinkedIn. I would buy from Lenny." 

(00:16:23):
That rep always works because you can trust them with those leads. Almost every first time founder hires someone because they worked at Twilio or CloudFlare or wherever, and they talk the talk and they can say ACV and NRR, and they can talk all these acronyms. None of which matter. None of which matter. We all get attracted to logos on our resume, but in our gut, I always ask them, "Did you know that Jason was going to ... Would you buy from Jason?" They're like, "You're right. I wouldn't have bought from Jason, but he worked at Twilio." So just wait, wait and interview 30 sales reps, however you find them through LinkedIn, through use recruiters, use contingent recruiters. It's exhausting. Do everything. Work your network and then be flexible in the beginning. We're looking for pirates and romantics in the early days. We are not looking for folks with massive sales operations teams and enablement teams. You're looking for that quirky one that's got a few extra IQ points, that for reasons that make no sense has fallen in love with your little product that is so feature poor and does nothing, but they love it, they love it, they love it. 

(00:17:28):
My first rep I had this back in the day, he had gotten let go by a prior startup and he was struggling and he was living in his brother's garage at the time. This was not your number one person at Snowflake, but of all the 30, he came in and what's now Adobe sign? EchoSign. He described the whole problem. He described how we would solve the problem for our customers in the early days of this category. It was clear, whatever it took we needed him and whatever we needed to backfill the garage or whatever, this was the only one that could sell the product, and he did it for a decade. Closed our first five-figure deal, first six-figure deal, first seven-figure TCV deal. Didn't scale completely. Inside of Adobe was harder to scale inside of a 20,000 person company than it was in a six-person company, but he was still there. He still made that far to the journey, but he was the only one that I knew that I would buy my product from, not that I would buy something from, but I would buy my product from. 

(00:18:24):
Leads are so precious in the early days. It's so hard to find leads. That's the problem. You hire this perfect person from Snowflake and you have three leads a month and you give him two and he doesn't close them, your company's going to die. Leads are so precious. That's what folks don't get. So wait, and I know it's painful, and I know most founders have hired this person with the right LinkedIn that they wouldn't buy their product from. Just keep interviewing. You need that quirky pyromaniac that loves your product and can sell it. They're out there.

Lenny (00:18:57):
Amazing advice. Wow. There's so much there. I'm going to follow a couple threads there. In terms of the level, I know a lot of people make the mistake of going with a VP of sales pretty quickly. What's your advice? I know you talked about general attributes, but what's your advice for the level and seniority of these first two hires?

Jason Lemkin (00:19:14):
Two things, one that's evergreen and one that's maybe especially apropos for today's environment. The evergreen one, which I've talked about for over a decade, and I think folks that have been through it will see it, which is you need two sales reps hitting quota closing deals before you're ready to hire a manager for them. Almost all VPs of sales, their job is to take you from rep three to 300, to take you from three to 300, to take something that's just starting to repeat, a script that's just starting to work, leads that are just starting to come in. Then take Lenny and Jason, the two reps I have, as quirky as they are, they're crushing it. 

(00:19:55):
Then I'm going to hire a more heterogeneous type of person going forward. I'm going to hire the person from Cloudfare. They can't all be like Lenny and Jason, they're pretty quirky, but at least I can learn from them. What's working? What are the objections? How do we get around that feature gap? We're one year old, we're two years old. We've got a lot of feature gaps. This integration doesn't quite work. How do we box around those issues? How do we sell our 10x feature? Because if you're a startup, your product isn't very good, your software is not very good, and you have a competitor, but you have some 10x feature that is driving people to buy you something you're doing that does not exist in the marketplace.

(00:20:29):
The really good reps get insanely good at selling that, and the folks off the street, the new VPs often doesn't even understand the 10x feature. It's too subtle. It's too subtle. Why? The fact that your product is localized in Portuguese magically means you can win these deals. I'm making up something that doesn't quite make sense. So you need two reps that are hitting quota and then you hire VP of sales. If you hire it before then, you're doing a Hail Mary. It ain't going to work. It never, ever, never, ever, ever, never, ever works. You're asking them to find product market fit to be the first rep, to be the second rep and scale it all at the same time. It's mission impossible to do all four at the same time. 

(00:21:09):
So that's the biggest mistake is, Lenny, I can't get sales going at my company. I can't do it, but I raised $4 million in my C+ round. I'm going to go out and hire the VP of sales. That VP of sales will not be there in eight months. You know what else? 2 million of the four will be gone because they'll never understand the product. They will never understand. There's so many things we could talk about, but if there's one thing I could reinforce for this audience, it's that early sales team, they've got to be product gurus for your product audience. They've got to be product experts. Later as you scale, they can't be or you can't scale. 

(00:21:42):
When I started, when I came out of my own startup and started interviewing other folks, I remember I would interview a lot of folks at places like GitHub back in the day. I'd be like, "Do you have a technical background? Are you an engineer? Have you ever built any software?" They're like, "No, I don't. I don't know. I don't know," and I was like, "I was curious how you could do it," but GitHub was so well-established that it's 10 questions. It's 10 questions and grab a sales engineer. It's 10 questions and grab ... So you got to be really good at 10 and then you grab a sales engineer. That doesn't work in the early estate startups. So you've got to find these sales folks that are a bit of product savants and dropping the VP of sales in that isn't a product savant, which is a big issue. That's all mister or miss process. This is the issue. They're all mister or miss process.

(00:22:24):
So the second point I wanted to make, and I was on the fence for years of when you hire a VP of sales, do they need to carry a bag? Do they need to sell themselves or not? Does it matter? Does it matter? I wasn't sure for a long time. The reason I wasn't sure for a long time, it's not that you don't want a VP of sales carrying a bag. I do think a VP of engineering also should commit code. We can talk about that. 

Lenny (00:22:45):
Carrying a bag, meaning close sales themselves? 

Jason Lemkin (00:22:46):
Yeah, not just be a boss. 

Lenny (00:22:47):
Have a quota. 

Jason Lemkin (00:22:49):
Yeah, have a quote. The reason I was on the fence was because I was like, "Well, listen, in theory it's great, but let's say you're a hot startup and you want to go from two to six this year." So I want to add 4 million in new bookings, and let's say I can do 400K in quota per rep. That means I got to have 10 reps. She walks in with two. I'm at a race, aren't I? I got to hire eight in the next six months to hit my plan, and I got to put numbers on the board. If I'm going to out there as an individual contributor sales rep, I'm never going to hire eight people, am I? It's never going to happen. 

(00:23:20):
So I used to say I don't know if it matters, but what I've learned the last 18 to 20 months when everyone has gotten lazy, Lenny, everyone in tech has gotten lazy, is I see way too many VPs of sales that come in and never have any idea how to sell the product, never, never. They only want to be managers.

(00:23:38):
Now, whether they carry a bag or whether what they do is they join calls with the reps, whether they backfill the reps, you want your VP of sales in deals 20, 30 hours a week when they start. I see VPs of sales today start, they're in no deals. I'll go to a board meeting and a VP of sales will be there two, three months, and they'll have a look on the board. I'm like, "How's it going with Airbnb?" and they'll be like, "I don't know. I got to ask John." Doesn't know because it isn't in the deal, isn't even in the deal. So I see this too often.

(00:24:08):
Another company I'm on the board on, I really like this VP of sales a lot. He joined and six months in, sales were down from where, the new bookings were down from where they were six months before. He was honest. He's like, "The biggest problem is I feel like I didn't have time to learn this product. It's a complicated product. It's more complicated than the product I last sold, and I just didn't have time."

Lenny (00:24:29):
Jason, this conversation is going exactly how I'd hoped. There's so much actionable advice here. Let me try to summarize a little bit of the things you've said and then keep going. So let me know what I'm missing here. I'm going to try to just highlight some of the important things you mentioned. So in terms of when it makes sense to start hiring your first salesperson, a couple of things you shared is you've closed the first 10 customers on your own as founders. If you're spending more than 20% of your time on sales and you need to start creating more leverage. I'll throw in one other thing I've heard and just to tell me if this is also true, that there's a repeatable process you've created. You can sell consistently enough or you can tell someone, "Here's how I've been selling." Is that right?

Jason Lemkin (00:25:08):
Yeah. If you hire a VP of sales before then, it's approaching 100% chance of failure.

Lenny (00:25:13):
I see. So you can hire the first two reps before you're like, "Here's a pretty good process that has worked for me a number of times."

Jason Lemkin (00:25:19):
Yeah. Listen, as hard as it is for a lot of founders to even get their arms around, the reason is you've got to be that crummy first head of sales with them. You've got to manage those reps. You've got to be in the field with them. You've got to be figuring it out before you can hire the person. You just have to even if you're terrible at it because you're still going to be a good middler. You're still going to be a good middler.

Lenny (00:25:41):
Okay. A few more things that stood out to me. One is hire two sales reps immediately, not just one. These reps you need to interview about 30 people. Eight will be pretty good, 20 will be terrible, and two, these are people that you can see selling your product and you would buy from them. They're often very quirky and not maybe a traditional sales background. They've never been VPs of sales, essentially. They're more like AEs and things like that historically or maybe not even salespeople historically. Is that right?

Jason Lemkin (00:26:10):
I think you will regret it if you don't hire these first couple of sales reps that have a couple years of experience if you're in B2B with B2B sales. They need a couple of years of experience and they need a certain amount of maturity, and maturity is a real issue, and these are in any early hire because we just don't have time to babysit people. There's no onboarding, there's no training. So they need a couple years of experience, ideally something close to your deal size, we could chat about why, that would be nice, and enough maturity that you can trust them with that lead. You can trust them with your customer.

Lenny (00:26:43):
Okay. Then you hire a VP of sales once you're ready to go from three to 300 reps. Your advice is also give the VP of sales a bag slash a quota slash they need to be doing sales themselves in today's world.

Jason Lemkin (00:26:56):
At least for a little while. More importantly, if they don't want to, I think in today's world you got to run from them. Exactly whether they fully carry a quota, a half quota, whether they backfill the sales team, you want a salesperson. Here's the thing, Lenny, you want a ... This is going to sound silly, but it's not. Trust me on this. For anyone watching, listening, you want a head of sales that actually wants to do sales. I got to tell you, and I'm still struggling with this myself after the last three years or so, so many folks in all functions, we could talk about other functions too, but especially in sales, don't want to do sales anymore. They don't want to do it. They don't want do it. 

(00:27:39):
2021 was crazy because everything was too crazy. There's too much money, too much going on. 2022 was the knife falling. That was crazy too. 2023 was just hard. Whether it's burnout or whatever out or just too much change, I would say I've probably interviewed for different reasons, 50 VPs of sales in the last 12 months, I would say the majority don't want to do sales. It's my first screening question. That's why they got to carry a bag because it proves they actually still care about the craft. 

(00:28:12):
The best sales folks love sales. It's a craft. They love money. Yes, they love money, and that does matter. Do not hire a sales rep that doesn't like money. Trust me on this one. There's 0% chance they'll work out either, but they also like the craft. They like honing the script. They like beating the competition. They like figuring out the counterfeit. They like figuring out the weapon and the 10x feature. They like working on a team. They like hunting. They love it, but then sometimes I just think burnout is always a reality, but I just think that the last three years have been so yo-yoed, that folks are just, they're out. They're out. Don't hire them no matter how smart they are, and that's the test. 

(00:28:52):
I'll tell you, I talked with a really great VP of sales candidate that had worked with a top 10 tech company and I asked him what he wanted to do in this next role. He's like, "I've got a great team. I've got eight people that I can bring with me. We're ready to lock and load." I'm like, "Okay. Well, let me tell you one of my views in today's world is that you've got to actually visit more customers now, not less. In a distributed world, it's more important to visit customers." He lived in the East Bay in Pleasanton in the East Bay, which is maybe 20 minutes east of Oakland. He said, "I'm willing to visit customers, but I won't go as far as the peninsula in San Francisco." He's just happy at home. He's happy at home, Lenny, and he don't want to sell.

(00:29:34):
This guy has the best LinkedIn and the best references, but he don't want to sell anymore. He needs a job. He wants to be a VP of sales. I see this across the industry and I'm struggling to find answers. I think the biggest hiring ... We talked about a lot of tactical hiring mistakes that you can make today in sales. The biggest strategic mistake you can make today in sales because there's so many veterans, there's so many folks that worked at Twilio and Mongo and wherever, pick any great company you want. There's so many veterans out there, you just can't hire the ones that don't actually want to sell anymore, and there's too many, there's too many.

Lenny (00:30:06):
You mentioned that you actually just asked them in the interview. The first question is, "Do you actually want to sell?" What other questions do you ask for either ... Let's go through both. You said you have these questions that you ask for the early hires and then the VP of sales. What are some tips for people when they're interviewing these folks?

Jason Lemkin (00:30:21):
It's interesting. VP of sales or VP of product, I look for the same answer. One of the Colombo style questions I ask them, and this is so odd. It barely even counts as a question is, what do you want to do your first 30 days? What do you want to do? Actually, I usually ask, "What do you want to do your first two weeks?" In B2B, if I don't hear from the VP of sales or the VP of product that I'm going to go meet customers, out, I'm out. There's too many VPs of product too, Lenny, that don't want to meet customers anymore either. The majority of VPs of products that I interview, they don't meet customers. Every single great VP of product, chief product officer I've ever worked with in my entire career, you know what the first thing they do in the first two weeks? They're like, "Leave me alone. I'm going to go talk to 20 customers. Leave me alone."

Jason Lemkin (00:31:00):
The first two weeks, they're like, "Leave me alone. I'm going to go talk to 20 customers. Leave me alone. Leave me alone, I'm going to go talk..." They don't want to sit out on meetings and look at PRDs and talk out of their navel on endless internal meetings. All the best ones, they say they just leave. They literally say, "Leave me alone. I will see you in two weeks. I'm going to go meet with 20 customers." And that's what products should do. Sales, whether it's prospects or existing customers, it can vary, but they should be like, "On my first day, I want to join five calls." 

(00:31:29):
And when you hear that story of, "I don't want to travel out of Pleasanton," or they say, here's what you're going to hear from the wrong person for anything, even up to 50 million in revenue, "I'm going to spend that first month working on process," "I'm going to spend that first month getting Salesforce up and running," "I'm going to send the first month on territory planning, Lenny, because we really, with our three reps, I really want to make sure we've nailed territories, right? Lenny will do the south, Elaine will do the east, Jason will do the west." 

(00:31:59):
When you hear process, process, process, from any, from marketing, product, sales, customer success, too, boy, it's the death of customer success. It's just... And it's not that you don't need process, it's just, it's even worse than it was than a few years ago. And I know this is going to trigger some people, but the truth is they don't want to work. They don't want to work. They don't want to work. 

(00:32:21):
I literally just got this LinkedIn email to work with me at SaaStr, from this person who'd been reading SaaStr for eight years. You're like, "I want to run account management, customer success for you. Here's what's, you're doing wrong, here's how to do it." I'm like, "Oh, this is pretty good." And I DMed her back, I'm like, "Great. To be honest, you realize that you're actually going to have to talk to customers and sponsors yourself in the beginning." No response. Just out. Just out. And that was the best one I got the last 30 days. That was the best inbound that I personally got. 

(00:32:51):
I know it sounds triggering or critical, but as founders, we have to be honest that there's this vast pool of veterans with great LinkedIns and great resumes that are so burnt out, Lenny. And let's not blame them. I know it sounds like I'm blaming them or being negative, and I'm trying to not be negative. I'm empathetic. I am empathetic to the burnout, but don't, you can't hire these. There's too many. 

(00:33:14):
The industry is littered with the burnt out. They're littered with it. And if you hear a touch of cynicism, if you hear anger, if you hear, "I don't want to meet customers in any..." and I'm going to say any VP role, product, sales, marketing, customers... If they don't want to meet customers their first, let's make it a 14-day test, you know they're never going to want to meet customers.

Lenny (00:33:33):
These folks that don't want to do sales that are VPs of sales, I imagine when you're further along, that's more, okay, because you don't need them to be doing sales, right? They want to manage, optimize. No. I see you shaking your head?

Jason Lemkin (00:33:46):
I mean, okay, you think, okay, there's an element, let's call it north of 50 or 100 million, where for, what's sometimes called commercial sales, SMB sales, it really is all process. Okay? So for sure, I agree. But at Salesforce, they're trying to close $100-million-plus deals. You think that the sales leadership doesn't need to be in those deals? You think they can just hit refresh on the dashboards and track them from home? No. Marc Benioff today is still flying to meet customers. He said the other day, why does Marc Benioff go to Davos? He sits, and I've never been to Davos. He sits at the same place, at the top of some staircase. Okay? 

(00:34:26):
And Salesforce drops millions of dollars, and he waits to meet customers, prospects, and partners in person all day, because it's efficient. Because it's efficient. Because he can do 50 or 100 customer or prospect meetings a day at Davos. He's still doing it at 30-something billion in revenue. Right? So this idea that, is there some truth at... For example, when I worked at Adobe back in the day, it is true that Adobe, which was, parts of the business, sales literally was dashboards. I get it. Okay, at four billion, 10 billion in revenue, but most of your audience is not ready to hire at four billion or 10 billion in revenue. They're not ready to hire that person. Don't hire them, right?

Lenny (00:35:08):
I don't know, maybe Satya's listening. You never know.

Jason Lemkin (00:35:12):
I think on the sales side of the business, they're flying out to the big deals?

Lenny (00:35:17):
To close the loop on this thread, when you're interviewing the early sales reps, those first two quirky folks, what are some questions and ways to know if there may be a good fit? You mentioned one of, you feel like you would buy from them?

Jason Lemkin (00:35:30):
Okay. The one, really, the simplest one, and early in my career, I thought this was silly or hated it, this Glengarry Glen Ross. I don't know if it was Glengarry Glen Ross or that toxic Leo movie about sales, which is still entertaining. Yeah, one way or another, Lenny, it's got to be, "Sell me this pen." But it's not "Sell me this pen," it's "Sell me this app." So I don't like surprises, I don't like games. I like to do this in a second interview or whatever. Give them time. And I don't like to judge too harshly, but whether it's the first interview or the second, they got to sell you this pen. They've got to put in the 30 minutes of work and maybe it's two hours.

(00:36:07):
But here's the thing, today's world, you can go on YouTube or someone's website... There's an explainer video for every product under the sun, isn't there? I am shocked how many salespeople I have met, Lenny, from SDR to SEB of sales that, by the time... And I'm doing an interview for a portfolio company, this isn't a screener interview, they haven't even watched an explainer video yet. I could be the fifth or eighth interview, and they don't know how the product works. They have not even gone to the effort of searching YouTube or the homepage and watching it. 

(00:36:38):
And forget about explainer videos enough. But so many companies do webinars now and they publish them on the... Really good stuff, customer testimonials. Right? If you're a sales rep, you don't actually have to know how the webhooks work or how to provision an API key, but you need to know the product as well as that webinar that's on YouTube. And 98 out of 100 folks won't bother in an interview. They won't bother. They're just going to click on "Apply" on the ATS and tell you, "Hey, I recently stumbled upon whatever. It looks like... Do you have time to discuss." Right?

(00:37:10):
But that one that actually does enough work and watches the video, and then can sell it to you, and they're going to make mistakes. They're not going to get it right, but they have enough confidence with the core problem to be solved. Because here's the mistake that 99% of founders and sales reps make. We're not really selling in B2B. We're solving problems. And this is why so many people are struggling in 2024, because they can't... their products, as sales reps, as companies, they can't solve big problems anymore. 

(00:37:41):
Our job as sales reps in SaaS is to not sell a used car, okay? We are selling a Tesla Model 3 performance. It has competition. I might not need it this week, but it's pretty darn good. And I'm going to help you understand, Lenny, because you're in the market for the car, why this is the best one. I'm going to be honest about where it's not. I'm going to answer all your questions. I'm such an expert, and then I'm going to ask you, Lenny, when is that... You have 280,000 miles on the Civic? Let me help you get you into that Model 3 performance today. And I've even got a special discount for the end of this month. And let me just help you."

(00:38:14):
And I've spent four calls answering all your questions and I'm explained to you all the things and why the supercharging network is better than the regular one that doesn't really work at the charger near your house. And I've gone on Google and I've seen there's no charging network near your house, there's only supercharges. I got you, don't I? And that's the job of SaaS and sales, because we're not selling commodities. And that's why the best reps will also tell reps when not to buy their product. 

(00:38:41):
As painful as that seems in tougher times, in 2024, the best reps say, "No, we're not there yet. We're not the right... If you need this feature, if you need this integration, I want you back in six months when you use this big product that isn't that great. But today, we're not the right solution for you." That's, the best ones do that. They have the confidence to know to close it. And the rest of the world thinks this is some sort of adversarial transactional thing and it's not. Right? 

(00:39:07):
Software... I think hopefully all your audience would agree, when it's done right, software's magical. It solves incredible problems, incredible problems. What Airbnb does, what Uber does, what SaaS... Things solve... I can track my customers, I can manage, I can automate my communications. It's magical. You shouldn't have to use boiler room tactics and use [inaudible 00:39:30] tactics when you have something. But, it doesn't sell itself, except for a little while in late 2020, early 2021, that screwed the whole world up when products actually sold themselves.

Lenny (00:39:42):
I feel like this is a separate podcast we should do of just how to get better at sales and how to sell. But, I feel like that's its own hour of conversation. I did a great episode with April Dunford where, I don't know if you follow her stuff, but she-

Jason Lemkin (00:39:54):
Yes. 

Lenny (00:39:54):
... essentially describes exactly your approach of help people understand the market, help them understand the entire landscape, and then talk about your problem. So anyway, we'll link to that episode. Has a lot of good advice there. In terms of this interview, selling-me-a-pen approach, to give people something very concrete to do. How do you actually set this up? Is it like, "Sell me your product," and then they put together a pitch for your team and they pitch you on a product?

Jason Lemkin (00:40:19):
I'll tell you, until the boom, until everyone in late 2020 got so desperate to hire anyone with a pulse, almost everyone in sales had to come and they had, during an interview process, they actually had to do the pitch. They would come and you used to do it in person with this screen. You can do it on Zoom now, it really doesn't matter, but do it for real. Do it for real, and everyone would see. And everyone in recruiting change, people stopped doing reference checks, they stopped doing these tests, and they would just hire warm bodies.

(00:40:51):
Late 2020, I can tell you a funny story in a second, and it was okay until it wasn't. And our hiring processes have not reverted back to pre-March, 2020, and I think it's failing founders left and right. I can't tell you, I would say 95% of the hiring I see out there, people don't do reference checks anymore, Lenny. And we can talk about when they work and when they don't, but no one does them. No one does them. You're going to invest so much... Forget about the salary, it doesn't really matter. So much time, your time, your leads, everything's so precious, to bring Jason into your company and you're going to go through all this recruiting process and you're not even going to do any reference checks? People don't even do reference checks.

(00:41:33):
And they don't, they stopped doing, "Do me this demo," because they were so worried the rep would go to Gusto or would go to Deal, or would go to remote. There was no time. I got to get... This SDR has 50 offers. Lenny, we got to hire this SDR with three weeks of experience. We've got to decide today. And that's the way, and hiring does not come back. If those hires bounce, not only is it bad for you, but it's a disservice to the... It's worse for the hire. I mean, that poor CloudFlare woman that blew up with the thing, there's so many issues there we could dig into, but it's all Cloudflare fault for hiring her. Okay, let's forget about that she didn't close a single deal. Okay, so objectively, in sales, should you retain your job in sales if you can't close a single deal? I don't want to get into some of the triggering things, but remember, if you hire someone and they fail, it's all your fault. She didn't know what she was getting herself into. No candidates can do enough diligence ever. There's not enough time. There isn't enough time. 

(00:42:32):
And this is true all the way to the top. And so, as an investor, a board member, it's funny, when I do interviews, I do this thing, I try to be the last interview sometimes, and the founders don't want me to do it. They want me to sell. I don't want to be the last one. And what I want to do is when, Lenny, you've decided to join Ellen at her startup, right? At the end, I said, "Look, Lenny, I've talked to Ellen, she loves you. You have the job. You've got the job. What I don't want you to do, Lenny is bouncing three months after. So let's slow down, let's talk about the questions you have on your mind, and let's have a safe space where we can make sure you're going to be happy and successful there." Right? 

(00:43:09):
And sometimes even the founders get mad at me for doing this, because sometimes, the candidate bails. But I'm like, "I know you're mad at me today, but it is your fault. A hundred percent your fault if any of your hires fail. Don't blame them. And I'm guilty of this. I get upset when people start and they don't give it their all or they don't do it. I mean, what if you hired someone for your podcast and they decided, "You know what? I don't want to do the podcast this week. I'm tired. I'll do it..." You're so mad at them, but you should've seen it during the hiring process. Right?

(00:43:44):
So, tying it back, that's why you've got to do this, "Sell me this pen." You've got to, before you hire the salesperson, have them sell your product real. Do the demo. And if they need more time, give them more time. Let them watch another demo. Don't have them feel like it's a trap or spook them. Treat them the way you would like to be treated. But if you skip this step, I mean, what's the point? You're not helping them.

Lenny (00:44:09):
What I love about this process is it connects exactly to what you recommended you look for in these hires is, "Would I buy my product from these people?" So this makes a lot of sense. And you give them this assignment at home and they do work on this and they come in, right? It's not like come to the office?

Jason Lemkin (00:44:22):
If you talk to a great transactional VP of sales that's hiring tons of reps that do it, they'll make them do... If they're still doing this, they'll make you sell the pen fast in the process. They don't have time. They're doing 20 interviews a week, 30 interviews a week, you've got to sell me this pen. But if you're a founder and I'm talking about you've already talked to a bunch of candidates, you're down to one or two, make them, tell them, "Look, this isn't a trick. I'm not that great at telling my product myself, but I got to know that you're going to be happy and successful here. So do a demo for me."

(00:44:49):
And if they won't do it, they're not a salesperson. And too many people went into sales, not... The other weird thing about B2B sales in good times is actually, a lot of these folks are not really what you might think as salespeople. They can't do outbound, they can't pick up the phone. All they know how to do is to manage leads that come in and say, "I want to buy today." And you need those people, too. Okay? And I'm not saying you don't need those people, too, but that's not always what we think of as sales.

Lenny (00:45:16):
Another black box for me, and I think a lot of people with sales, is comp and quota, had actually set up their comp for early hires, and then how to actually decide on a quota. What advice do you have for figuring that out early on? What percentage is commission, what percentage is salary? All that-

Jason Lemkin (00:45:31):
Yeah, everyone gets this wrong. We worry... Look, at scale, when you're extremely mature, extremely mature, and very profitable, you really got to tweak this stuff very carefully, and we could talk about that if it's relevant. But, in the beginning, we get this all wrong. What matters is, can a sales rep close more than they take home? In the very beginning, that's all that matters. It's just you selling, right?

(00:45:58):
The first three months of a new rep, you're lucky if they can close as much as their take-home pay is, their OT. And so, in the really early days, my early, early day comp plan is, look, your first three months, you keep a hundred percent of what you close. Of course, that's not profitable for the business, but you've got to invest in them, right? You keep a hundred percent of what you close. And if you have enough going on in your business, usually, that's enough to put supper on the stove. 

Lenny (00:46:24):
And that's without a salary? 

Jason Lemkin (00:46:26):
No, no. You pick an OT, a salary, but you got to... Okay, let's step back for a minute. You got to pay market. You got to pay market. And in the early days, if you're bootstrapped or really lean, this stresses folks out. I just talked to this great rep, Lenny, but he wants 150k OTE. And in fact, it's a step down. He had 170k at Slack, but he knows this isn't a startup. He wants 100. He might take 140.

Lenny (00:46:53):
And OTE is total comp, overall total comp.

Jason Lemkin (00:46:54):
Total comp. And the founder panics. "I don't have, I'm only making 60. How can I pay 140?" Well, let's break it down for a minute. First of all, let's be tactical. It's usually 50/50, right? 50% base, 50% bonus for a sales rep. So they're really only taking home a 70k base, trying to make another 70. Okay? Then 70 divided by 12, help me do my math. It's not quite 6k month. Well, maybe with taxes it is. You're really only paying 6k a month for a couple months to see if this experiment works out. You're investing 20,000, you don't have $20,000 to do sales? Then don't do sales, if you can't find $20,000. So people freak out too much about this comp-line number, this base and bonus, the on-target earnings, OTE, and they're not more practical about what am I committing to cash upfront? 

(00:47:44):
Two, you need a plan where it's a win-win. So if this person makes 140, but ultimately, a sales rep's got to bring in four to five times what they take home. That 140's got to be 500, 600 or more. The more enterprise you are, the bigger the multiple has to be, and the higher the comp. But it's got to be 3x to 5x at a minimum, 3x for small businesses, 4x for mid-market, 5... You got to get there, but you don't have to be there on day one and two. When you get there, the reps should be accretive, shouldn't they be? If they make 150 and they bring in 450, unless your marketing costs are out of control, which can happen, but that's not sales fault is it? If your marketing costs are reasonable and you pay a sales rep 150 for closing 450, if you engineer your plan right, you should be smiling, not frowning.

(00:48:34):
Where it gets tough is when you have a ton of folks not closing. When you have a ton of folks not closing and you have extremely high marketing costs, then it all breaks. Your cap breaks, your payback period breaks. But, if you have inbound leads, if you have demand, and you have sales reps that can sell you this pen, they're going to be accretive, Lenny, because of that math. And take the pressure off, don't make them close 5x their take on their first quarter, make them close 1x. Let them put points on board, let them eat. And so negotiating, here's the point if you think about it. Negotiating someone down from a 150k OTE to 130, it's not going to make any difference. You want them to close 600 or 700. It's not going to matter. 

(00:49:15):
At scale, does it matter? For Mongo maybe. Maybe. But, what you care about is how much more can they close and they bring in? And then you, that's why you want them to make a lot of money. You want them to be rich. You want them to take home a lot for a whole bunch of reasons. And so, don't freak out about the acronym OTE, what they take home. Figure out what it's really going to cost you and would you buy from them? And if you would, they're probably going to bring in more than they take home. Right? And on the marketing side, in early days, you're lucky if you can find a marketing channel that is that accretive.

Lenny (00:49:49):
Amazing. Okay. So just to summarize, you start a sales person with, say, 75k in salary and then say 75k in expected sales. And they take-

Jason Lemkin (00:50:01):
Bonus, bonus.

Lenny (00:50:02):
Bonus.

Jason Lemkin (00:50:04):
Bonus from sales, yep. 

Lenny (00:50:05):
Bonus from sales and the the idea there is they take 100% initially of their sales, for the first month or two, just to make it feel amazing. They're making money. See how they're doing, don't put a lot of pressure on them. And then the plan is, over time, get it to a point where they're bringing into the business four to five times what they're taking home in terms of bonus.

Jason Lemkin (00:50:24):
Yeah, yeah. 

Lenny (00:50:25):
I set expectations every month or two, or is it every quarter? We're going to revisit your comp and quota and adjust.

Jason Lemkin (00:50:32):
If you get it right, you never have to revisit it. Not for years. I mean, I'm using the same sales comp plan I have for a lot of years. It still works. Listen, you can make tweaks and you've got to listen, and we're all human beings. And people, and again, remember, your sales team has to eat. They've got to eat, okay? And you've got to be somewhat competitive. But, there's only so much you can tweak, Lenny. I mean, they have to bring, close more than they bring home. Right?

(00:50:55):
And so, you can make tweaks at the margin. The problem is if you make too many tweaks to this model, you burn up all the cash. You're trying to plug a leaky boat, there's no point. There's no point. There's no point. And remember, related to this, for a long time, for most folks, unless you're, even if you're hyper funded, you're better off with fewer, better reps than more reps.

(00:51:18):
There is a stage when you get big enough where this concept of capacity planning really does matter. Lenny, if I got to go from 50 to 100 this year, okay? I'm going to add 50 million. If each of my reps can do 500k, I need a hundred, don't I? Okay. And literally, if you have 20, you mathematically cannot hit the plan. So there's a certain truth at scale. In the early days, this is a rookie error. I'd much rather have two reps, each closing a million than 20 reps struggling to close 100k each. Culturally, it's terrible. There's no domain knowledge in the company. Everyone's miserable, everyone's fighting. 

(00:51:50):
What you want to do in the early days is concentrate your leads and your best closers, at the same time, bringing new people up. But you've got to concentrate your leads to your best closers. And that means year two, year three, year four, they should be making a lot of money. Lot of money, sometimes too much. I remember the first investment I ever made was a company called Pipedrive, which sold for a billion and a half. SMB CRM, and I put in the first sales rep there. He used to work for me. And the founders got mad at him. They got mad at him, because in three months, he was making more than any of the founders. They were pissed. 

(00:52:21):
I'm like, "Guys, I know we're have different backgrounds and cultures, but this is what you want." But it took them a long time culturally as self-serve... Because Pipedrive was 100% self-serve at the time. They'd never had a sales rep. And I put the guy in, and what he did was he went and he looked, all these self-serve customers, he's like, this was the company was about two million revenue at the time. And he's like, "Okay, who's bought more than one seat?" He just did a reverse sort and he called them. 

(00:52:48):
I remember he called AOL back in the day and he's like, "You guys have 20 seats of Pipedrive. Would you like to buy more for your sales team?" They're like, "Thank you very much. We'll take 100 seats." And he just went down the list, from the top to the bottom, and he took home 20% of those deals. Now that difference, that extra 80 seats at AOL, he brought it in. So Kim, keeping 20% of that is a great deal for the company, right? But he was pretty good at it and he was the only person for a while, so he made hundreds and hundreds of thousands of dollars when the poor company, the founders were paying themselves 50.

Lenny (00:53:20):
So your advice there is don't be sad if your salesperson is making tons of money.

Jason Lemkin (00:53:25):
If you architect the simple sales fund we talked about, and they're making a lot of money, you're making a lot of money, and your equity is worth a lot of money, your equity is worth a lot of money. Right?

Lenny (00:53:34):
When do you make that switch from they're taking home 100% of what they're selling to smaller percentage?

Jason Lemkin (00:53:40):
Look, some people are going to think it's goofy what I said about 100. I just view it as a simple ramp. I think you do it for one quarter max. One quarter. The problem is if you let this go for too long, more than a quarter, if you make it too easy for long a quarter, the problem is the mediocre lean into it too much, and that doesn't help. And not only does it not help you, it doesn't help them. You don't want to make mishires. They're so damn... I mean, you could have a whole podcast only just on mishires. It's probably the single most important thing in scaling startups. It's not hires, it's mishires.

(00:54:12):
It's a tragedy if you mis-hire a rep, but you don't want them there six months. It's not good for them either. You want to support them, you want to help them find a place where they're successful. And here's the quirky thing on the mishires, and this is why that first guy I hired was mid-pack. He was less than mid-pack. Here's the thing about sales is, someone can be very good in certain sales environments and completely fail in other ones, completely fail. It's probably more binary than any other function. And so you got to find it before you hire them, but you also got to root it out fast, because those leads are too precious.

(00:54:44):
And it doesn't mean they won't go on to another company and be wildly successful, but you could utterly fail. And the one related point I'll give, if I had to throw one hint on this first, any of these reps, first 10 and VP of sales, one hint more than anything else, trust... got to hire someone whose last product was harder to sell. This is so important. This is a recipe for utter disaster. If you've, take someone in sales and their last product was easier to sell, they will have none of the skills to sell your product. But, this is the... and I'll give you an example in a second. 

(00:55:27):
If you hire someone from something that was just a smidge harder, a smidge harder to sell, and they come into your company, it's like they're on Mars. It's like weight has been released from their feet. They learned how to sell a harder product and get it done, and then they come to you. And the first example I had, the first SDR I hired was a guy named Sam Blond, who went on to be CRO at Brex, and then now is a partner at Founders Fund. We worked together from the very beginning, first SDR. And he came, before that, he was an SDR at a company called Intacct, which was bought for a billion, which was online financials. Okay?

(00:56:03):
And back in the day, we know what the one thing people didn't want to put in their cloud was? Their financial statements, okay? It just wasn't trusted that. There are some things you would trust to the cloud, like A CRM, but they'd be like, "These are my crown jewels. I can't put these..." So he went from desperately trying to convince folks to move a business process to the cloud. They had no interest. And he came to us, and it was hard, but it wasn't that hard. And he instantly was number one. He went from SDR to SMB-AE to mid-market AE to director of sales, to head of this whole sale... 

(00:56:31):
Because, I mean, there are many reasons he was great, but he came to me and I said, "Sam, why are you crushing it when everyone else here is struggling?" He's like, "This is much easier than Intacct." So hire someone like that and don't make... No matter how much you like them, the sell me this pen thing will control for it a bit, okay? But, when we give, we give, we give in the hiring process. We never give what we want. Be very, very careful if the last product was easier to sell.

Lenny (00:56:57):
I love this advice. What is a heuristic that the last product was harder to sell than yours? What tells you that that's probably true?

Jason Lemkin (00:57:04):
Be very careful if it was more technical, very technical. Some folks can go from a business process sale. They can go from selling a Gong or a sales software and outreach, and they can go sell a complicated API to VPs of engineering or VPs of product, but most can't. Okay? So more technical is a tough heuristic. More competitive is a positive. What really works, Lenny, is if you hire someone from the number four in the space and they did well. You take someone that was number four in the space and then you're number two in the space? You think number two's really hard because number one's crushing you? But they're at number four in a space where no one can tell the difference between these products? That's a great one, right? So a space that's more competitive, a space that is a positive, more technical.

(00:57:55):
The other one related to technical, on the pure B2B side, is much more complicated business process. I see folks fail in B2B when they've sold us... Yeah, it's hard, but they've sold a simple business process. They go to something that's got a lot of integrations, a lot of complexity, and a lot of business process change, and they just melt because it's too complicated. They just melt, right? There's a company I invested in, it's doing over 20 million today. And for some reason, to simplify what they do, which is pretty complicated, they called it the Gong for X. Okay? The Gong for X.

(00:58:30):
And it's great to get a VC meeting and a few other, but it's not even on their homepage, okay? It doesn't really make sense. And the CEO had me listen to this senior sales exec he hired, and the only thing he could tell the prospect was that they were Gong for X. And the prospect kept asking, "Well, how does this deep integration with this business process flow and Zendesk works, and how does this go over to Salesforce?" He's like, "Well, we're Gong for X." That $600,000 deal was lost. Right? 

(00:59:00):
But, maybe that works in some space, right? And Gong's hard to sell today, too, don't get me wrong. But you see my point, it's just that simplicity, it's too complicated, right? And I know it's not the perfect heuristic, other than this technical thing, but the technical one, man, trust me. Too many B2B type reps melt in B2D. They just melt. They just, selling to VP of eng is a different... It's the same beast, but they don't suffer fools, do they? Not the VP of engineerings I'm close. They don't suffer fools.

Lenny (00:59:32):
I haven't heard this term, B2D before, business to developers. 

Jason Lemkin (00:59:35):
To developer, yeah. 

Lenny (00:59:36):
I imagine that what it stands for. Oh, interesting. Haven't heard that term before. Okay, let me zoom out a bit and I want to move on to a different topic. But before we do that, so we've talked about kind of these early days of hiring your first two reps, getting your VP of sales to help scale out the team. To give people a sense of where this goes, as the business scales, what does the org evolution look like? You have these two reps doing sales on their own, then you have a manager. What does it look like over the next couple phases of the sales org?

Jason Lemkin (01:00:03):
Look, to simplify, there's rules of eight. So in sales, I'm actually not sure what the tip of heuristic is in product, because product teams are leaner, at least I hope. I like it when they're leaner. But the thing about sales is there's no efficiency. If you have a sales-led motion, half your company is going to be in sales at 10 millionaire, half your company is going to be in sales at 50, half your company is going to be in sales at 100. 

(01:00:27):
One of the tough parts of the software model is that there's no, there's actually almost anti-efficiencies in sales. The public companies are actually less, they have the higher CACs than startups, believe it or not, because they have so much market penetration. So you're going to need a lot of people. And it's rules of eight, eight SDRs, outbound reps need one manager, eight AEs, eight sales execs need a director above them.

(01:00:51):
And then when you really scale, eight directors. You don't really ever going to have eight directors, but eight directors could have a VP or eight reports. And so there's rules of eight. If you want to build an organization on it, it's all rules of eight. For a while, for SDRs, thinking this was this high velocity entry-level position, people pushed it to 12. But the more folks I talk to today, the more I hear, everyone's reverted to eight. I'd rather have fewer SDRs, having better conversations. And so it's just, you can build your whole org with eights.

Lenny (01:01:21):
That is way too easy of an answer. So the idea there is you hire this VP of sales, then you hire six more sales reps, AEs. So what happens next? You hire another-

Jason Lemkin (01:01:32):
Got to start hiring managers.

Lenny (01:01:32):
Manager, got it. Yeah. 

Jason Lemkin (01:01:33):
Yeah. 

Lenny (01:01:34):
And then you scale eight more reps.

Jason Lemkin (01:01:35):
And once you have eight AEs scaled, you almost always are going to start, a VP's going to already... A good VP of sales already be hunting two directors.

Lenny (01:01:44):
Two directors. 

Jason Lemkin (01:01:45):
Whether they're just split up normally, whether they're east, west is a classic way. Another way, you might have smaller and larger customers. That's pretty standard, right? Commercial and enterprise. But a good VP of sales, once you have, she or he has eight reports, will be bringing in two directors, or maybe two VPs if they're an SVP. There's a lot of title-

Jason Lemkin (01:02:00):
... directors or maybe two VPs if they're an SVP. There's a lot of title inflation today, which doesn't bother me nearly as much as a lot of other things we've chatted about. I don't care what your title is if you'll actually do sales or do work, but yeah, we need to bring in managers at 8:00. And folks that can, also, a related point is, a lot of founders were, "When will my ... " I really love my head of sales, but she's a stretch. Most of them should be stretches.

(01:02:25):
If you hire the seasoned one, they're not going to work, so for 95 out of 100 of us, our first head of sales should be a stretch VP of Sales. And what that means is, usually, they were a director before that or a senior director or sort of a VP, okay? But you should be cautious about hiring your first VP of Sales for their first third VP of Sales gig. They're not willing to do the job anymore. You need a stretch and it's worth it for their career growth. It's worth it for their personal growth. It's worth it for the equity, right? So you're going to hire a stretch. That's an important tip right there. But then, you're going to be a little worried, how far can Lenny go? How far can ... I love Lenny, but he was a director for two years before this, and this is his first rule, and he did so good last year, but I'm worried Lenny's going to break. I'm worried Lenny's going to break.

(01:03:09):
And related to this quote, the simple answer is, Lenny will break if he can't source those directors under him. You can scale forever as a sales leader if you can hire better managers under you. And it's true of any functional area, but what you'll see in sales is, you'll see your stretch VP of Sales drown when they never can hire better managers under them, They'll end up doing some weird internal promotions, which you want, you want to do internal promotions. My rule is you want to promote 50% from within and hire 50% without for your managers, but if, really, the only people you can promote are just junior people on your team, you can't find leaders, you can't scale. I do see this happen too frequently is, a first time out of sales, does it, and then, they're like, "Here are my managers, Lorraine and Jason, but they really were just reps for two years and they don't know how to do it." So you have a whole bunch of people who don't know how to do it. That's when the organization cracks.

Lenny (01:04:06):
Imagine a place where you can find all your potential customers and get your message in front of them in a cost efficient way. If you're a B2B business, that place exists, and it's called LinkedIn. LinkedIn ads allows you to build the right relationships, drive results and reach your customers in a respectful environment. Two of my portfolio companies, Webflow and Census, are LinkedIn success stories. Census had a 10x increase in pipeline with a LinkedIn startup team. For Webflow, after ramping up on LinkedIn in Q4, they had the highest marketing source revenue quarter to date. With LinkedIn ads, you'll have direct access to and can build relationships with decision makers, including 950 million members, 180 million senior execs, and over 10 million C-level executives. You'll be able to drive results with targeting and measurement tools built specifically for B2B. In tech, LinkedIn generated 2x to 5x higher return on ad spend than any other social media platforms. Audiences on LinkedIn have two times the buying power of the average web audience, and you'll work with a partner who respects the B2B world you operate in.

(01:05:11):
Make B2B marketing everything it can be and get $100 credit on your next campaign. Just go to linkedin.com/podlenny to claim your credit. That's linkedin.com/podlenny. Terms and conditions apply.

(01:05:26):
There's these terms that we throw, around account executive reps. It might be helpful just to give people a sense of what does this actually mean when someone's an account executive. Is it that they're just sitting there calling and doing sales directly? Whatever the key terms are for the roles or the title might be helpful to quickly summarize.

Jason Lemkin (01:05:42):
Yeah, I think the two ones that are probably less obvious for folks that are new are SDR, Sales development representative, and AE, account executive.

Lenny (01:05:42):
Okay, great.

Jason Lemkin (01:05:49):
And SDR is, generally, although I wish it wasn't, it is generally an entry level position, often fresh out of school, generally paid on the order of 60K to 80K, OTE and SaaS and US-based SaaS, and their job is to email for dollars, dial for dollars, and in many cases, to screen, to screen inbound leads. It's entry level, and their job is to pass on a lead to a sales executive, an account executive, an AE. Not all companies have SDRs. It's a longer topic, but pretty much all the best teams have some type of SDR function now because we've learned we want to specialize. We want openers opening and we want closers closing, so that's the rough idea.

(01:06:34):
SDRs are openers in some cases, and account executives are the more seasoned folks closing. And it varies, compensation from account executives that are US-based could be anywhere from like 90K to 200K, depending on, that's with base and bonus split at 50/50, depending on whether they're hunting tiny deals or big ones. That's the way an account executive works. And I think what doesn't happen today ... Those are the acronyms, SDR and AE. I think people can figure out VP of Sales, that's vice president of sales.

(01:07:03):
I think a thing that's gone on in the industry that founders expect now because there's so much discussion of it on LinkedIn and social media, but I haven't found work, is that an account executive will magically be full stack. They will do outbound themselves, they'll go use ZoomInfo and Apollo and develop a list themselves, they'll manage that outbound list themselves. If they don't have enough inbound, in their free time, you know what they'll do, Lenny, in their free time? They'll just do more outbound. You know what sales reps do in their free time? Today, they sell real estate or courses.

(01:07:36):
If you want a tip, for founders, I know you want this full stack AE, and they do exist when they're micromanaged in certain high performance sales organizations, but they don't exist in real life. They're specialized. Most AEs, they want to be closers, they want to be handed a lead, a contact me, a lead. They want to work the lead and close the lead, and you hire some SDRs to help generate more demand. Those are the basic acronyms. What's hard for most founders, here's the tough part, most founders have enough stamina to manage a couple of these AEs, these account executives, these folks who work the leads. Most founders do not have the stamina to manage 10 kids fresh out of college that need to be micromanaged on an hourly basis to call leads. Very, very few founders themselves can manage a team of SDRs, but if you can, it's like a superpower.

Lenny (01:08:28):
That was really helpful. I did not know what exactly these terms represented, and when you're hiring those first two reps, they should be at the account executive level.

Jason Lemkin (01:08:37):
Yes. And they'll do some outbound and they'll do some of this SDR work. It's just, ultimately, people end up specializing.

Lenny (01:08:43):
What is the title for someone above the account executive? Is it Director of Sales?

Jason Lemkin (01:08:46):
Yeah. There's really no ... It's a meta topic. I wish there were another career path for these ICs. This does exist in product, it does exist in engineering. It should exist in sales, but the truth is it doesn't. There is no senior SDR for this outbound. And for this AE, this person closing, yes, you can go more enterprise and make more money, but there isn't really a senior AE track, but there should be. It's unfortunate. It should be.

(01:09:15):
Too many of these folks are looking for, they look to go into management for promotion when what they really should look for is to be a super IC, and it's a shame that more folks don't try to implement a super IC role in sales, but that's basically what the career path is in management. And that's why another tip, another mistake that founders often make is, they hire the number one account executive at a hot company to be their head of sales. It's not the same skills. Most sales executives should not be managers. They don't want to be managers. They want to be individuals. They want to be highly paid individual contributors, these days, that mostly work from home and make a lot of money working 30 hours a week. That does not naturally breed great management skills.

Lenny (01:10:02):
I want to shift directions a little bit and talk about product and sales. A lot of listeners of this podcast are product managers or founders building products. How involved should product managers be in sales. And vice versa, how involved should sales be in the roadmap and what's being built?

Jason Lemkin (01:10:19):
I think, in the best run B2B organizations that I've worked with, and my own as well, the great, at least the head of product, the VP of Products, are deeply involved in sales. Deeply involved in sales. Deeply involved in sales. A company I invested in that's just crossing $60 million, they just had a meeting with who will be their largest customer. And the head of product who was there at the board meeting is like, "Thank God I was there because what they want to do with our product, we sort of do. We sort of." Now, the product does do it, but what they want to basically do is deconstruct the product. They don't actually want to use the backend and analytics and some other pieces, but they don't really need the front end of the product. If the head of product hadn't been there, that deal would've been lost. It would've been lost.

(01:11:11):
An AE doesn't know that. Even if an AE did know that, a sales rep did know that even. If the VP of Sales didn't know ... A VP of Sales would not be empowered enough to stand up in a meeting and say, "I know what you want. We can launch tomorrow on this and, in 90 days, we'll tweak the UI so it does exactly what you want." You want that in your big deals. If you have that magical VP of Product that truly owns the roadmap, owns it and has the gravitas for that meeting, they become like the mini CEO in these meetings. A lot of CEOs, at scale, I've talked to, I was just talking with Daniel Chait at Greenhouse, he does this, they're over $200 million, when they have that head of product, they divide and conquer with the big customers. And the CEO can do some and the VP of product can do others.

(01:11:52):
And sometimes, the VP of Eng, if they're very producty, can also do that role too. Sometimes, you get these three weapons. In the old days, sometimes, your VP of Customer Success could do this, but unfortunately, and I know this is going to trigger some people, I don't see customer success stepping up for this pseudo product role anymore and I see them shrinking more and more into process. But that magical VP product, they give you that scale, that CEO level scale.

(01:12:17):
Can a product manager or a director do that? In my experience, the best ones, absolutely. The mid-pack ones that are working on the color of the pixel, I'd rather not have them in the deal. You have to be utterly fluent in the product, the entire product. You have to be the one that knows how to connect the pieces that don't ought to always connect themselves, and you have to have the gravitas to work with a large customer, to make commitments. That deep knowledge and commitment, it's hard below the VP level, but if it does exist, I love it. They become one of the greatest strategic weapons of a B2B company is bringing the product team, because the VP of Sales never quite goes that deep and can't make the commits, and the CEO can't be everywhere.

Lenny (01:13:04):
The bane of many product managers' existence is the flip side of sales is involvement in product. Do you have any advice for how you've seen the best SaaS companies handle requests from sales going into product, how product teams should think about requests from sales and making that work?

Jason Lemkin (01:13:21):
I think this one is so simple and I'm surprised people make it so complicated. I know we all release 28 times a day, but the reality is, software still goes on quarterly release cycles no matter what we say, okay? Your customers cannot process 88 releases a day, okay? The maximum a customer can process is two big releases a year and maybe quarterly, so let's simplify. That's how customers think. Forget about how we build software.

(01:13:46):
Every quarter, give your head of sales a certain budget, whether it's story points or 10% of the pie chart, however you do it, give them a budget. And when you do this, things will radically change then. They radically change because even the best VPs of sales, they change the wind. On Monday, what they really need is the HubSpot integration. And they're like, "Oh, my god. We weren't going to do that for two years, but I guess we could change everything on Monday," but then, on Wednesday, a new prospect comes in and, "We need SAP, but we just spent two days spec-ing out." You need SAP. And then, on Monday, it's Salesforce, right? And it's not that sales isn't honest, it's just, the big deals, the big ones always, the tail's wagging the dog and it burns out the organization. Even with the best sales leaders, I find it burns out, especially because the stressful deals, they overreact, and as good as they are, they're not product people, so they don't really know how to prioritize and force rank. If you say, "Okay, Lenny, my VP of Sales, great. HubSpot, SAP, whatever you want, you've got 10% of the budget, you've got a hundred story points, whatever metric or heuristic you use, but you've got to decide now each quarter." And if you want to change during the course of the quarter, if you want to disrupt our whole engineering product team, you can do it, but understand there's a high cost, and the later you do it in the quarter, the less successful it's going to be because we already started the HubSpot integration. Not only will it demoralize the team, but we're going to run out of ... You already used your budget.

(01:15:10):
I just don't see enough product leaders being objective here, saying, "Listen, here's your budget. You get it, period. No one can take it from you. I guess the CO can steal it if she really wants to, but it's yours, VP of Sales." And they will do the low balancing across their team. They will do it. They will listen and they'll say, "Maybe I don't need that HubSpot integration after all. Maybe." Right?

(01:15:32):
Because what a VP of Sales should be doing is taking ... The CO has to look five years into the future, product has to look about two years into the future, and you really can't ask a VP of Sales to look more than 12 months into the future because that's where they're next on the line, but a good one will load balance feature requests across the year and they will listen to all the ... Because they'll actually be in sales, they'll actually be in deals, and they'll be listening and they'll realize, look, even though we're going to lose this deal to HubSpot, I've gotten four SAP requests the last ... I'm going to take that bet. Even if I'm wrong, I'm going to take that bet. You got to give them that ... And you got to talk about it every week and say, "Look, here's your budget, Jane. Here's your story points, your whatever, your 10%. This is what we're building now for you, objectively, and this is what we're currently planning for the next two quarters. Would you like to change the ones for the next two quarters? Because we haven't committed any code yet, and if you really want to change what's in process, you can. Otherwise, it's going to be hyper disruptive," but you got to at least pretend to be objective, for sales.

(01:16:29):
If you're too emotional about it, you break the organization. You've got to say, "Listen, I know we've already written 80% of this upside integration. If you really need us to put us on the shelf and drop everything for a million dollar deal, we're a startup, we'll do it. But understand, just, is this really really what you want?" And if you involve them every week as a stakeholder, magic happens. But I don't see the VPs of Product that I work with, I know I'm not in all the staff meetings, but the meetings I'm in and the board meetings, I don't see this back and forth happening.

Lenny (01:16:58):
This might be the same exact answer you just gave, but say you're a PM and a salesperson comes to you, "Hey, we're about to close this deal. We just need this one feature. Can we just get this on the roadmap?," what's the best way to help that sales person understand why it's not happening, help them feel like, "Okay, I get it"? Is it exactly what just said? "Okay, we could change everything. Here's the story points you have this quarter."

Jason Lemkin (01:17:18):
Well, are you assuming that PM is the head of product or empowered enough to make the decisions?

Lenny (01:17:24):
I'd say, yeah, that PM could put something on the roadmap if they think it's important.

Jason Lemkin (01:17:29):
The reason I'm a little confused, just because I want to get it right, is what I'm hearing, which maybe isn't what you said. What I'm hearing is, a junior IC rep is talking to a more mid-level product person about the roadmap, and you want to have that. That's one of the reasons we actually go to the office. Because those discussions don't happen on Zoom, Lenny. They don't happen. And you want those discussions to happen, but you don't actually want them empowered. You want them to say, "Listen, I will talk to my boss." That's the right answer. It's too confusing.

(01:17:58):
This stress between product and sales is a good thing. It's a sign of a well-run B2B company when there is stress between product and sales. It's a good sign. If there's no stress, you're not in enough deals. You're not in enough deals if there's no stress. But the stress has to have enough process, even in a startup, that it doesn't break because your question alludes to the fact it can break organizations again and again. People get people resented on either side.

(01:18:27):
This is one thing where the answer has to be, "Look, we can chat about it over lunch. We can chat about this, and actually, you've got a good idea. You're an individual contributor. I'm going to tell my boss, on Monday, that I think we should do that. I'm going to use a little social capital and say we should do this," but you got to push the decisions up. That's as far as you're going to make recommendations. Otherwise, instead of that one stressful conversation with the VP, you've got a hundred, you've got 10 times a hundred, and again, they're fun lunch conversations, but they'll wreck you.

Lenny (01:18:54):
So the advice there is, basically, "Talk to your manager, I'll talk to my manager. They need to hash this out. It's not my call."

Jason Lemkin (01:19:00):
I think you got to push it up and I think you got to force the VP of Sales and the VP of Product to have this weekly meeting about the budget, and that will force them to have enough, just enough organization on their team so that it can all be surfaced up. Because that means they each have to have a meeting with their team for 30 minutes each week and say, "I'm going to put up on the whiteboard guys, so my sales team's going to say ... And I've been to many of these meetings where you force the sales team to force rank what they want and you end up, I tell you, Lenny, 100% of the time in the sales meeting, when you do a whiteboard force rank, you end up walking out with very different outputs than when you start the meeting in sales 100% of the time.

(01:19:36):
On the product side, you need to do the converse. You just need to say, "We owe sales 10% of our points, so in our team meeting, we're going to put in 15 minutes of our team meeting and we're going to make sure we have the priorities right from the sales team. Let's go over what I got from Linda. This is what she says. Is she wrong? Should we do something? How can we help the sales team be even more successful? And what inputs is the team hearing?" And they can raise their hand and say, "Look, I just had this all the way conversation with Bobby, but honestly, Lenny, I can build a HubSpot integration in a day." "What? I thought it was really hard." "No, I did it my last company. And listen, actually, we can actually outsource it to Bob and Linda at this agency I know for 20 grand. They'll build it next week." That's a magical moment. That's a magical moment. But you've got to each have these parallel meetings. The good thing, that tension can become debilitating. We've all seen those fights, those almost fights that break out, and they come from a place of passion, but you got to have structure.

Lenny (01:20:30):
Great advice. Another trend I've been noticing is that product teams are taking on P&L responsibilities and revenue goals. What's your sense of, is that good? Is that bad? How do you think about that for product teams?

Jason Lemkin (01:20:42):
You want everyone to be aligned on the big picture revenue goal for the end of the year. Is the question, you mean having financial bonuses and stuff tied to hitting the plan?

Lenny (01:20:51):
More that their KPIs and their OKRs are essentially this much revenue, you need to drive this much revenue from your experiments, from your product launches.

Jason Lemkin (01:21:00):
As you can see, I have a lot of opinions on things here that are data-driven and they're live experience. This one, I need another year in the oven, and I'll tell you why. I'll tell you why. What happened in the last 18 months is, in customer success, which is, in the old days, it was related to product. Now, it's less so, which I think is unfortunate. In customer success, in the last 18 months, this happened all across the industry. 24 months ago, customer success's goal was happy customers, measured in retention, sometimes NRR, net retention with upsells, sometimes with GRR, just logos, how many logos. That was your only job, happy customers. Happy customers.

(01:21:35):
Then, things got harder in many areas of B2B, and every customer success team last year, their goal was revenue. You need to bring in more revenue from existing base, and it destroyed customer relationships. There is a leading public company, I will not name them, I'm a positive guy. I will tell you, a company we all have used for years and loved, and they did this to their customer success team. And they came to us last year, we paid $299 a month for this product for our team. They asked us for $50,000 upfront or said they would turn it off that day. That week. Maybe it was that week. $50,000. That's what happens when you weaponize ...

(01:22:10):
So customer success, and I know this is going to trigger some people, but it is true, when I talk to leaders, customer success got weaponized and I don't like it, okay? I don't like it as a product. All founders are product people, I think. I don't like it as a product because I think it's bad for customers. That experience I got was horrific, wasn't it? That $50,000, being told. And it got walked back. And the fact that it got walked back is almost even worse because it wasn't true. It was a threat. So do I want to weaponize the product team? I want the product team aligned with revenue. These are the tough decisions for founders. But I think we're going to regret, to some extent, weaponizing teams that we don't need to weaponize.

(01:22:50):
Having said that, I will tell you, and again, no knock on Adobe, but when I was a VP at Adobe, and it was a long time ago, when product was in another building, in some cases, that was not great. And I love Scott and the whole team, it was a great experience, but I can just tell you, what I learned is, that did not work for me as an agile guy, having groups that would do this work in isolation.

(01:23:08):
And the problem was they would never talk to a customer. So I know I want product constantly talking to the customer. I know I want the VP of product with a lot of equity, wanting to hit the bookings number for the year. Do I want your average PM weaponized and forced to bring in revenue from an experimental feature when everyone agreed it's the test we're going to run? We only can run so many. You say, should they have revenue for new feature launches, for new product expansions, for new things? Yes, but everyone's got to make that decision. There aren't that many of us that have 1,000 extra engineers sitting around with nothing to do.

(01:23:44):
Even the smallest experiment, no matter what it says on the internet, again, that we release 100 a day, I would argue bringing any product extension to market's very expensive and risky because you're taking away from something else. These are expensive decisions, and if you punish people for the mistakes in product, this is something that big companies are actually better at than startups, which is, they don't fire you if the new initiative fails. Because then, no one at a big company would ever join the new initiative. There are exceptions, but no one at Adobe or Google would work on the new product if you got fired if it didn't hit $100 million its first year.

(01:24:21):
One thing I saw that was very, and I don't know how to bring to startups in my big company experience, was it's liberating to some extent to let people fail, up to a point. It's liberating. Because the cost of failure in a startup is so high. It's just so high. I know that's not what the exact question, and ask me in a year, but my advice is, just be careful that you don't weaponize functions.

Lenny (01:24:44):
I probably should have clarified. I think this is mostly true in PLG companies where most of the growth is coming from product, but I imagine the advice is still the same, as be careful putting too much pressure on the product team to focus on revenue.

Jason Lemkin (01:24:55):
Well, that's how you get dark stuff. Back in the day, I remember my sister worked at Vistaprint for online business cards, and her entire job was to force people to buy upsell of additional products on the checkout page they didn't want to buy. That was her whole job. And she was paid a large variable comp to get people to buy third party products without realizing in their checkout, and it worked. That's all she did for three years was figure out dark stuff, I mean, darkish, grayish stuff so that when I bought my business card, I also bought GoDaddy and 11 other things that I didn't want. It works, but it doesn't create high NPS, does it?

Lenny (01:25:34):
Mm-hmm. No.

Jason Lemkin (01:25:34):
The thing is, here's the thing that you have to think about. What's crazy, Lenny, now, and I talk to a lot of these folks is, there's so many SaaS companies that are a billion or more in revenue. I just wrote up, there's just Pimcore, which is SaaS for [inaudible 01:25:49]. I just wrote up, it just crossed a billion in revenue. So many folks are at a billion. CloudFlare just crossed a billion. And the only way you can do that is if your revenue compounds.

(01:25:59):
And in fact, just myself, I just interviewed Matt Mullen from WordPress, 20 years he's been doing this, and he said the number one thing he didn't understand at WordPress, at Automatic, was the power of compounding. When you do these things that are customer hostile, and a lot of us were under stress this last 12 days, to hit the numbers, right? This is your job as founders, is you got to load balance the fact that the cash has to last and my investors are mad with me, but nothing matters in B2B that it compounds. And some of this dark stuff you're talking about on PLG, it anti-compounds, right?

(01:26:30):
And I would say, let me flip it around. The magical thing at the high level that it compounds, if you have a self-service model, a PLG model, I actually think the number one most important metric is churn. It's going to this churn, churn, churn, churn. And when I meet any startup for investing or anything, if the churn is not top decile for a low end product, I'm always out. It's almost unsolvable. It's almost unsolvable. This 3% to 4% a month churn rate that a lot of SMB stuff, it's almost unsolvable. I think that's where the energy should go, is relentlessly bringing down churn so that, 20 years from now, we all have billion dollar AR companies. That's what we want.

Lenny (01:27:11):
I have a rapid fire set of questions before, actually, the lightning round. We'll see if we have time for all these things. I just have a bunch of random questions that I'm going to fire at you and and see what comes up. Sounds good? Okay, cool. I got a thumbs up. Let's do it. Okay.

(01:27:23):
What is just one thing a founder or product leader can do to become better at sales?

Jason Lemkin (01:27:28):
The number one thing they can do, and this is very tactical, at the end of each meeting, because again, both of them are good middlers, the head of product and the founders are good demos, they're good at talking shop, they're good at talking in the industry, they're good at talking workflows. Learn. This is the only school you have to learn. Even if you're not comfortable asking for money, learn to ask for what's the next step, Lenny. This is what all great salespeople have learned to do. Actually, mediocre salespeople are terrible at this. The best salespeople never leave a meeting without a next step. The next step does not have to be a check. Don't break the relationship, but what's the next meeting? The next meeting might be, "Lenny, is there someone else at your company that I could do a demo for?" People are lazy, they don't want to do multiple demos.

(01:28:06):
But in 2024, we all have to demo multiple stakeholders. In 2021, it was one stakeholder. Now, it's a four-stakeholder sale. If you don't know what to ask at the end of the call, ask, "Who else? Lenny, is there someone else? I know you're excited to buy our product, but who else? Is there someone else in the organization? Can I help you? Can I just do a demo?" A demo is not threatening. Whatever the next step is, "What's the next step we can get on our books?" And listen. The best salespeople march deals step by step by step by step. And then, they put in the time. They've done the demos, they've done the pilot if they need to, they've helped them get going, they've helped them see the value. And then, if it takes six steps to say, "Okay, Lenny, now, we've got five folks at the organization using it. They've seen, here's the deal. They love it. What can we do, Lenny, to get going? Can we get a contract signed so we can get going on February 1st?" It's just very natural.

(01:28:56):
And founders just end the Zoom. They end the zoom, and they wait. They wait in their inbox for the next step to come, but it doesn't, it rarely comes on its own. That's the number one tip is, make sure yourself and you log it in your CRM that you always have a next step after. You don't have to be great at sales. As long as you're moving the ball down the field, then, get it into the red zone, and then, figure out how to ask for the money. But you don't have to ask for the money until it's in the red zone.

Lenny (01:29:21):
Amazing. While we're on this topic, is there a book or a course or anything that you'd just recommend folks go to get better at sales? Just, is there some tactical, "Go read this thing, it'll help you?" Or is it just, it's hard, you're not going to figure it out reading a book?

Jason Lemkin (01:29:35):
I am a voracious reader. If I only wanted to plug myself, and I usually wouldn't, two things that we have, we have something called SaaStr.University. SaaStr dot University. It's free. There's a pretty good course on learning about sales. It's not perfect, but it's pretty good. It just organizes a lot of the stuff we're talking about and it's free. I think it's pretty helpful. We actually wrote a book called From Impossible To Inevitable that sold about 100,000 copies.

Lenny (01:29:59):
Oh, wow.

Jason Lemkin (01:29:59):
I did almost none of the work, although a lot of is my content. Aaron Ross did it. It's actually really good, and it interviews a lot of top sales leaders and goes through a lot of stuff we did. I don't usually hype it, but for 15 bucks, I think this ... And actually, I've never made one dollar. I've never even gotten a check for these 100,000 copies, but I do think it's actually ... The second edition's pretty good. I think, if you like what we're talking about, the SaaS University and the others. I just hyped my own course, which is free. I don't think I'm selling something if it's free. The book, I don't make a dollar on. I'd be very cautious, and this is tough, maybe this is something we can work on together. There's so many courses and so many people selling stuff the last two years. Just be cautious. Just be cautious.

(01:30:39):
The last thing I will say is, there is another community called Pavilion, and I do think it's great, Pavilion. It does have a lot of networking and stuff for sales and connecting sales with founders, and I am a super fan of what they're doing. That one's worth investing. But be careful about Bob and John's sales courses on the internet. There's too many.

Lenny (01:31:00):
Awesome. All right. We'll link to all those things in the show notes.

(01:31:03):
Next question, what is the ideal trial length for a free trial for sales team? Is it 14 days, a month, years? What do you recommend?

Jason Lemkin (01:31:11):
Tomas Tsangaris did a whole SaaStr presentation just on free trials and free trial legs. It was really good, but the one thing you didn't know, which I know just being an old timer is, one of the reasons we have 14-day trials on the internet is, in the old days, the Salesforce sales team, when they were SMB focused, wanted to close deals that month, so they forced Salesforce to move from 30 to 14 days. There was no evidence it was better for the customer. There was no evidence that it got usage going or people ... They just wanted to close deals the same month.

(01:31:41):
That's something to be cautious about, these metrics. And be cautious, since we're talking to product folks, be cautious that they're customer centric. Salesforce is very enterprise now, but in the old days, it pushed it to 14 days so the sales reps could close deals faster. What we learned from Slack and Zoom until recently was infinite trials work pretty good. So does Canva. Slack and Canva, and until recently, Zoom, were okay waiting four years to convert. And those are epic companies. Those are epic companies.

(01:32:12):
And these are one of the things that only founders can make these decisions. I wrote this post years ago saying, "Who's your VP of Free?" Because who's got a VP of Free? Do you know anybody that has a VP of Free? I got a VP of Growth, I got a VP of Product, but if you have this massive free base, who's your VP of Free? I know almost no one that has a VP of Free. And usually, it's some kind of collaboration between product and the CEO. They're the VP of Free, but even then, you need a VP of Free, and we don't have one. There's no perfect answers, but in a world where we're tightening nooses everywhere on trials, we're tightening nooses everywhere, be careful the advice you get, be careful the short-term advice.

(01:32:49):
For example, another related terrible piece of advice VCs give you is switch to annual contracts. This is terrible advice. Terrible advice, Lenny. Terrible advice from people who've never built products and aren't in the field. Going to annual contracts, on a spreadsheet, looks great. On a spreadsheet-

Jason Lemkin (01:33:00):
Going to annual contracts on a spreadsheet looks great. On a spreadsheet, it looks great. You know what's better? Letting customers pay what they want to pay. If it's you or me buying for ourselves, Lenny, we're still going to put it on a credit card, aren't we? If it's our own personal... And we want to pay monthly, usually, we don't know. We usually want to just try it monthly. Big companies want to pay annually because they have procurement departments. Why force people to go the way they don't want to go? So, just start, this is a product audience. Product needs to be the voice of the customer. It's not so much customer success as it used to be. It's not so much sales. You've got to be the voice of the customer together with the founders and push these things.

(01:33:39):
Think about, I would do the longest possible trial that is still customer-centric and understand there's tension. Understand there's tension, right? I say anytime I'm in a board meeting where some VC says, "Let's do annual for an SMB." I mean, I'm like, "No. Show me the money. Show me the evidence that this is better for the customer." Right? How many times have you gone to buy something for yourself and it's 19 bucks a month? And that's annoying because it's an [inaudible 01:34:05] credit card charge. But do you want to pay 240 up front? I mean, maybe you do it for a Riverside or something you use all the time, but some random product you just discovered, you're just going to bounce.

Lenny (01:34:14):
Yeah.

Jason Lemkin (01:34:14):
So, who's going to show the data in the bounce, right? A related point for like in sales. No one does enough. Everyone does these win-loss meetings, but no one talks enough about the deals they lost. Everyone talks about the deals they won. All the lore, the tribal lore in sales is how we won the deal. People should be spending more time talking about deals they lost than the deals they won, right? And same thing for this PLG motion. If you make your... Yes, I give everyone a pass for 2023, everyone whose growth plummeted and did things they shouldn't. Did price increases they didn't earn, cut the free trials, hid their free editions. I'm going to give you, look, you've got to give your team a little stress relief, right? So, I'm giving every person I work with, every portfolio, everyone a one-year pass, but the past is in the past. We got to get back to being customer-centric and building businesses that build to 1 billion ARR on their own because they're wonderful businesses that are product-centric, right? That recur. And every time you rip a customer off, you lose, the relationship's damaged, isn't it?

(01:35:21):
And a controversial thing I say to the product team, but I think this is the right thing if you're going long, is look, everyone raised prices last year, as you know, right? Everyone raised prices. The question I ask folks is, "Did you earn it?" What feature did you [inaudible 01:35:36]? If you raised prices 8% last year, did you add 30% more value to your product? In the old days pre these crazy years, the answer usually was yes. People would wait up, they would wait a couple years, right? And the whatever product from four years ago was so much better. It really was. Really had earned 1995 instead of... Last year, no one earned their price increases. No one came out with an amazing new edition, an amazing new functionality that earned it. They just sent you an email saying, "You're paying more." So we get one pass, but earn it. Earn your price increase.

(01:36:12):
Have the longest free trial possible. Own it. And this VP of free thing, it's got to be founders working with product because no one else cares about the free. You can't expect the sales team to care about free, can you? You can't expect the marketing team to care about free. Unless they can immediately monetize them, right? Unless they can ram them into conversion. People abuse their long tail in the last 18 months, but your long tail is... These are your... Even if they don't convert that much, they're your advocates. I mean, how many people read your newsletter? 500,000 people, right?

Lenny (01:36:42):
Almost 600,000.

Jason Lemkin (01:36:42):
Okay. 600,000. Now, not all of them convert, do they?

Lenny (01:36:46):
No, no. That's exactly how I look at it. It's kind of this Brian Belfort is this... Yeah.

Jason Lemkin (01:36:49):
What about the 590,000 of them that love Lenny that don't convert, right?

Lenny (01:36:49):
Yeah.

Jason Lemkin (01:36:53):
If you over monetize them, then Lenny's community doesn't exist if you over monetize them. But when you bring in a VP of sales for Lenny and a VP of growth and... You can't expect them to care as much about that long tail as you, right?

Lenny (01:37:10):
I love your passion around this. So, what I'm hearing partly is you're a big fan of freemium, essentially, right? And the benefits of product-led growth where there's something you could just use indefinitely, or do you still think that's a trial where it needs to end at some point? Or is it just like, "No, freemium is great in a lot of cases."

Jason Lemkin (01:37:26):
Listen, I'm a big fan of long tails when they work. They don't always work for enterprise products. I'm a big fan of delivering more value than you take out for your customers. And I am a big fan overall of free, because, and I know you'll agree with me this, every founder figures this out at some point, free products are better software. Products that cannot offer a free edition cut corners because they don't have to be good at onboarding. The products that do not have a free edition have human beings that bridge the gap between buying and deployment. And that's okay at ServiceNow, and that's okay in certain products, but the best products invest the engineering cycles to have a free edition. Whether that's truly free, whether it's an extended free trial, whether it's a long tail or a medium tail, the amount of... All of your product is better if people can actually, if you have a free edition, all your customers benefit, even your enterprise customers benefit, they all benefit.

Lenny (01:38:28):
This idea of VP of free, I think technically it's probably the head of growth for a PLG company or the person leading the self-serve part of the business.

Jason Lemkin (01:38:36):
But even in the organizations I work with that have those structures, that person is focused on monetizing that tail. Who stands up for the 590,000 other readers of Lenny? Who's their champion?

Lenny (01:38:50):
Yeah, and you're 100% right. That's exactly how I think about the newsletter. There's this free audience and ideas over time, they get convinced, "This is worth my money and let's give it a shot."

Jason Lemkin (01:38:58):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:38:59):
So, yeah.

Jason Lemkin (01:39:00):
And your growth person, let's say 1% converts. I'm just making that up. Going from 1 to 1.1 actually is a big deal at that scale or 1.2, right? That's okay. But you've got to nurture the 490,000, not spend all the calories just ramming the paid edition through, right? But only it's a fun thing, because once you hit a little bit of scale, this is part of your job as founders and product leaders is who's going to be this VP of free? It's not growth. I don't think it's the growth team or something. They got to hit their goal when their goal is to get another half million out of the newsletter this year. And that's their bonuses side to it. You think they're going to work on the free ones? No chance.

Lenny (01:39:43):
Makes sense. Oh man, there's so many things I can go into and want to go into. I also want to let you go. So with that, is there anything else, Jason, that you wanted to share before we get to our very exciting lightning round? Anything you want to leave listeners with?

Jason Lemkin (01:39:59):
I think just make this the year of the customer guys. And I really think that sales has been under so much pressure the last 18 months. Customer success has changed. Product teams have to step up. This is your time to do great things this year as product people. Be the voice of the customer. Be the VP of free, be the whatever. Be the champion. Stick your neck out. Work harder, folks. Work harder. The funnest part of anything in startups is working hard, but in product it's extra fun. By working harder, you have the more fun conversations. Find the delight in... The delight in product is making customers happy. It's not worth it otherwise. Otherwise, it's drudgery and it's endless PRDs and Gantt charts and mindless discussions. Make your customers happier this year, you will be happy. This is the year of product and we all get a pass for whatever bad deeds we did or mediocre deeds we did in 2023, get back and be the vanguard in your companies.

(01:40:53):
Startups need, and bigger companies, they need someone to inject energy again, in many cases. Energy has been lost. And it would be great if product can do it and say, "Listen, let's do something, even if we're not exactly sure how to get more leads, okay? Even if we're not exactly sure what to do, there's one thing under our control is the code we write and the product we ship. Let's do three great things this year. Let's just do them not good, great. Let's do three great." And what you'll find is the whole company will respond, including sales, including marketing, including... If we start shipping great thing. Few things inspire teams more than when you're shipping great products. So, be... If you weren't the leaders the last two years, if you were being forced to weaponize your customer base somehow ship three great things this year. That's my challenge. Ship three great things.

Lenny (01:41:39):
I love this. This is the year of product, that might be the title of this podcast.

Jason Lemkin (01:41:42):
Yes.

Lenny (01:41:44):
Jason, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions for you. Are you ready?

Jason Lemkin (01:41:50):
Okay. I'm worried about the first one, but go for it.

Lenny (01:41:52):
They're very non-surprising, because they're always the same. What are two or three books you've recommended most to other people?

Jason Lemkin (01:42:00):
That's the one I just want to take a pass on. I know they're the same. I read more than anybody else in the planet, but I wish I had those two great, great books that have changed my mind in the last 12 months, but hopefully I've added some value. But this one, I think I got to take a mulligan on it [inaudible 01:42:14] perfect answer.

Lenny (01:42:15):
Acceptable answer. Is there a favorite movie or TV show that you really enjoy?

Jason Lemkin (01:42:20):
Oh, the Terminal List.

Lenny (01:42:22):
The Terminal List?

Jason Lemkin (01:42:24):
The Terminal List, yeah. I'm not into the Chris Pratt. I'm not into that goofy superhero movies he does, and I know people like it, but The Terminal List, it's pretty, it's I got it, it's written by this ex Navy SEAL that I think tech people don't read the... Everyone, but outside of tech reads this author, but Amazon did this thing with The Terminal List and I think the reason it gripped me, it's like this post, it's like a lot of tech is right now is we're trying to do the right things, but are we doing the right things? It's just confusing. So this one, I couldn't put down, The Terminal List. That was my favorite show. The other one, the one I liked that I couldn't believe. You want the second one? Even though as product people, Maverick, and I'll tell you why. This movie Maverick, okay, you wouldn't think I'd be a Maverick guy, but the quality of this product, it was so high.

(01:43:18):
And what's interesting, you remember Maverick was supposed to come out before COVID, right? And Tom Cruise said no. He's like, "This is such a good product, we're going to wait years for this thing to come out." I'm like, " I'm not going to like this. I mean, cocktail was pretty good, but I'm not going to..." But as a product, when... I've watched this movie three times from a product perspective and just like software, when something is done that well, no wasted calories, no... You see everything tied together. That's the kind of software we love, right? It just delights us when it works better than we expected. So, those are my two.

Lenny (01:43:53):
You also did all his own stunts, which I think is a good metaphor for the VP of product, maybe being involved in sales?

Jason Lemkin (01:43:57):
Actually do the work.

Lenny (01:43:59):
Yeah, exactly. Oh man, I'm stretching it. Okay, next question. You answered a few of these already, but do you have a favorite interview question that you like to ask when you're interviewing salespeople, especially?

Jason Lemkin (01:44:09):
I answered it, but I'll bring it up again in case you do it again, is, "What do you want to do your first 14 days to head of product or head of sales? What do you want to do your first 14 days?" It's not a technical 30-day plan, you don't have to do 28 slides. It's what I call a Colombo question. Not that I really watch Colombo, but Colombo is this old detective on TV who, I don't know if you ever, he would ask these dumb questions, right? And then the murderer would thought Colombo was so dumb, but by the end of the episode he'd always incriminate himself because the question. So, when I interview, I always do Colombo questions. They're never tough ones, right? They're always nice. I don't know if I'm nice, I'm honest, but the interview [inaudible 01:44:42]. But Lenny, what would you do your first 14 days as VP of product here? And they don't want to visit customers. Don't hire them for either all sales or product. Just don't hire them.

Lenny (01:44:51):
I've got the answer now. That's exactly what I was going to say. Next question, what is a favorite product that you have recently discovered that you really like?

Jason Lemkin (01:45:00):
My two aren't really amazing, but I'll answer them. I love this Opus Clip app for making clips from video. I know you have a whole team, so you probably don't need it, but I produce a lot. I mean, a lot of us do content marketing, right? Whoever does it. I produce a lot of content. I don't have enough time to do this. So, the only AI tool that I've found helpful so far is Opus Clip, which takes all of the incredible amount of YouTube content we have, force ranks it and turns it into 59 second clips. And I'm a case study on the website, I tried the earlier products. They were almost there, right? But it's not, is it as good as a clip team? Right? Is it? No.

(01:45:41):
But literally in 60 seconds, what's interesting is it can do something, I don't have time to, I could never make YouTube clips. I could never make Instagram shorts. I could never make... It just would never happen, right? It would never happen. And the fact that one product enables you to do something at a minimum viable quality you couldn't do before, I'm a super fan. It's pretty interesting. So, that's my favorite. And my other one is this one. This is the folding phone that's finally as good as a normal phone. See, there's The Terminal List that I've got folded up and it just works.

Lenny (01:46:11):
That's wild. [inaudible 01:46:12].

Jason Lemkin (01:46:12):
Weighs the same as an iPhone.

Lenny (01:46:13):
Wow.

Jason Lemkin (01:46:13):
And so the reason it's cool is this has changed the way I do productivity. One Plus, it's the One Plus. One Plus, yeah, it's the first one that's the same form factor, same weight, same... So there's really no, there's no loss, right? And I can use my normal phone here like I'm using, it's a little funky, but it's the same... And then to be able to do content, to be able to check, to be able to do full email, full account, full everything like an iPad.

Lenny (01:46:39):
We see your Tesla where it's going, that gets parked. That's very cool. So, it's basically like an iPad plus a phone in one.

Jason Lemkin (01:46:47):
Yeah, I probably use this 50% of the time of the iPad.

Lenny (01:46:50):
Wow.

Jason Lemkin (01:46:50):
So, that's it. That is it. The other ones that-

Lenny (01:46:52):
And that's an Android?

Jason Lemkin (01:46:53):
... Make sense to me. Yeah, it's a Android, yeah.

Lenny (01:46:55):
Amazing. I had not seen that. That is extremely cool.

Jason Lemkin (01:46:55):
Very cool.

Lenny (01:46:58):
Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to share with friends or family, find useful in work or in life?

Jason Lemkin (01:47:07):
It's, "Be kind." When I reflect on my career, right? Mistakes, I don't think I'm mean. I actually think I care more than most people on the planet. I like to think I've helped a lot of people, but it's not taking the time to be kind at times and not taking time to be kind when things don't work out. Not taking time to be kind when you leave a situation. Not taking time to be kind when maybe someone's done the wrong thing, right? Not taking time to be kind to a customer that leaves, right? I remember in the early days of Adobe Sign of EchoSign, we had a top tech customer, and I killed myself to close this customer, right? Famous, huge, huge tech company today. And then our champion changed, right? Champion changed is the big issue in software and product and came in and brought in DocuSign instead of us.

(01:47:56):
And man, I was just so mad. I just tore into this guy. This guy had actually had dinner at my house, right? And he actually never, he just did it because it was good for his own career, right? And I was so mad, but I broke the relationship forever, right? That's just one random example. And I just think there's so much advice to fire fast and to be relentless and do all these things, right? But you've interviewed so many people, Lenny, right? I mean so many great leaders. I haven't done what you've done, but I've talked to almost all the top CEOs in SaaS, okay? And they're kind. It doesn't mean that they're soft, they're not soft, okay? They make tough decisions every day, but they're kind. And so in this world where everyone feels like they're getting ripped off or they're not paid enough, or I want founder pay for founder work, this motto, really it's troubling.

(01:48:51):
Everyone is founder pay for founder... "You want me to work more than 30 hours, Lenny? I need 30% of the company. I need founder pay for founder work." It's like, I hear you. But you'll find that by being totally committed, going to 110% and also finding a way to be kind, that will endure across your whole career. So, I know it's... Because I think I'm good, but not always kind. It's how I challenge myself all the time. Be kinder in that conversation. And the big epiphany, we already talked about it, it shouldn't have taken me this long to realize that anytime an employee fails, it's your fault, be kind. You hired them. They never knew what they were getting themselves into. If the job's too hard, if they lack the skills, if there's not enough budget, if there's not enough people, if it requires too many hours to work, you should have known that. Not them. Be kind. Be kind to every single person on your team that doesn't work out. That's not just putting together an email spreadsheet and sending it out. Try, try harder. Be there for them. Be kind.

Lenny (01:49:44):
Be kind. I love this. I know that you actually, your username on Twitter includes, "Be kind." In your actual-

Jason Lemkin (01:49:51):
It's a reminder.

Lenny (01:49:52):
Yeah.

Jason Lemkin (01:49:52):
It's a reminder.

Lenny (01:49:52):
So, you really back this up. Amazing. Okay, final question. You're on a giant conference, SaaStr.

Jason Lemkin (01:49:58):
Yes.

Lenny (01:49:59):
First of all, just talk about what it is so people know and explore it and check it out. But the actual question is what would surprise people most about running a conference like this? Things that they know, think about it goes into running a conference like this.

Jason Lemkin (01:50:13):
Any business, no matter how weird it is, that's at scale, the best one in it, it's always interesting, I think for case studies, right? The best, pick anything, the best cup maker, whoever it is, whoever makes the best... This is not an interesting business, the Starbucks cup on its own, but the best person, I pretty much guarantee you there's a good story there, right? SaaStr is a community as well like you have. We started this really early in 2011, 2012 for B2B founders back when that seemed like a weird thing to do. Now it doesn't seem so weird. So, we built a lot of content and we started doing events and meetups. I never did a meetup. You do a lot of meetups, but when I did meetups, I'd never actually even been to one. So, I did meetups in 2012 and 2013, but 1,000 people came to the meetups.

(01:50:56):
That will make sense to you today, but a decade ago for B2B, it was pretty, people were like, "Why are all these people here? We thought there was six of us that cared about B2B." So, then we did a big event. We did a one-day SaaStr annual in 2015, and 3000 people came including the evening. And so we just kept going. So, we get about 10 to 12,000 people together a year. What that means is change. It's no longer novel. I'm not the only person producing B2B content anymore. I'm not the only founder that sold their company like in the old days. There's plenty much more successful founders and better, I certainly, I don't do very many podcasts, because I'm not a hundredth as good as you. I do one a quarter, for example.

(01:51:34):
But the events have become this meeting place for founders that have hit scale, that are somewhere between 1 million and 20 million. And especially folks that aren't in Silicon Valley, especially folks that aren't sitting in Hayes Valley or wherever, that don't have a community. And that surprised me in the beginning how many international folks would fly all the way to the Bay Area. I remember this founder came from Perth, Australia for the first afternoon. I'm like, "Thanks for coming, but this is a lot of work." He is like, "I didn't come for you. I came because there's no one like me in Perth." So, it's taken on a life of its own. There's a lot of learnings. I think, I didn't intend to do mass scale events. I intended to just do meetups, because I had a community like you do meetups. So, it was absolutely an accident. The learnings are, it's extremely expensive and it has this weird curve. Okay, that's this weird curve where, and this is more because I think actually all founders, all startups should be doing events for their own customers, at least steak dinners I've written about. You should get your customers, if you get your customers and prospects together, you sell more. Get your customers and... It does not need to be a million dollar or 10 million event. It can be Roots Chrises, it can be whatever. It does not even need to be fancy. Just get them together.

Lenny (01:52:39):
It has to be steak though.

Jason Lemkin (01:52:41):
Yeah, well, no, but steak does work. I mean, I'm not a big steak guy. It could be any, just something nice where they want to go. It, just where they want to go. Your customers will sell your prospects for you. Your customers will do the selling for you [inaudible 01:52:53] bring them together.

(01:52:55):
When you do it really small, it's cheap, because how much does that back room cost at the steakhouse, right? It's worth it if you get one big deal out of it, right? And then you graduate and then you'll do a meetup and you'll do it at someone's office. Some tech company, they'll give it to you for free, they have an extra office. That costs nothing, right? And then you're like, "Well, that went well. We got 100, 200 people came to Lenny's thing at Digital Ocean." And then you say, "I'm gonna do an event." And then you rent a theater, a disuse. And these theaters are actually kind of cheap because they're dark during the day. There's not a lot going on and a lot of... Not movie theaters but music. So, those are cheap. But then you're like, "Well, there's only one stage and it smells like beer."

(01:53:34):
So, then the next year you do a hotel and a hotel's pretty expensive. It's like half a million, 800,000 and I hated hotels. But you know what I learned from the business model? It's turnkey landing. So, your marketing manager can call up the Hilton in any city and in two weeks spool up some mediocre AV, some mediocre chicken wings and drinks, okay? And you and I don't like to go to the Hilton that much. The ballroom C, we don't like to go to events [inaudible 01:54:00], but it turns out your customers don't care. They want to be together and talk about your app, right? And then if you do community like you do, you could probably charge a couple $100 for tickets and get some sponsors and bring in some revenue, right? But then after Hilton Ballroom B, it costs $2 million to turn the lights on.

(01:54:16):
And SaaStr annual... So, our Europa event in London's in early June, June fourth to fifth, please come if you want. That costs $2 million to turn the lights on in London. To turn the lights on in the Bay Area for 12,000 people in September in the Bay Area, which is the most expensive place, right? It's $10 million to turn the lights on.

Lenny (01:54:32):
Holy shit.

Jason Lemkin (01:54:34):
It's $10 million to turn the lights on. Now, I'm being a little expansive in what I mean by turn the lights on, but this is what it's going to cost you. It's going to cost you about $1000 per attendee in the Bay Area or Las Vegas to have a mass scale event. Not smaller, not one day in Grand Ballroom B, but a multi-day event, right? The AV is 1.5 million. The food and beverage is 1.5 million. The tenting is $800,000. I can keep going. So, once you get to 20, 30, 40 million in revenue, quietly, there's public companies out there.

(01:55:04):
They have software like Margins at that scale, but before that, it's brutal, right? And when I started doing these events, I interviewed the head of it back before March 2020 when tech companies did their own events, they've pretty much given up, which is an interesting side topic. Big ones like big, not small ones, but big ones. Biden View, the head of events at everyone, right? At Twilio and Marketo and dah, dah. They all be like, "Well, how'd the event go?" It'd all be the same. Well, we brought in about 1.5 million revenue. " Oh, okay." "And we lost 2 million." Everyone lost 2 million. Every single one lost 2 million. And you could see in the financial state, even Zoom at that scale just announced how much money they lose at Zoomtopia. So, it's a terrible business. What I like to say is it has diseconomies of scale. The Lenny's little free meetup costs zero, right? And then the one at Cloudflare's office costs zero.

(01:55:50):
And the one at Hilton B maybe costs $200, but then it costs $1000 per person at scale, right? Even more like Moscone like in San Francisco is probably the most expensive. You're approaching $2,000 per person, because you have to buy about 15 to 20 million of hotel nights to do an event in Moscone, right? So I don't know if that's... We could, I mean it's a side topic, Lenny's side podcast for people that care. But this diseconomies of scale. But there are a handful of public companies that do Lions, Money 2020, Shoptalk, a few others that are at SaaStr scale. And they cobbled together these very profitable public companies. But they all got to do at least 20 to 30 million, because you've got to get over a 10. And it's intimidating to get over a $10 million net, right?

(01:56:33):
And so what it means is we have to spend 14 to 16 months each year planning for SaaStr annual because it's not that fun if you fall six or $8 million behind. That's what happened in March 2020. We were the first major event to be canceled by COVID in March 2020. The first one, RSA happened for security the week before then we got canceled. So, we lost $10 million in one day and it took a long time to dig out of that hole, Lenny, especially since we monetize nothing, it took a long time, but they're worth it.

(01:57:04):
I know you don't do traditional events, but you do do meetups in your community, and I know they're worth it. I know they're worth it. Bringing your customers together, bringing your community together, and we talked about this offline before we started. Second tier, third tier events I do not think are worth it because they do not attract the best people. It's just a fact. Most people, it turns out from our founders are our core ICP. They go to two events a year on average, two events a year, okay? And they'll do other steak dinners. So, if you go to one of the two that they're at, you just might bump into Jeff Lawson or Eric Juan or whoever the next one. They might be there. That might be one of their two, but they don't go to number three through 10. They don't go to these. So, my role in general is people wonder, should I go to events? Is it worth my time? It's a waste of time.

(01:57:49):
And I know you've thought about it. And the irony is, even though we produce events, I used to think that. I didn't want to do events, I just wanted to do meetups, right? I was shy, I just wanted to do meetups. But then I learned over time that the best events bring the best vendors, the best executives, the best everything together. So, pick the one or two best events in your industry. And even if you're antisocial, try to go to one or two a year, go along. It pays off. It pays off, but maybe don't bother with the rest, even if they're ski slopes or they're fun that the subscale, subscale just doesn't work for meeting and marketing to people. It just doesn't work.

Lenny (01:58:25):
I said at the top of this podcast that there's a billion things that we could talk about, and I think that's exactly what happened. We can go in so many directions. And that alone was extremely interesting, because people want me to run a conference and I really don't. And I really enjoy the meetups that we have now. And we actually do have sponsors that cover drinks and food and things like that, and they're very chill, and I really love what happens at those things. But yes, this is really good information. Jason, I have two more questions for you that I ask everyone. I think we went through a couple of these things, but just real quick, where can folks find you if they want to reach out and maybe follow up on some of the stuff you talked about? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Jason Lemkin (01:59:03):
In general just go to this kooky, URL, SaaStr, saastr.com. That's a way to access a lot of what we're talking about. If they want to reach me to be transparent, I get a lot of impound, like I'm sure you do, to be honest, guys, it is hard to process the amount of inbound that folks get, right? But I'll give you an insider tip. I do see almost all of it. So, if you want to reach me, if you just want an hour of my time randomly, I'm sorry, honestly, I'm sorry, I don't have that hour of time, okay? But if you want to interact lightly, I mean, I'm on Twitter all most days @Jasonlk. I'm on LinkedIn a lot, just search for me, Jason Lemkin. LinkedIn's pretty cool. I have 260,000 followers. We have really good conversations. And I will tell you, if you have a question like you really need some help in your business or you want to do a pitch, if you send me the world's best email pitch, I will read a 100% of them.

(02:00:00):
Track it, put it in Mixmax, put it in HubSpot, put it... You'll see I'll open that email if the title's good. It doesn't mean I can respond. I'm sorry, no, Lenny can't respond, but realize it is going to be read. If you need a favor, like a help, if you ask the question super discreetly like, "Jason, here's the LinkedIn, I'm Lenny. I'm trying to hire this person. I'm at four millionaire doubling. Should I hire her?" There's a chance I'll look at that LinkedIn, I can tell you, or if it's one question, but if it's an hour or coffee, it isn't going to work, but it is going to get read. So, do that by email. Do it even by LinkedIn. I didn't used to read those LinkedIn emails, but if it's really good, I will read it and I probably respond to five or six of them a day.

(02:00:35):
I give to the extent that it's helpful, free answers, free advice. Not that I charge for anything, but make it good. Don't ask for coffee. So, many folks have written this, the most important people in the world read email. It's an open medium, right? And a subset of those folks actually read their social media. Even Elon Musk reads his, before he bought Twitter, he read it. You can access almost anyone in this industry. Just be super strategic about how you do it. Again, put yourself in your shoes. Would you answer this? Would you do this? But I would say half the stuff gets open to read. So, I know that's a rambly answer, but first, we talked about sales. You can reach anybody in the world via email. It's magical.

Lenny (02:01:11):
I'm sorry for the many emails you might get from this podcast. That is actually really good advice. Resonates deeply with me as well. Jason, thank you so much for being here.

Jason Lemkin (02:01:21):
Thank you for all the time, Lenny. I'm a super fan. It's great to be here and let me know anything I can do to support you or your community going forward.

Lenny (02:01:28):
I really appreciate that. And the same in reverse. Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at Lenny's podcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Jonathan Becker (00:00:00):
There's a lot of different ways that we are beginning to use AI to do more with less, basically. The effect ultimately that we've seen from a human capital point of view is displacement. We have more people now than we've ever had, but the nature of the work that they do is more strategic. It's more about modeling, validation, asking the right questions, being focused around creative levers. And less so the like trench work of implementation and bid modifiers at the keyword level on Google search, and some of the really hardcore manual analysis we had to do.

(00:00:35):
On our creative group, we can come up with mockups, in literally, 1% of the time that it took. And so you still have to understand what questions to ask of the AI and be capable of iterating, but these rough drafts that you might show the artwork of to a client to say, "Do we like this more or do we like this more?" That's AI generated. It's really interesting.

Lenny (00:01:01):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast, where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard won experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Jonathan Becker. Jonathan is a legend and an OG in the world of performance marketing. On this podcast, we've done deep dives into the many aspects of growth, including SEO, sales, conversion optimization, retention, product led growth, product led sales. But this is the first episode where we get super deep on paid growth. For the past decade plus, Jonathan and his team have planned, built, and executed more than $3.5 billion in paid acquisition budgets for companies like Uber, Asana, Square, Masterclass, Tempur-Pedic, and many more. And they've built their agency, Thrive Digital, into one of the preeminent independent digital marketing agencies. In our conversation, we get real deep into all things paid growth, including what's changed with recent privacy shifts, why focusing on creatives is the new biggest opportunity within paid growth. How to think about attribution, and what's changed there. What to look for in people you hire to run paid growth for you, how AI is already changing how paid growth teams operate, and so much more. Enjoy this episode with Jonathan Becker after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:16):
This episode is brought to you by Brain Trust, where the world's most innovative companies go to find talent fast so that they can innovate faster. Let's be honest, it's a lot of work to build a company. And if you want to stay ahead of the game, you need to be able to hire the right talent quickly and confidently. Brain Trust is the first decentralized talent network where you can find, hire, and manage high quality contractors in engineering, design, and product for a fraction of the cost of agencies.

(00:02:43):
Brain Trust charges a flat rate of only 10%, unlike agency fees of up to 70%, so you can make your budget go four times further. Plus, they're the only network that takes 0% of what the talent makes, so they're able to attract and retain the world's best tech talent. Take it from DoorDash, Airbnb, Plaid, and hundreds of other high growth startups that have shaved their hiring process for months to weeks at less than a quarter of the cost by hiring through Brain Trust network of 20,000 high quality vetted candidates ready to work. Whether you're looking to fill in gaps, upskill your staff, or build a team for that dream project that finally got funded, contact Brain Trust and you'll get matched with three candidates in just 48 hours. Visit usebraintrust.com/lenny, or find them in my show notes for today's episode. That's usebraintrust. com/lenny for when you need talent yesterday.

(00:03:35):
Today's episode is brought to you by AssemblyAI. If you're looking to build AI powered features in your audio and video products, then you need to know about AssemblyAI, which makes it easy to transcribe and understand speech at scale. What I love about AssemblyAI, is you can use their simple API to access the latest AI breakthroughs from top tier research labs. Product team that startups and enterprises are using AssemblyAI to automatically transcribe and summarize phone calls and virtual meetings, detect topics in podcasts, pinpoint when sensitive content is spoken, and lots more. All of AssemblyAI's models which are accessed through their API are production ready. So many PMs I know are considering or already building with AI, and AssemblyAI is the fastest way to build with AI for audio use cases. Now's the time to check out AssemblyAI, which makes it easy to bring the highest accuracy transcription plus valuable insights to your customers. Just like Spotify, CallRail, and Writer do for theirs. Visit AssemblyAI.com/lenny to try their API for free, and start testing their models with their no code playground. That's AssemblyAI.com/lenny.

(00:04:46):
Jonathan, welcome to the podcast.

Jonathan Becker (00:04:48):
Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here.

Lenny (00:04:50):
It's my pleasure. What we're going to be doing with this episode, is we're going to be digging real deep into all things paid growth, which we've never done on this podcast yet. And normally I actually skip this part, but I thought it'd be actually helpful for you to spend a little bit of time to give us a little bit of background on your experience in the space of performance marketing, AKA paid growth, AKA paid ads. You tell us what the right term is for this genre. But yeah, just tell us what you've been up to in this area over the past decade and a half, I think.

Jonathan Becker (00:05:20):
Sure. No, that's a great way to kick things off. And again, thank you for having me here. If I think about it, my experience goes back about 15 years into this space. I started off as a web developer. And as I built and structured websites for people, I became pretty obsessed and fascinated with the fact that you could build landing pages or homepages, or whatever it was. Basically the content on a website, and structure it in a manner where you had the chance to surface in organic, so SEO results more prominently. And as I became a practitioner of SEO, SEO really being my first love of marketing, I started attracting attention and people wanted to hire me on as a freelancer. And what I noticed is that as people started asking me questions like, what was the ROI of our SEO campaign? Or, how do I scale this, or whatnot? The answers to their questions ended up being a lot more aligned with what then was the biggest driver in the paid acquisition world, which was paid search.

(00:06:25):
And so I started experimenting with paid search. And what I found was that it was a tangible format and lever through which we could basically give people the types of results they were expecting from SEO, but that were obfuscated in terms of Google's analysis algorithm from an organic point of view being somewhat intangible. And Google slowly removing a lot of the data early on that allowed you to guess and test more easily. 10 plus years later, what started off as this freelancer consultancy that I started running in a walk-in closet in my old apartment, became 130 people. And we manage about $500 million a year in ad spend for small and large companies, including Uber, Asana, Tempur-Pedic. We've worked with Lululemon. Very exciting companies, mostly from the United States, even though we randomly happen to be based in Vancouver, Canada.

Lenny (00:07:26):
There's a number of threads I'm going to pull on there over the course of our chat. But you mentioned Uber and you told me that you had a crazy story about how you actually landed Uber as a customer. Could you share that?

Jonathan Becker (00:07:35):
I had been running Thrive for a couple years, and it was a very excellent regional agency in Canada with really cool local clients. In 2013, I got invited to go down to the TED conference, which was in Long Beach, California. And my friend Andrew Wilkinson asked me to join him at a dinner that night. I didn't know anybody from the TED community at the time. So we have dinner, and then afterwards as it goes at conferences, there's an after party. And so essentially I hop into a taxi, everybody else sped off in their cars, or however which way they were getting there. And as we're talking to the driver saying, "Hey, we're going to this place, can you take us?" There's a knock on the window and the person outside says, "Hey, I think I'm heading to the same destination. Do you mind if I hop in this car with you?"

(00:08:25):
And so we're like, of course. And I turn to him and I'm like, "I'm Jonathan. I run a 10 person agency out of Vancouver." And he says, "Hey, I'm Garrett Camp. I started a company called Uber." And so ironically, I meet the founder of Uber, the company that is in the process of disrupting the entire taxi industry worldwide in the back of a taxi cab. And what happened next basically changed my career forever. We end up at this party. At the time I was spamming Uber's referral program. Kind of a long story, but essentially I was using paid search to camp out on their branded keywords. And as people would sign up with my confusingly similar snippet to Uber's organic snippet, I was essentially siphoning off referral credits. So I would get $20 every single time someone signed up.

(00:09:18):
And I ended up making tens of thousands of dollars doing this. And so fast-forward, I'm getting a drink at the bar next to Garrett, and in my head I'm like, should I tell him about this? Maybe I can land them as a client. This would be really interesting. And essentially I tell him, I'm like, "Hey, I'm doing this. I'm adding zero value, but this is a loophole in your marketing system, and someone should close it." He essentially is like, "I need to report this to the board, but here's my card, write me what you're doing and we'll contact you." And so I get contacted by a bunch of his lieutenants. If you've read the book, Super Pumped. All the people that we dealt with at the time are in the book, and [inaudible 00:09:58]-

Lenny (00:09:58):
I watched the show.

Jonathan Becker (00:10:00):
Yeah, exactly. And they were like, "Hey, this is bad, you have to stop doing this. But can we hire you to solve the problem?" And so what started off as me running projects for local bars in Vancouver, or clothing stores, or whatever it was. Turned into me landing early stage Uber as a client, and really graduating us from competent professionals to leaders in our sector. And so it was a fascinating project, and we worked with Uber for 10 years.

Lenny (00:10:32):
That is an incredible story. I love the arbitrage game you're running there. It's basically siphoning VC money out of Uber. And I guess the lesson there a little bit is just sometimes it's this interesting combination of hustle in terms of just make some money, and also taking advantage of this opportunity you were plopped into.

Jonathan Becker (00:10:53):
Yeah. I think people often talk about entrepreneurs who have been successful and they comment that they're lucky. Whereas, I actually look at that situation and I think that you have to make your own luck. I could have been like, oh, cool, I met this guy in the back of a taxi and that was it. But I decided to take a risk, being that I could get embarrassed or nothing could happen, or they could shut down this referral gimmicky thing that I was doing. I had very little to lose, I guess, ultimately. But a lot of people just don't make these moves in life because they're nervous, or they're worried too much about what the downside might be. And so I very much was like, I'm going to shoot my shot here. And you put yourself in situations where everybody has luck, but you have to capitalize on it basically. And so that was an example of being willing to take a risk, and it paying off pretty big time I think.

Lenny (00:11:46):
Also, being at Ted, that seems like a good move. Networking, paying off. Love that he was in a taxi, that's hilarious. I was going to ask you about that. And clearly, he's doing some research [inaudible 00:11:55].

Jonathan Becker (00:11:54):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:11:58):
Let's start diving into the world of paid growth. And if you think about just paid growth.. And again, actually, what do you refer to this area as? Paid growth, performance marketing, paid ads?

Jonathan Becker (00:12:08):
There's a lot of interchangeable terms. Performance marketing is a common term. Paid acquisition is a common term. Some people think of those two things as growth marketing, whereas I see growth marketing as a bigger practice area within which paid acquisition sits. And then of course there's subsets, there's social ads, there's paid search, there's programmatic. And so there's a lot of different ways of saying the same thing.

Lenny (00:12:31):
I'm going to use performance marketing. I like that term because it really describes what it is. It's like marketing with you can measure performance. Let's see how that goes. As a channel, it's such an interesting mix of, on the one hand it's this incredible growth lever that allows basically any company to spend money and understand the ROI and acquiring the users. This thing that never existed before. Essentially Facebook and Google created these platforms. On the other hand, there's this sense that it's this drug that you start and then you get hooked on and you can never leave. And there's a lot of advice of just, avoid paid growth. That's just not a good healthy way of growing, especially as a startup. And so my question to you is just, how do you think about that element of it? And then even more specifically, what products do you find paid growth as a channel is right for and not right for?

Jonathan Becker (00:13:24):
Yeah, it's a really great question. And so, I think there's a couple different things that need to be unpacked here. Paid acquisition or performance marketing-

Lenny (00:13:33):
Performance marketing. [inaudible 00:13:35]-

Jonathan Becker (00:13:34):
... you can call it, can be seen as a drug, I suppose, when you are entirely reliant on it to fuel the revenue of your business. The analogy that I try and use here is that it would be very dangerous if I was advising you with your life savings and I told you to put it all in a single stock in the stock market. Stocks can be volatile. And as a result of that, your net worth would fluctuate quite a bit in the short-term and the long-term based on a lot of things that you don't control, like the external markets, or things that are happening within the performance of that particular company that you invested in. When I think about all of the marketing mix, so email, direct mail, linear television, performance, marketing, whatever it is, I think about it as investing capital with the expectation of a return. And in the same manner that I would not take all of your life savings and dump it into a single stock, I don't recommend putting all of your money into a single performance marketing channel, and then somewhat exposing you to the volatility of fluctuating CPCs or changing market conditions. I would agree with you that it is a drug, in a sense, if you have all of your eggs in one basket, and that basket takes you on a very intense rollercoaster in terms of performance. But when I think about the fact that Thrive manages $500 million a year, I think of myself to a extent as a fund manager, we are managing people's money with the expectation of a return. And part of the strategy is to diversify across channels. And so we decrease the reliance of any individual project on a singular channel and its performance.

(00:15:26):
And similarly, I always say to people that the first rule of performance marketing is not to forget about offline marketing and the classic marketing that works for organizations. In other words, direct mail can really work, email marketing works beautifully, SEO can really work. There's all of these wonderful things at your disposal. The real crash and burn scenarios that I've seen are these, not fly by night brands, but brands that figured out... Just like with Uber, I figured out this weird tie-in where I could make free money from their referral system. Sometimes people find shortcuts, hacks if you will, to scale rapidly because of one specific nuance of the Facebook ad platform, or something like that. And what they fail to see is that those loopholes come and go.

(00:16:19):
And so if they scale massively and their entire business is predicated on the performance of this one loophole that they found, or investing everything in a single channel, and then the conditions change, they're not going to be very happy and the business will suffer dramatically. And so when I think about this, it's a responsible channel mix, diversity, and understanding that you can't be overly reliant on performance marketing for the success or failure of your business.

Lenny (00:16:48):
What about the second part of that question of when you think about when companies come to you. What do you look for to help you understand this is going to be a really good fit for performance marketing and this is going to give them a lot of opportunity to growth, versus maybe not, maybe it'll be a small sliver but it's not going to be a massive success for them?

Jonathan Becker (00:17:06):
Yeah. I would say that the answer to that question is different at different stages of a company's life cycle. Early stage, look at what the company is doing, look at your own company. Have you established product market fit? Is this an idea that has yet to be tested, and are they entirely looking to performance marketing to scale everything? Are they at risk of it becoming an over-reliance on performance marketing? At a later stage we look at certain criteria that they might or might not possess. Typically, that will come down to resourcing.

(00:17:43):
The question at a later stage is not, does it work? But, to what scale can it work? And so we are looking at things like, do they have adequate creative resources and buy-in? Does creative resourcing tie into performance, and can we create a feedback loop there around testing? I'll talk to you about that in a bit. Do they have professional marketers on staff? Are there people who have experience doing what we do, that speak our language so to speak? Or is part of this an organizational educational, and creating buy-in through stakeholders process that needs to take place? Do they have technical resources? If we say, "Hey, tracking and attribution is broken, here's how to solve that." Can you implement it? And so on and so forth.

(00:18:27):
There's no one magic formula for what works or what type of company will be successful on performance marketing channels. Just as evidence of this, Google, which I think had a down quarter reported sales this week, and it was $70 billion in three months. And Facebook similarly just recorded yesterday evening, and it was $32 billion. That's $100 billion on just Google and Facebook in three months, and the majority of that revenue is from ads. This works really well for lots of different companies, it's just a question of at what scale.

Lenny (00:19:06):
Just to pull an thread a little bit more. Something I've heard from other guests is that paid ads are best for products where you get basically payback really quickly, basically to feed the flywheel of spend so that you're not sitting around waiting for someone to buy something in the future, or it's a small trickle of pay. How important is that, I guess? Do you find that you could just do paid growth for any company, it doesn't matter their business model? Or is there something you're like, okay, this needs to exist for you to invest serious resources? And even hire that team that you just talked about.

Jonathan Becker (00:19:37):
It's always nice when there's a quick turnaround on investment and return. And that's wonderful for like D2C or e-commerce style businesses where they're essentially taking the revenue to fuel additional inventory and operating costs. However, not all businesses work that way. And so, in a B2C or B2B lead generation scenario, we have to undertake pretty sophisticated modeling around these abstract concepts, like lifetime value. Which is difficult, because most businesses are relatively new that we work with, and so the idea of lifetime value is a misnomer. They don't know what that is yet.

(00:20:15):
But we have to model things like LTV to CAC, so cost per acquisition costs versus lifetime value and the period within which the payback occurs. You end up getting to a pretty sophisticated place where you can build out things like a lead scoring model, which predictively can determine in a statistically significant way the likelihood that one lead will convert to revenue over another. And so there are ways around the slower payback period that still end up being pretty accurate based on what you're bidding on today versus the latent revenue that will be accrued to those campaigns through attribution.

Lenny (00:20:58):
Do you have any just rules of thumb for someone listening and trying to decide, is paid a real model for us, either on LTV or CAC, or payback period? Or something just like, here's what you probably should have, especially early stage for you to feel like paid growth is going to be a great lever for you to use, and maybe a primary lever.

Jonathan Becker (00:21:18):
Product market fit. If you know that your business sells into audiences. Let's say you are a social media influencer or you had a really strong email marketing game, or organically your content surfaces within Google search results. Or, you did a lot of direct mail and linear television and billboard advertising and that worked. If other things work, it is highly likely that paid acquisition will work. The issue for most companies is in this incorrect assumption that the data that is provided through paid channels allows you to have full end-to-end understanding of attribution. Which is wrong, it's never been that way. And the other aspect of this is the patience to understand that every business is unique, and these metrics that we know are important are different for every business. Lifetime value, like propensity to repurchase, ROAS, which is return on amount spent, CPA, CAC, all of these different things are different for every business.

(00:22:24):
Even if I worked with two hotels in the same city, they would have different results based on the nuances of their budget, their brand, the market that they sit within, the services that they offer, and so on and so forth. I think that everything else, the main problem here is that nobody should expect an overnight turnaround with performance marketing. It is a very difficult channel to manage, and that's why people hire experts like us to help them with it because it's a never ending problem with constantly changing issues. It's always been like that, that's not a new thing since pandemic, or whatever. And it will take some time to work out what works.

Lenny (00:23:07):
I have this framework of there's these four growth channels, basically growth engines is what I call them. There's paid/performance marketing. There's SEO, there's virality in their sales. And essentially there's some companies whose growth is almost primarily paid. A few that come to mind are booking.com, which we know well at Airbnb, which is almost all paid growth driven. Credit Karma comes to mind as a classic paid performance marketing. I keep coming to paid growth as my term, so I'm just going to stick with that. TikTok initially was very performance marketing, paid growth oriented. Wish was another one I think about.

(00:23:42):
And I want to talk about how much things are changing within this realm. But before we get there, do you think there's still an opportunity for startups to emerge where they get to scale almost exclusively through performance marketing? And this question actually came from Twitter, someone tweeted this randomly the other day. And I was like, oh, that's a great question for Jonathan. And by the way, her name is Liz.

Lenny (00:24:00):
And I was like, oh, that's a great question for Jonathan, and by the way, her name is Liz Georgie asked this question, so there you go.

Jonathan Becker (00:24:06):
I'll put it this way. Every unicorn from the 2010s era that scale did performance marketing, but not everyone during that time who did performance marketing scaled. So I want to remove the bias here that just because all the successful organizations did this didn't mean that it was a magical channel for everyone. We had plenty of projects that we worked on that flatlined during that period. And so the sense that there was a period of time where this was easy or it worked on any project is not correct in my opinion. With that said, we see companies that are spending millions of dollars a month on performance marketing channels like Google and Meta still, despite all the ups and downs that they have faced and they do so profitably.

(00:24:55):
And I think there's some really great examples of companies that have scaled in relatively recent times, almost exclusively through paid. Grammarly is a really good example of this. They have been good at solving for this problem that exists around understanding the cost per acquisition versus lifetime value, how sticky customers are, predicting how much revenue can come from a customer and backing out into therefore how much we can pay per click and per lead and so on and so forth. Athletic Greens is another good example. So Athletic Greens is actually a pretty old company. I think they've been around for 10 years. I think they have retail distribution. I think they have done a lot of the more classic marketing things that are important in terms of developing that channel mix. But I think the amplification of that brand really, really gained traction quite recently where now everybody knows what Athletic Greens is, and that's because they're buying loads of ads on TikTok. They're buying loads of ads on other social channels like Facebook. They're investing in podcasting partnerships. But this is all digital paid acquisition.

(00:26:07):
And so it had a wonderful effect on this really interesting business that they had already built. So yes, it's still doable. We still see people doing it, and I think that there's been a bit of a reckoning in the performance marketing industry pertaining to things like privacy and the changes that Apple made and people being very creeped out at how their data is being used rightfully so. And then obviously the economy in 2022, we had a terrible macroeconomic shift where interest rates rise and inflation's out of control. And so of course the first thing that people cut are typically marketing budgets and we see Facebook and Google and other ad channels directly suffering from that. So all of that said, these storms pass. And so when the economy improves, generally speaking, I imagine people will go back to trying to find as much inventory from a pay per click point of view that they can purchase as possible and figuring out the economics of how to do that.

Lenny (00:27:08):
I was definitely going to ask about that, and I love that you touched on it, just clearly a lot is changing in paid growth/performance marketing recently. You talked about the privacy stuff, you talked about COVID kind of shifted the way people spend and kind of dropped and then came back. So my question is who are you finding has the most success these days in performance marketing? And I will plant one seed, which from the examples you just shared, it feels like it's mostly companies that are very efficient. I think Grammarly, they're just super efficient as a business. And then I think Analytic Greens, they're a sponsor and their negotiations for sponsoring is just like, okay, here's the number that makes sense for them financially, and they're not going to go anywhere above that.

Jonathan Becker (00:27:49):
Yeah. Because they know, they understand how many impressions they'll get and on average what the quality of impression is and how many dollars they can put behind that before it has a cliff in terms of ROI.

Lenny (00:28:05):
Exactly. So broadly, who do you think is having the most success now with the changes and then generally, what should people know about what has changed in the past say year in the space of performance marketing?

Jonathan Becker (00:28:18):
I'm not going to really be able to point to this company is really getting it right and I think that you can do that, but it's like saying, a friend of mine who recently on Twitter tweeted this funny thing where he was like, this is the number that I used to win the lottery said every successful founder ever trying to give advice to other founders. And so in other words, just because they won the lottery doesn't mean you're going to be successful picking the same number.

(00:28:43):
To that extent, there is a bit of a playbook around modern day performance marketing, and that includes everything from really stringent and rigorous creative testing and thinking about that correctly to understanding the subjectivity of attribution and its strengths and weaknesses, doing a lot of work around validity of these campaigns. So really just the measurement and whatnot. Companies that can do those things and then understand their own marketing economics, in other words, quite basically how much can we afford to spend in acquiring a customer on any channel before that acquisition is no longer profitable. So really focusing on the profitability of the bottom line and not just break net growth, for instance. Companies that have those capabilities and see the world that way tend to be successful in performance marketing.

Lenny (00:29:39):
When you were giving your intro, you talked about how you initially started doing SEO, that's where you started, and then you moved to paid growth. Well, how do you think about those two investments as a founder trying to decide which direction to go? What would your advice be of spend your time here versus there if X, Y, Z?

Jonathan Becker (00:29:56):
When I'm asked a question of should we put money into organic search or paid search? My response is often that they're actually not mutually exclusive to one another. So it's a great idea to do both, and that backs into my strategy of diversification of channels. So don't build up exclusively in one area and create volatility within your marketing mix essentially. SEO is a wonderful marketing capability when it's built out correctly. I think the issues that you run into are cause and effect related. So one of the things that people really like about performance marketing theoretically is that we can spend a certain amount and then if we're modeling things correctly, we can essentially determine how much revenue is generated from the actions that we took. Finance teams love that, C-suite teams love that, they can build projections, they can budget around it. There's some degree of predictability around it if it's done properly.

(00:30:52):
Search engine optimization is different in that the attribution can be tough. It's difficult to determine whether ultimately the actions that you took contributed to a rise in organic traffic. You have to essentially correlate that. And the reason is because when you build clusters of content and it's grouped thematically and you're targeting buckets of keywords, whether they're long tail or head keywords, whatever it may be, you can publish all of that on your website. Google still has to crawl it. They run it through their analysis algorithm, which is comprised of 200 different signals, of which maybe 20 to 30 have been publicly disclosed. So it's a bit of a black box.

(00:31:37):
We don't really know ultimately what ROI comes off of that unless you're very sophisticated, like probably one of your other guests, Ethan, in terms of measurement. Whereas paid, the ROI is still a difficult problem to solve, but there was a lot more of a linear relationship as it relates to attribution. And so paid being tangible was the reason why I leaned heavily into paid and ultimately away from SEO. But I do think that if you do SEO properly, the payoffs are indisputable and it is certainly an important part of a modern media mix.

Lenny (00:32:18):
You mentioned this earlier, I've heard this more and more recently that one of the biggest levers these days in paid growth is around creatives. It's not tooling or smarter data, or you tell me if I'm wrong, but it's just getting better creatives. And so I'll let you actually explain, what are creatives? There's a term creatives that people outside the industry don't really necessarily get. And then broadly, what should people be doing to optimize the way they approach creatives?

Jonathan Becker (00:32:46):
Certainly. So when we say creative, we're referring to the assets that power typically visual programmatic or pay per click campaigns on social channels or display networks. And so literally the motion graphics ad that you see on Facebook, the user generated content that you see on TikTok or a static ad that you might see that has a pretty picture in it or whatever. And so I think that when we talk about creative as a big lever around efficiency and optimization, the underlying conversation there is that over time our industry has been heavily automated. So a lot of the levers so to speak around performance have been automated by Google and Facebook over the last seven to 10 years. That's because originally when you ran these campaigns, you needed to have a rocket scientist in front of them. It was so complicated and there were so many different things that you could get wrong, and their solution, the channels like the big tech company solution to this is figuring it out for you. So eventually Google wants you to say, hey, I'm Google, give me your credit card and I'll take care of everything else. Facebook-

Lenny (00:33:57):
And the URL to point people to, and then we'll do the rest.

Jonathan Becker (00:34:00):
Yeah. I don't know if that's a great idea for consumers, by the way. But in the meantime, there's certain things that have just been fully automated. In the context of creative, it's still one of these things that for now is not auto-generated in the world of AI and all the changes that we're seeing. Maybe that's something that will change. But for now, essentially creative directors and their teams are concepting and producing different types of assets. And so there's a bunch of problems that we typically see when people come to us. So number one, performance marketing and brand marketing in a lot of organizations are two different things. And the designers that occupy brand teams bandwidth and whatnot often don't have a sense of how paid acquisition works.

(00:34:48):
And so one of the pitfalls of working with certain companies or the mistake that they make is the design team will hand off a file full of random assets for paid acquisition without any sense of how the channel works. And what I mean by that is these days we're using the analogy, the classic analogy of the funnel to organize our thinking around creative assets. So you can think about this as generating intent at the top of funnel and capturing intent at the bottom of the funnel. When I think about an experience that I want a consumer to have on Facebook, audience targeting and creative, I think about us beginning a conversation at the top of funnel creatively with an audience, having that conversation change as we say different things, and the audience that we're targeting ultimately graduates through different behaviors on our website from one to another, and then ultimately it resulting in an end to the conversation where they take an action hopefully that the brand that we're working with is looking for.

(00:35:56):
And so there's a clear beginning, middle and end to that. And one of the major pitfalls that we see is that certain brands just dump one homogenous message into all of their targeting. You see the same ad over and over again. It creates banner blindness and it's a total lack of efficiency. The antidote to that is to have resources dedicated to paid and essentially iterate upon the creative assets themselves based on the data that we see coming from ad sets and campaigns in various channels. And so what that means is that you have to experiment. You have to take a bit of a scientific approach, although it's a bit of an art and a bit of a science. You have to try and isolate variables, maintain similar conditions across targeting, and then determine which style and feature of an ad performs best at which stage of the funnel versus which audience. And the results that we see are dramatically different from brand to brand. But if you are not undertaking rigorous testing in conjunction with how you are driving the iteration and design of your ads, then you will not make progress essentially.

Lenny (00:37:11):
Is there a specific example that comes to mind here as something we did that just dramatically changed the impact of a change to a creative? Or if you can't think of one, are there just specific tactics that you can suggest for people to improve the way they approach creatives?

Jonathan Becker (00:37:28):
Yeah. So I think from a testing point of view, let's say I was running ads on Meta, beneath the campaign level when I create a campaign, the structure that my testing might take would be that I would have an audience, a single audience at the ad set level, and then I would have two nearly identical creatives within that ad set. The only thing being different across those two creative assets is a single variable. So it might be the copy, it might be an image or whatnot. That allows us to isolate a lot of variables and really test into one singular change across two creative assets. There's a lot of nuance to this. So sometimes the ad-serving algorithms, even when we set up a test structurally in that way, we'll serve one ad a different number of impressions than the other ad, in which case we then have to say, what is a leveling factor that allows us to look at these two ads equally, even though one received dramatically more impressions than the other?

(00:38:31):
This becomes where it becomes subjective in terms of how you want to determine success. But a good example is looking at the click-through rate, which is essentially a ratio or a metric like impressions until conversion, which is a leveling metric that allows us to determine, even though in a scenario where two ads facing the same audience within the same campaign received different numbers of impressions, we can still measure the efficiency or effectiveness of one ad over the other using metrics like that. And so from a testing point of view, I think that this is one way that we might look at trying to assess ad performance so that we can gather learnings, send that back to a creative team and say, hey, it turns out that when this copy is used at this stage of the funnel, it converts 50% more frequently than this other copy.

(00:39:26):
So let's now take that copy, use it as our base copy and challenge it with a different type of copy and see if we can continually iterate and refine. So that's a very practical example of how ad creative testing might work on a channel like Meta. You asked for specific examples where we've seen an unlock. There's two that come to mind. Several years ago we realized that highly produced ads from brand teams, and there's nothing wrong with brand teams, we work with them all the time. They do amazing work. I think we're just trying to work as a singular unit as opposed to being fragmented. But a lot of the brand guidelines of different companies would end up yielding these highly polished assets. And when you launch those on Instagram back in the day or something like that, what we found is that they would always underperform next to user generated assets.

(00:40:23):
So a brand that essentially has an influencer in front of it that says, I tried this product, I love it, I'm filming this ad from my iPhone. Look, check it out. Here's the product, here's me, I'm better off for it. Whatever it is that they're talking about. The unpolished iPhone, mobile phone creative, suddenly we realized massively outperformed these other channels because there was an authenticity to it. And rather than the brands themselves saying, hey, trust us, our product is great, here's a third party essentially validating what is so great about these brands, basically. So I can't speak to specific clients because I'm not allowed to talk about the work that we've done in large part, but that would be one example. And another example is we worked with a furniture company several years ago, which scaled dramatically, but they were having difficulty early on thinking through how to scale social ads.

(00:41:21):
And so paid search worked really well for them. Social ads, again, they had these highly produced styled rooms and one of the owners had their dog in the office all the time, and so they have these models sitting on furniture or whatever it was, and they would take these beautiful styled shots of their furniture in a room and one of the art directors was like, put the dog on the couch and let's take some photos of dogs on furniture, which made it more playful and approachable. That one change resulted in a total unlock of their performance on paid social channels. It would double or triple the ROAS that we were seeing type thing. So it's these minute differences that you can test into that ultimately can drive performance.

Lenny (00:42:04):
That reminds me of Airbnb. The photography team found, and actually the photography team was initially including people in the photos of listings, and that was the [inaudible 00:42:16] images of listing photos. And it turns out when there's no people in the listing photo, much higher conversion. And the theory basically people don't want to see other random strangers in a place they're going to sleep, and that was not expected.

Jonathan Becker (00:42:29):
That's a really great example. And so the question becomes, as a company and as a brand, do you arrive at those learnings anecdotally by accident? Is it the brilliance of one person on the team that the whole brand is predicated upon in terms of performance? Or do you put a very rigorous structure around testing and the iteration of assets and how to determine whether something works over another thing that is a process that yields the outcomes that you're looking for? And so a lot of times with agencies, people talk to us about the obvious hard skills that we have, but the soft skills are around process that can be deployed, that can actually be the difference between being highly sophisticated or unsophisticated. Internal teams do this too, but that Airbnb example is a great illustration of how if you put the right testing in place, you can yield an outcome that becomes an unlock for performance.

Lenny (00:43:28):
Getting even more tactical with that idea of testing a bunch of creatives makes me think about a story from chatting with a guy from Wish who's had a growth at Wish about how they uploaded hundreds of variations. And I think Wish is the epitome of the opposite of brand highly polished ads or it's just the most ridiculous looking product with just banners and numbers and prices and crossouts and all kinds of stuff, just anything that would take to get people to click. Is there a tool or process that you can point people to to help them do this testing on creatives or is it mostly built into the existing tools now and there's nothing really fancy about it?

Jonathan Becker (00:44:04):
We get asked this a lot and I think there are tools for different types of functions that we undertake in the process of running paid acquisition for different brands, but these days most of the testing that we do is within the channels themselves. So Meta ads, Google Ads, I keep touching on those two specifically because they're the most advanced in my opinion. They're really powerful. The good news here is that you don't necessarily need some exotic tool to do sophisticated creative testing. You can do it in platform and you can use the structure that I just kind of outlined as a starting point.

Lenny (00:44:43):
You mentioned Google and Facebook. What is your take on TikTok and YouTube and maybe Snap? Do you recommend people go there and there's a big opportunity? Do you think it's overblown? Do you think people should just take Google and Facebook basically at this point? What's your general advice?

Jonathan Becker (00:44:59):
So when I say Google and I say Facebook, I'm talking about the Google ecosystem of channels inclusive of YouTube. And when I talk about Facebook, I'm talking about Facebook, Instagram, and probably eventually WhatsApp, which I think will probably launch ads later this year. With all that said, some interesting opportunities these days really exist on channels like Amazon and TikTok as well as a number of other challenger channels I think. Snap I'll talk a little bit less about because I think really there's just fewer and fewer people potentially using Snap. There's no knock on Snap. I use Snap, I like it a lot, but at the same time, most individuals or organizations tend to want to place ads where there's a lot of views and engagement and the king of this right now is definitely TikTok. And so TikTok faces its own set of challenges and arguably there is as much an opportunity there as a barrier at the moment.

(00:45:58):
I love TikTok. I'm a consumer of content on TikTok, not a producer of content on TikTok. Their ads platform kind of reminds me of where Facebook ads was like six, seven years ago. It's not super sophisticated and attribution is not great yet, but you can get cheap CPCs because there's just fewer organizations advertising there. Fewer companies have figured out how to make that work. And same thing with Amazon. Amazon is a bit of a bespoke channel. It doesn't work for a B2B SaaS company. It's more specific to D2C I would say. But essentially those channels are wonderful. They're not at the point yet where they're kind of ubiquitous. Every single advertiser that has ever worked with us I think in the last 10 years is for sure on Google. Everybody does that. And then the question is, what else can I invest money in with the expectation of profitability?

(00:46:53):
And so TikTok and Amazon, and even if I want to break out YouTube, they tend to be a little bit more specific and they definitely work, but not for everybody yet. And so the question becomes, will TikTok become as prominent as a social ads platform like Meta Ads? And we just don't know yet. What we see working very nicely on TikTok, by the way, are these founder led brands where the founder is the ambassador and they're doing those handheld videos with their iPhone. They're talking about the merits of the products that they make. They're talking about the problems that they solve. They are great at cultivating a following. Their content is highly engaging. Those types of organizations crush it. Also, companies that got really good at partnering with influencers. So we haven't talked about partner marketing that much, but affiliate marketing companies got into this early, and then influencer marketing networks are all over this. But essentially having these third parties be an ambassador for your brand in an authentic way, partnering with them, having them generate the content. And that's the nature of the partnership. Stuff like that seems...

Jonathan Becker (00:48:00):
... And that's the nature of the partnership. Stuff like that seems to work quite well.

Lenny (00:48:05):
Awesome, I love those bullet points of just what is likely to work on TikTok.

Jonathan Becker (00:48:05):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:48:09):
Just broadly, would you say TikTok advertising today is underrated, overrated, or just right?

Jonathan Becker (00:48:16):
If you are e-comm based, if you're wholesale, retail based, anything direct to consumer, you have to investigate TikTok and try and figure out whether there's a way of promoting your products there, basically. It's a massive, highly engaged audience with somewhat specific demographics. It's a very exciting opportunity. Other brands need to pay attention to this and figure out what their entry point is going to be. And just because the innovation hasn't happened for B2B SaaS yet on TikTok doesn't mean it won't. TikTok wants that to happen, and so the question becomes how. And so someone will unlock that, and they'll make a billion dollars because of it.

(00:48:59):
But I wouldn't recommend that channel to everybody yet, and at Thrive for instance, we don't have a huge amount of people coming to us yet saying, "Hey, I'm spending $750,000 a month on TikTok, can you help me?" Type thing. The other problem with TikTok is that it's extraordinarily creative, asset dependent, and heavy. And so you are launching net new assets several times per week, it is hard for creative teams and brands to produce that much content. It takes a machine, and that's expensive, and so that all factors into the cost of not only just the ad dollars, but the creative resourcing and investment that's required to power that. So it can be done in a more nimble manner if you're spending less, but you can't really get to a million dollars a month on TikTok without having a huge amount of creative being pushed to that channel.

Lenny (00:49:56):
Awesome, that's really good advice. I want to chat out about AI soon, just because I imagine that could help with some of these things. But you mentioned B2B SaaS, and I wanted to ask, I imagine Google is the primary channel for B2B SaaS, and if not, or if it is, where else do you find there's value in spending money to drive growth through B2B SaaS, which channels and ad networks?

Jonathan Becker (00:50:20):
So I'm agnostic here in terms of where people should be spending money. I see this world in terms of impressions and clicks, and does that conform to the marketing economics of a project that needs to be achieved in order for it to grow. It's less about where to place your money and how to think about the placement of those funds. And so the common mistake that we see as people build out a funnel, so to speak, for B2B lead gen projects, or B2C lead gen projects, is they'll be overly reliant on the first of a sequence of metrics that ultimately yields a sale.

(00:50:57):
So typically it's something like cost per lead, marketing qualified lead, sales accepted lead, there might be a couple more metrics there, and then eventually a sale occurs. And so that the thinking is that, okay, for sales to occur, I need more leads at the top of the funnel. The more leads I have, the more marketing qualified leads I'll get, the more sales accepted leads get, and ultimately the more opportunities there will be and the more revenue will generate.

(00:51:24):
And so if I think about this world of lead generation on performance marketing platforms as a function of cost per lead in that sense that I just described, then the tendency is always to want to drive down the cost per lead, thinking that that's the efficiency, I can get more cheaper leads and that will yield more revenue. When in fact it turns out that if you flip that conversation on its head and say, not all opportunities and sales are equal, and instead of focusing upfront on a cost per lead, I now want to focus on what is a high value customer, so the cost per lead is actually higher, but the ROI of targeting those people is also higher. And so to get the higher quality leads, it's not a function of CPL.

(00:52:15):
And so that is a very common pitfall that we see when people come to us. The antidote to this, it's interesting, so Thrive developed an ETL tool, an extract transfer load tool called Thrive Stack. It's not commercially available, but if you wanted a commercially available version of this, you can use something called Supermetrics. Basically Supermetrics is a data connector. There's a world of different data connectors out there, but it allows you to pipe, via an API, revenue data from your CRM into a third party database that can then be joined with data from the channel itself. You can build tables within a database and normalize them together in a manner where you can start to determine the relationship between, again, the audience that a particular cohort of opportunities came from and whether a sufficient degree of revenue is derived from those opportunities.

(00:53:08):
And then you can build upon that what is known as a lead scoring model, which allows you to bid in real time on the audiences that have a higher likelihood to convert to high revenue generating customers. And so the magic there, we talked a little bit about rates of return and instant gratification in the performance marketing world, lead generation inherently is a slow gratification process. And so the problem is that if my pipeline is full of opportunities that yield revenue in two months, six months, sometimes 12 months, how do I determine how heavily to bid on different leads today in order to predictively have an outcome where I'm maximizing revenue? And a lead scoring model basically solves for that.

Lenny (00:53:59):
Today's episode is brought to you by Miro, an online collaborative whiteboard that's designed specifically for teams like yours. I have a quick request, head on over to my Miro board at miro.com/lenny and let me know which guests you'd want me to have on this year. I've already gotten a bunch of great suggestions, which you'll see when you go there, so just keep it coming.

(00:54:20):
And while you're on the Miro board, I encourage you to play around with the tool. It's a great shared space to capture ideas, get feedback, and collaborate with your colleagues on anything that you're working on. For example, with Miro, you can plan out next quarter's entire product strategy. You can start by brainstorming using sticky notes, reactions, a voting tool, even an estimation app to scope out your team's sprints. Then your whole distributed team can come together around wire frames, dry ideas with a pen tool, and then put full mocks right into the Miro board. And with one of Miro's ready-made templates, you can go from discovery and research, to product roadmaps, to customer journey flows, to final mocks, all in Miro. Head on over to miro. com/lenny to leave your suggestions. That's M-I-R-O.com/lenny.

(00:55:06):
You talked about attribution, and I thought this would be a great time to get into that. So the way I think about this is oftentimes the biggest challenge in driving growth isn't the actual work you do to drive growth, it's measuring what impact your work is having and understanding where dollars are spent effectively. And things are changing heavily in attribution land with privacy shifts and ATT and iOS 14.5.1, or maybe whatever the version was that came out that changed everything. And so my question is, what changed, is one, in terms of being able to do attribution. Maybe even explain what attribution means for folks that are just like, what the hell are you even talking about? And then finally, just what do you recommend people do now to do attribution well in this new environment?

Jonathan Becker (00:55:57):
Yeah, it's a really, really great and pertinent question in the industry, and it has a lot of focus on it now, but attribution has always been a conversation that's been very important. So just to kick things off, attribution essentially is how we determine the relationship between what we did and what happened. In the context of performance marketing this means what ads did we serve, what campaigns did we launch, and generally what was the revenue ultimately that was derived from these campaigns? And so there's a funny quote that I love, someone named John Wanamaker in 1919 said, "I know-"

Lenny (00:56:33):
I bet I'm going to guess what it is.

Jonathan Becker (00:56:34):
Do you want to guess?

Lenny (00:56:35):
It's, "Half my marketing dollars are wasted, I just don't know which half."

Jonathan Becker (00:56:41):
Exactly, I love that you knew that. He said this in 1919. The world was a very different place there, but oddly enough we still have these types of problems today and it's because the world of what I did and what happened because of what I did is very complicated. There's so many variables, some of which we know, and then some of which we don't know that we don't know, type thing. And so attribution, as it stands in our industry, is still an incredibly subjective art and somewhat of a science. It doesn't mean that it's impossible, and it doesn't mean that there aren't varying degrees of sophistication as it relates to attribution, but we're still in a place where we have to understand the business and its goals, and then start to work on an attribution model.

(00:57:32):
An attribution model is probably something that is never solved, but I'll give you a couple of examples. So number one around attribution, it's important to determine whether an organization, a company, a client, is focused on profitability or growth. Whether I use one attribution lens or another will drive those outcomes. And so these days, for a number of different reasons, you mentioned iOS 14.5, in addition to third party cookie deprecation, and whatnot.

(00:58:02):
There's no one way necessarily of approaching attribution. The most classic and commonly held version of attribution used to be a cookie-based form of attribution called last click attribution, meaning that the last click in the sequence of clicks that yielded a conversion would be attributed with all the revenue from that conversion. Other models in a cookie-based world involved first touch attribution, so it's actually the first click. So I launch an ad, it's in an audience that doesn't know about my service or my brand, and so the first click that I get should be given all the credit for that sale. And then there's multi-touch attribution, which can take several different forms, but essentially is saying it's not one way or the other of the two first versus last click options, it's somewhere in between. So I'm going to create a weighted attribution model where the first touch gets so much of the credit and the last touch gets so much of the credit.

(00:58:59):
This is very subjective, as you can see. I am essentially looking at my business model, determining what my goals are, and then I'm backing out into an attribution methodology that I think adheres to both the economics of my business and the capabilities of these platforms. And again, we live in a world where a single brand might do television advertising, they might buy media in magazines, they might buy billboards, they might get impressions from Facebook, they might do paid search, so there's a big argument over how to ultimately model this.

(00:59:34):
So there was something called an IDFA that Apple allowed advertisers to use, and essentially what that was, it literally means ID for advertisers, and it allowed Facebook, Google, and other advertisers, Snap, TikTok, whoever was essentially selling ads that were predicated on being displayed on a Apple mobile device or a desktop device, it allowed the advertiser to provide attribution metrics and certain types of customer match metric metrics in their own platforms. And so when Apple ultimately launches its privacy changes, I believe in mid-2021, overnight it allows users to say, "Well, I don't want to share that information, I'm not going to share my IDFA anymore." Or, "Yes, I do want to share my IDFA." And so what you see as a result of that is less of the core data that Facebook in particular would've required to make attribution more airtight and ultimately validate its advertising.

(01:00:43):
So because we can no longer validate attribution on Facebook as seamlessly, we are in a situation where we're not sure any longer which audiences to target, and we're not sure how to run all of our creative testing, and ultimately we can't even determine the degree of revenue that's coming from particular campaigns that we've launched, and whatnot. And so it created quite a stir in the world of attribution, which is obviously this core discussion to is it working or not? People want to answer John Wanamaker's question, but the modern methodology now is through a number of different approaches to validation.

(01:01:25):
So the cookie based attribution, which had been probably the most popular version of attribution in the 2010s, really up to this point, is now one of the ways that we would look at this, but we would also include things like various forms of statistical modeling, customer surveys, population surveys, there's a number of different ways to the same place here. Statistical modeling, by the way, one thing that's very popular these days, which I think was originally created in the 1950s, is a form of statistical modeling called media mix modeling. It's essentially regression analysis, and it is trying to determine the causal relationship between, again, what you did and what the effect was on revenue. That's very topical in the industry these days. If you're looking for a tool off the shelf that can help with this, Recast is something that I see people using. But a lot of organizations build these highly customized bespoke models that ultimately feed the algorithm inside of an MMM model in a customized manner.

Lenny (01:02:27):
What is it, or is there a recommendation of just like, hey, if you're trying to do attribution today, here's what you should do. Is there a clear, do this, piece of advice, or is it super personalized depending on what you're trying to do?

Jonathan Becker (01:02:42):
The advice is that there's no single source of truth. Anyone who claims that they are a single source of truth, whether it's an individual, a model that they've created, or a tool that they've created, is not being accurate. I believe that the approach that works to attribution is that it's an ongoing investigation and it never stops, and essentially what you're doing is looking for evidence that validates the outcome of your performance marketing campaigns one way or the other.

(01:03:12):
There have been plenty of incredibly sophisticated attribution models that we've helped build and invalidated with MMM or other types of tools that have indicated that the campaigns do not work. So I will repeat that, we, a very sophisticated organization, have stood up campaigns that we measure and ultimately determine do not work, and that is an important finding in terms of an organization's determination of whether they want to continually invest, take budget out of these channels, or invest into other areas.

Lenny (01:03:49):
Awesome. You mentioned a company called Recast. I don't think you knew this, but I'm actually an investor, and so obviously a big fan, so check it out. I don't know what the site is, recast.com maybe. I think if you Google Recast attribution, we'll also have a link in the show notes.

Jonathan Becker (01:04:02):
Cool. Yeah, they're working with a couple of our clients right now and it's interesting, I like their approach.

Lenny (01:04:06):
Yeah, they're basically, they're building the model as a SaaS tool to do attribution in a really clever way. Amazing. Okay, just a couple more questions, one is around AI, one is around agencies, and just how to start down this road. How has AI in any way impacted the work you're doing today, or the work of paid growth, performance marketing, and then where do you think this will go in the next few years?

Jonathan Becker (01:04:29):
Interestingly, and I think I alluded to this earlier, but our industry has been influenced by AI for over a decade. So Google, Facebook, even Microsoft, these are some of the organizations that historically have been at the bleeding edge of artificial intelligence, and their goal was always to automate as much as possible within these platforms. And so the effect ultimately that we've seen from a human capital point of view is displacement. So we're actually, we have more people now than we've ever had, but the nature of the work that they do is more strategic, it's more about modeling, validation, asking the right questions, being focused around creative levers, like some of the things that we've talked about, and less so the trench work of implementation and bid modifiers at the keyword level on Google search, and some of the really hardcore manual analysis we had to do.

(01:05:19):
So I think if we are the canary in the coal mine for other industries, what will be interesting is I assume that if you work in an architecture office that you'll be doing less of the drafting, and it's already been a change that's occurred in those offices, but you'll be doing less of the drafting and more of this strategic problem solving around what kind of building is necessary for the client in this scenario, type thing.

(01:05:42):
And so on a practical level, though, some of these conversational AI models are very interesting for us in that when I think about creative testing, for instance, we can have ChatGPT come up with all kinds of variants of copy that we would not have necessarily thought of. It can do a lot of drafting of things like RFP responses, so we can feed ChatGPT 100 previous RFP responses that we've done and have it spit out net new responses to net new questions in a net new RFP, and it's like 80% good and still requires 10 hours of work to massage to the point where we can send it off to a client, but that replaces a week of work with five or six people that it would've previously taken.

Lenny (01:06:33):
And that's already happening today, you're saying?

Jonathan Becker (01:06:35):
That's happening now, literally right now, type thing, all of what I just said. And there's a lot of different ways that we are beginning to use AI to do more with less, basically. So that's how I see it influencing not just our industry, but other people's businesses as well.

Lenny (01:06:55):
That's amazing. So just to repeat what you said, your team now, because of ChatGPT is able to spend more time higher level, and leverage specifically ChatGPT to do this kind of, and RFPs are basically proposals, people are asking you to pitch to work with them, is that?

Jonathan Becker (01:06:55):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:07:12):
Okay, yeah.

Jonathan Becker (01:07:13):
Some of these AI-driven organizations that allow you to type in a prompt and it spits out an image, on our creative group we can come up with mockups in literally 1% of the time that it took. So you no longer have to draw the initial mockups for art. Suddenly what might have taken one person a week of work on a campaign takes an afternoon, type thing. You still have to understand what questions to ask of the AI and be capable of iterating, but these rough drafts that you might show the artwork of to a client to say, "Do we like this more or do we like this more?" That's AI generated. It's really interesting.

Lenny (01:07:55):
What's the tool your team uses for that, is it MidJourney or Dall-E or something else?

Jonathan Becker (01:08:00):
It's Dall-E and it's MidJourney, so you got it.

Lenny (01:08:03):
Got it. And so what you use it for is you're thinking about a concept and you just come up with a mock, coming up with a prompt to pitch what this could be.

Jonathan Becker (01:08:11):
Yeah, the interesting thing there is that these concepts often live inside of someone's head, and we do this thing as humans where we verbally discuss it, and I try and put the image in my mind's eye, in your mind's eye, which is an inherently inefficient process and actually hurts our ability to be creative leaders. Someone might just see it slightly differently than you do. Now that person theoretically can use Dall-E to output what is inside their head, and they can refine that easily through subsequent prompts in Dall-E or MidJourney, or whatever it may be, and then just say, "Do you like this? This is my idea." And so in a way it's helped humans connect more easily in that context than we were capable of doing before, and then in the context of pitching a client on ideas, we are capable of generating more ideas faster and iterating upon them live. So I can have a Zoom call with you, I can present my screen, and if you don't like the output of Dall-E that I just prompted, I can re-prompt based on your feedback in real time.

Lenny (01:09:16):
There's this sentiment that AIs going to take away the fun stuff of jobs, like maybe being creative and coming up with a new concept and photography, setting up a whole photo shoot, whatever.

Jonathan Becker (01:09:30):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:09:30):
Do you find that your team is excited about uploading this to Dall-E, or are they just like, goddammit, this is what I loved, and now I'm just sitting around in docs writing prompts.

Jonathan Becker (01:09:40):
I am not an incredible artist, but now I can take those thoughts in my mind and output them just as well as someone who's pretty skilled in artwork. So in a sense, I'm excited because this technology democratizes the ability to do this across everyone. Anyone who can think a thought can generate an image on an AI image generator. How many scribes do you know?

Lenny (01:10:04):
Zero, I believe zero.

Jonathan Becker (01:10:06):
Because we invented something called the printing press, and the printing press took over what was a cottage industry for very specific individuals that allowed them to control the flow of information. Yet today it's not like we have fewer writers or creative thinkers, they're just using different tools to arrive at the same place. You could say the same thing of the loom. There used to be people who would stitch your T-shirt together, or your sweater together, and none of those people have work anymore. There's still people who knit, I suppose. But your clothes are made in factories with machines, and the quality of the clothing is arguably a lot better than it was, maybe I'm wrong about that point, but you can make more of it and more sophisticated clothing.

(01:10:46):
There's no question that AI is going to displace and replace certain industries of people, certain roles. I'm not going to pretend like I know whether that's a good or bad thing, and I'm also not a poster child for AI, I am really just using the technology that's available to us to run our business the best way we can. We haven't let anybody go yet because of these efficiencies. The people who used to do the artwork are the ones using these tools, and I think they're excited that they're more productive. Is there going to be nuance around that? Of course. Are some people going to be sad about the changes? Yes. I think human nature is that people generally don't like change, but I think over time we've seen change has been a productive and positive thing for society, not a negative thing.

Lenny (01:11:35):
Awesome. Yeah, so it sounds like the team is excited, generally, and that's a good sign, and that's what I find generally. I think some people will be really upset, but most people will be like, amazing, and they never wanted to do this part.

Jonathan Becker (01:11:47):
This generation of people will be upset, and then there will be a subsequent generation that never knew anything different. So the way that I think about this is the people growing up these days have always had the internet, whereas you and I probably remember a time before the internet existed. AI-

Jonathan Becker (01:12:00):
You and I probably remember a time before the internet existed. AI is a platform like the internet and just as when the internet was launched, you couldn't conceive of amazon.com or all of these wonderful or social networks or whatever it was. The permutations of what AI will become, even in the current GPT 4 context or Dolly context or whatever it may be. We don't know what people are going to create with this and so it's difficult for the generation that knew what life was like beforehand, before iPhone, before internet, before AI, but there will be people who know nothing but this eventually, and to them it'll just be normal.

Lenny (01:12:42):
Until we're all just replaced by AI and then it's AI writing ads to get other AI tools to buy products from each other.

Jonathan Becker (01:12:42):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:12:49):
And then we're just sitting around watching Netflix and that'll be great. There's always this question when you're starting to invest in paid growth, performance marketing of should we work at an agency? Should we work? Should we hire someone junior to figure it out? Should we hire someone senior?

Jonathan Becker (01:13:03):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:13:03):
What's your general advice for, say, an early stage startup when it makes sense to work with an agency versus bringing someone in-house?

Jonathan Becker (01:13:12):
Mm-hmm. We need people in-house to do our jobs properly. Agencies are not mutually exclusive to personnel in-house. If we don't have a point of contact, for instance, at an earlier stage company and we're supposed to report to the CEO, CEOs tend to be very busy people and we often just can't get the information and approvals that we need to be successful. If you think that growth marketing is an opportunity and that performance marketing is a subset of growth marketing that you want some focus on, the reality is you're going to need expertise and you probably should start in-house and then hire an agency.

(01:13:49):
Again, there's different stages of companies and different examples of what makes sense at different stages and the nature of the work that we do at different stages changes. Very, very late stage, we're kind of doing a lot of this sophisticated production work. We're implementing sophisticated testing, we're working on attribution, we're building beautiful reporting, but in a sense, we're maintaining this machine that already exists. Earlier stage, we're doing a lot more of net new experimentation, trying to discover what is working and what sequence of audience targeting versus creative asset display will work, what channel mix works, and all of that. A lot of times the body of work that's required to nail that and the inputs to literally out front what questions to be asking isn't something that a small in-house team possesses and so they will work with an agency to scale faster, to get where they're going quicker, to bring in more resources quickly, basically. Then later stage, sometimes it's a permutation of the same thing or we're really just managing a whole bunch of different capabilities that they have because it's very complicated and difficult to staff.

Lenny (01:15:05):
That is really interesting. So it's not like agency versus in-house full-time person. It's you need both is what you're finding.

Jonathan Becker (01:15:11):
I don't think we have any projects that we're working on where there's not a professional marketing person as our POC and generally the people that we report to have a background in what we do, whether they ended up doing something different and now they're a VP or a director level and not directly managing channels themselves is one thing or another. But yeah, we work with people that have in-house expertise all day long.

Lenny (01:15:35):
I see. Sometimes it could just be a generalist marketing person that becomes your point of contact.

Jonathan Becker (01:15:35):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:15:39):
They don't have to be experienced in paper.

Jonathan Becker (01:15:41):
There's one more thing. As agencies, we're constantly solving people's problems in the market and as a result of that, I have a fairly large team of 130 people that think about performance marketing all day long. It's the first thing we think about when we have our morning coffee and it's the last thing we think about as we're leaving the office kind of thing. We have very sophisticated and built out capabilities as well as all kinds of software and processes and capabilities, I guess, that we've created that most in-house teams just don't have because they're smaller or newer or someone might be really sophisticated but they don't have the resources to implement it and stuff. In the same way that a really sophisticated organization might go to Boston Consulting Group or McKenzie to say, "Hey, we did this, but you do more of this all day long and we need advice on how to be more efficient," people come to Thrive saying, "Hey, we're top of our game. We have really strong people. They absolutely know what they're doing," which is always the case by the way, "But we're looking for extra sophistication and additional capabilities that are very difficult to create in an in-house organization." It's why we worked with Uber for 10 years. It was tough to replace us.

Lenny (01:16:59):
Yeah, that's quite the retention. 10 years, 10 years going, I imagine our net dollar retention has gone up too.

Jonathan Becker (01:17:08):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:17:09):
When you're looking to hire someone full-time to drive the paid growth channel and/or work with an agency, what do you recommend people look for specifically, especially things maybe they're not likely to think about when they're hiring someone that people often miss?

Jonathan Becker (01:17:26):
There's a couple of competencies that I think are very important. I found that, so I was a nerd as a child, if you can't tell, I don't know.

Lenny (01:17:35):
Nope.

Jonathan Becker (01:17:35):
Super nerdy, geeky kid. I would take apart-

Lenny (01:17:38):
[inaudible 01:17:38].

Jonathan Becker (01:17:39):
I would take apart my parents' computers, I'd try and rebuild them. I was fooling around with bulletin boards before websites existed, stuff like that. Then I became a web developer and as I transitioned into a performance marketing role, I realized that being technical and having technical aptitudes was extraordinarily helpful in terms of being on the front line of what we were doing and solving problems. If you're making your first hire, you probably want them to have the ingenuity and capability to solve a lot of the problems that you're going to run into within the context of tracking, attribution, data visualization, and then campaign management. Number one, do they have a technical background? That can be multidisciplinary.

(01:18:22):
At Thrive, we have someone who is a nuclear physicist that left discipline and became a performance marketer. We have people who have left mathematics and become performance marketers, people who left finance, full stack engineering, all kinds of stuff. Those are technical fields where people tend to be good at math and good at problem solving, and so that's a strong piece of evidence that they might have a strong aptitude for performance marketing and managing this.

(01:18:52):
Another thing is just literally do they have experience in this discipline? Have they managed on any level Meta ads, Google ads, TikTok, Amazon, some of the things we talked about? Do they have an appreciation for some of the inputs that we just discussed today that ultimately create the conditions for success within a performance marketing environment? Do they understand the role of creative? Do they understand the role of proper attribution and are they capable of understanding the mechanics of your business and so on and so forth?

(01:19:29):
I would say just fundamentally, those are some of the areas that when we are interviewing we're looking for. As an agency too, we are looking for the ability to work with people and be excellent at client services. One of the questions we might ask, I actually borrowed a Jeff Bezos question from early stage Amazon where I asked people without much warning in an interview, I'll ask them whether it's okay to do a bit of a thought experiment together and whether they are comfortable responding to a logic question. I'll ask the question of, "How many windows are there in New York City?" There's two things that I look for in this scenario. One is can they think on their feet? I'm not actually looking for the correct answer. It's a pretty difficult question to solve. But number one, do you realize that windows are not just building windows and windows are also in cars and trucks and stuff like that, so there's more than one type of window. Then can you just do the arithmetic of saying there's so many buildings per hectare or square mile or whatever it is and it's division multiplication type stuff.

(01:20:33):
But also from a client services point of view, I'm trying to see whether in a scenario where I've asked them something that they obviously probably weren't prepared for, that is a strange thing to ask and probably makes them feel a little bit uncomfortable, how they react in that situation. Do they remain composed or do they lose their composure and get frustrated or even angry that I asked them something that's pretty weird to ask? Their reaction there is often a good leading indicator of whether or not in a client scenario working with our clients, they can compose themselves in a difficult situation.

Lenny (01:21:10):
Very tactically, what level of experience do you recommend people look for in their first performance marketing hire year or two, four or five years, longer?

Jonathan Becker (01:21:23):
I've seen people who have 10 years of experience in the industry not be that great and then I've seen people who have one year of experience be absolutely phenomenal. I would say that again, the years of service under their belt is one clue or piece of evidence to their potential aptitude. But really, you want someone who can clearly demonstrate to you that they can competently run the channels I suppose. If what you're asking is literally at the level where someone is managing pay per click and programmatic media buying, then you want to make sure that they can just do that and I would say it's less about the years of experience. A lot of times people only want to do those types of jobs for a couple years before they're like, "Hey, what's your plan for me? I'm tired of running ads and building campaigns. I want to manage the people who do that now." The people who tend to really do that are often somewhat earlier on in their careers. That's just a reality that we see.

Lenny (01:22:25):
One more very technical question. What do you recommend the title for this role be? Growth marketer, something else?

Jonathan Becker (01:22:31):
I've seen so many different names for this. I think again, if the intention is to grow out a growth marketing capability, which again is not exclusive to performance marketing, then you're looking for a manager role of growth marketing manager. I've seen paid acquisition specialist for people who just manage channels. I've seen paid acquisition manager, performance marketing manager, media planner and buyer. I've seen all kinds of different roles. But when we are launching a new role these days, there's such wonderful tools like everything from Glassdoor to LinkedIn to PayScale where you can essentially just look at what other people are calling it and borrow from their role descriptions and then create your own role description and then determine what role is meaningful in the context of your own organization.

Lenny (01:23:23):
Awesome. Last question. We started with the story of how you landed Uber, and I know you also have an interesting story which I haven't heard of how you landed Snap/Snapchat as a client, so maybe tell that story.

Jonathan Becker (01:23:38):
It's a fun story and I think it's about ultimately confidence and knowing your craft. I believe it was like 2015 or 2016, we were essentially contacted to participate in an RFP down in Los Angeles. RFPs are difficult processes and essentially a department of a company is saying, "We want performance marketing and here are all the questions that we're going to ask you and exercises you need to complete in order to vet you as to whether you are the right partner or not." Sometimes RFPs are incredibly thoughtful and they're run by people who have either done a lot of RFPs in the context of what we do or they know specifically what the outcome is. Then in other cases, they're very experienced marketing departments with senior people and an approach that they may take is every stakeholder within that department gets to submit one or two questions to a long list of questions and the respondents have to respond to all of this.

(01:24:38):
The RFP process for Snap was somewhat complex and they asked a range of different questions and we find ourselves in LA at a hotel the night before, it's 2:00 in the morning, my business partner and another team member that we had brought down are sweating and we're like, "How are we going to build a presentation out of this? They're asking so many well-meaning but difficult questions that are zigging and zagging." In a pitch situation you want to tell a story, it's important, and that story has to have a beginning, middle, and end. It was just difficult and yet here we were and we had worked with all these really cool organizations and I was very confident that we knew precisely what we were doing. I kind of had this eureka moment where I was like, "Here's what we're going to do." It was Brent MacArthur, my business partner and I kind of arrived at this together, but we're kind of like, "Here's what we're going to do. We're going to have a completely unique take on how to respond to this and we're going to build a deck that's bespoke around X, Y, and Z."

(01:25:54):
We work till 6:00 in the morning, I think we get a couple hours of sleep and then by 10:00, we're sitting in their offices. Essentially the pitch is something like this. I stand there in front of about 20 different executives from their organization and I say, "You have thoughtfully curated an RFP for us to respond to today, and you have asked us to respond to about 20 to 30 different questions. With the utmost respect, I am not going to answer any of your questions today. I'm standing here because you are looking for a marketing partner and you need expertise in this area and instead of telling you the answers to the questions that you asked, I'm going to tell you what I think you need to do to get where you want to go and if you agree with me and my logic and what I talk to you about here today, then you should hire us. If you do not agree with my logic and you think that we're out to lunch, then you should not hire us."

(01:26:47):
You could hear a pin drop in the room. My own team I think was a little bit surprised. We had a whole bunch of technical difficulties that day. Someone who was supposed to Zoom in couldn't make it and so I have to ad lib part of the pitch that I wasn't prepared for, lots of zig and zags. They thank us for RFP response, lots of handshakes and smiling faces, but we don't know whether we're going to land the client or not.

(01:27:12):
Then about two hours later, I was driving to San Francisco with a friend, immediately leave LA for SF because I had a bunch of follow on meetings, and I get a phone call and they were like, "We loved your approach. Congratulations. You're hired."

(01:27:28):
These days I think Snap is still a really interesting organization, but at the time they were kind of bringing the future of a social platform or what a social platform could be in the same way that we think about TikTok right now. TikTok wasn't on the scene yet and Facebook was very worried about Snap and there was tons of engagement on Snap, so this was the it client of the day and it felt amazing.

(01:27:55):
Essentially the lesson was that you have to trust yourself and understand your strengths and weaknesses. In situations where someone is well-meaning but may not understand what they need, be brave and tell them what they need rather than just conforming to what they're asking for because sometimes inadvertently that leads you down the wrong path. We took a big risk and it had a wonderful payoff and we have, in addition to this story, we had a wonderful relationship with them for a couple years.

Lenny (01:28:28):
I love that story. I love how dramatic all your new customers, your way of acquiring customers and I imagine not all of them are this dramatic.

Jonathan Becker (01:28:38):
Not all of them are this dramatic, but there have been some pretty dramatic ones. I think part of running a business and running an agency has been the curation and experience around all these fun, crazy stories that have accumulated as we run this really interesting services business.

Lenny (01:28:55):
Awesome. Well, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions for you. Are you ready for the lightning round?

Jonathan Becker (01:29:03):
I'm ready. Let's do it.

Lenny (01:29:05):
Okay, great Looking, very excited. Okay, first question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Jonathan Becker (01:29:13):
As a marketer, Storyworthy by Matthew Dicks is a wonderful book. He is a world world-class storyteller. I don't know if you know him. He wrote this book about how to structure and think about the art of storytelling and every marketer should read Storyworthy. It was a huge contributor to how I think about what we do at Thrive. As an entrepreneur, I love startup stories, so Shoe Dog, which is the startup story of Nike. It's basically Phil Knight talking about all the ups and downs, and it's crazy. Nike shouldn't be a company based on all the turmoil and challenges that they overcame. Fascinating read about taking risk and doing what you think is right and ultimately succeeding and building Nike. Then a book by Nick Bilton called American Kingpin, which is the story of the startup of the Silk Road, which was like this dark web marketplace for some pretty bad stuff. But it is half tech story, startup story and half gangster kind of kingpin story. It honestly should be a Hollywood movie. It reads like a Hollywood thriller. So awesome, great book.

Lenny (01:30:30):
Favorite recent movie or a TV show.

Jonathan Becker (01:30:32):
I don't know how recent it is, but I love The Big Short, just love it.

Lenny (01:30:35):
Not recent at all, but it's still great.

Jonathan Becker (01:30:37):
It's still great. The reason why I like it is because someone found truth in the data they were analyzing and then capitalized on it, which is really an analog for what we do in performance marketing. Then recently I have fallen in love with White Lotus for no particular reason. It's just raw entertainment.

Lenny (01:30:54):
What's something you've changed in the way that you all operate that's been relatively minor in terms of how hard it was to change, but that had a tremendous impact on your ability to execute as a team or a company?

Jonathan Becker (01:31:08):
The tools that we use in performance marketing change constantly. The channels themselves change and therefore what problems exist and what SaaS companies or different types of platforms offer as solutions to problems change. I don't think it's one thing necessarily, this might be a bit of a roundabout answer here, but I mentioned that change itself earlier is something that humans seem to not love, whereas in our industry, and I don't think we're alone here, but there's a culture of change. A welcoming of change, aptitude around change, having a playful mindset with new technology and tools rather than being upset about the fact that AI exists or third party cookies are being deprecated or iOS 14 removed IDFA and trying to be creative around those types of solutions has been like a constant for us. I'm kind of sidestepping the question a little bit, but it is the cultural willingness to adapt that I think has been a strong suit for us as a company.

Lenny (01:32:12):
Speaking of tools, final question. What is your favorite most underrated tool for performance marketing work?

Jonathan Becker (01:32:18):
It's Thrive Stack. It's a tool that we built in-house that allows us to pipe third party data and anonymized customer level data into a database and then ultimately visualize it in a format like Data Studio, Google Data Studio, which I think now is called Looker Studio. That has been a profoundly powerful platform from which we're capable of delivering insights that are built upon the data as opposed to just regurgitated data, if that makes sense. We have not released this technology yet. It's basically a tool we use in-house with our clients. But to a certain extent, I mentioned Supermetrics, which is another ETL and has some of the same capabilities but isn't quite as powerful.

Lenny (01:33:05):
Amazing. Jonathan, this is by far the deepest I've ever gone into the world of paid growth. I really appreciate you making time and sharing all of your wisdom with us. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to learn more, reach out, ask some questions maybe, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Jonathan Becker (01:33:23):
Thank you for having me again, by the way. This was a lot of fun. I'm available through Thrive, so thrivedigital.com. You can contact us through our site by accessing the contact form. Personally, I'm on LinkedIn under my name Jonathan Becker or Twitter, JZBecker. Then things that would be interesting from the audience, always looking for feedback in terms of whether people agree or disagree with thoughts and feelings that we have about what we do. Obviously always looking for amazing people ultimately to join our team at Thrive. If you're a practitioner of growth marketing or performance marketing and you're looking for a top place to spend some time, would love to talk to you. Also, I suppose if you need some help making this stuff work within the context of your own organization, we'd love to be at your service.

Lenny (01:34:12):
Awesome. What is the URL again?

Jonathan Becker (01:34:14):
Thrivedigital.com.

Lenny (01:34:16):
Sweet. You asked for feedback, be careful what you wish for. We get some hilarious C2 comments. We'll see. We'll see what comes in on this one.

Jonathan Becker (01:34:24):
Sounds good.

Lenny (01:34:25):
Jonathan, thank you so much for being here.

Jonathan Becker (01:34:27):
Pleasure. Thanks, Lenny. Thanks for having me.

Lenny (01:34:29):
Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Matt Dixon (00:00):
We collected two and a half million sales calls and studied them with a machine learning platform at scale.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05):
The big insight is that you're losing most of your sales deals, not to competition, but to indecision.

Matt Dixon (00:12):
And that indecision stems from their fear of failure. Dialing up the FOMO backfires 87% of the time. They're not afraid of missing out, they're afraid of messing up.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20):
You just talk about how to actually leverage these insights to improve your sales process. You have something, I think you call it the JOLT method?

Matt Dixon (00:25):
Yeah, JOLT them forward. The first thing is we've got to judge their level of indecision. The second thing is we've got to offer a recommendation. The third thing is we've got to get them to start trusting us and we call it limit the exploration, and the T is we've got to de-risk the deal. We've got to take some risk off the table. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38):
Great segue to The Challenger Sale, which is basically this on steroids. 

Matt Dixon (00:41):
Most salespeople are trying to figure out what's keeping the customer up at night. The challenger approach is about showing the customer what should be keeping them up at night. What's a risk that they don't know about but you do. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51):
Holy moly, this is going to be the most action-packed, high-density podcast episode we've done. Today, my guest is Matt Dixon. Matt is one of the world's foremost experts in sales, known for his groundbreaking research into what makes the best salespeople different from everyone else. His first book, The Challenger Sale, was a number one Wall Street Journal bestseller and has sold over a million copies worldwide. His most recent book, The JOLT Effect, builds on his lessons and insights and will change how you do sales. 

(01:23):
In our conversation, Matt breaks down what you're probably doing wrong in your sales process based on research, into millions of sales conversations, and then how to tweak your process to be a lot more successful. This episode is for anyone that wants to improve their sales skills or improve the rate at which they close deals. 

(01:40):
With that, I bring you Matt Dixon and if you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. Matt, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Matt Dixon (01:59):
It's great to be here. Thank you for the invitation, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (02:01):
It's great to have you here. First of all, a huge thank you to April Dunford for connecting us. She's a huge fan of your work. She mentioned you a number of times on the podcast episode that she did. She's great. 

Matt Dixon (02:11):
Yeah, she's very nice. 

Lenny Rachitsky (02:12):
She's amazing. You basically spend your time researching salespeople and digging into what makes the best salespeople different from all the rest, and then synthesizing these lessons into these really actionable pieces of advice so that anyone can become better at sales, which to me feels like a dream come true even if I'm not a salesperson, even though many of us do sales part-time, but especially if you're a salesperson. 

(02:40):
First of all, just to give people a sense of the work that you do, could you just talk a bit about the research that went into the books that we're going to talk about, we're going to be focusing on The Challenger Sale and The JOLT Effect. What is the research they did?

Matt Dixon (02:53):
Yeah, sure. Just start with The Challenger, because that chronologically came first. We actually started that research study in, I think it was in late 2008 actually, and we published the initial results to, at the time I was working for a company called CEB, which was acquired by Gartner Group in 2017, a research organization, and then I was running the group that served heads of sales, business, business heads of sales around the world. We had five or 600 clients around the world, and we launched that study in '08. 

(03:24):
We published the initial results for our clients in '09. We kept collecting some data and then we published the book in 2011. The book was published off a data set of 6,000 salespeople, so we did an in-depth survey with 6,000 salespeople, as well as collected performance data on those 6,000 sellers. It was a global, cross industry, different types of companies as well, product companies, services companies, large, small, slow growth, fast growth, you name it.

(03:50):
Overtime, though, that research has been ongoing, so we've collected data. I think to date, on roughly a quarter million salespeople around the world that we continue to go back and not just validate the original findings, but look at how things are changing and do cuts of the data now that the data set's so big. That was a survey based piece of research we did. 

(04:11):
The JOLT Effect, we started that research in 2020, actually. It was actually in March of 2020, which I think is a time that everybody remembers with probably mixed emotions, most of them bad. I think though, you remember March was a time when people were getting into Tiger King and baking sourdough bread. A few months later, that got really old, but in the beginning it was kind of surprising and weird and this whole pandemic thing, but we actually thought because we're huge nerds, that this would be an interesting time to do a sales research project.

(04:44):
We had always been fascinated by what Professor Neil Rackham did back in the '70s and '80s and spin selling, and he and his research team sat in on 30 something thousand sales calls, physically sat in on these meetings and took notes. They're a team of psychologists to produce the research that went into spin selling, and so we always kind of aspire to get, if you will, at the coal face or where the rubber hits the road in sales, which is the sales conversation when that salesperson is sitting across from the customer. 

(05:11):
The problem with that is it's really hard to get people to pay for that kind of research, that kind of undertaking, and then let alone, getting invited into those meetings because a lot of the really critical sales meetings took place, of course, in the client's office. Until March of 2020 when that all changed and the entire sales process for every company on Earth went to Zoom and Teams and Webex and other virtual platforms.

(05:34):
We recruited several dozen companies across industry and around the world into a large global study, and we collected two and a half million sales calls and studied them with a machine learning platform at scale. That was a very different kind of research project and honestly, it's fun just as a researcher to look back on Challenger and the manual survey-based approach and the interviews and all this stuff to fast forward to today, being able to take advantage of large data sets and advance technology to study millions of sales conversations is pretty cool.

Lenny Rachitsky (06:07):
Amazing. Okay, so the second book, the most recent book, The JOLT Effect is based on these two and a half million sales conversations. 

Matt Dixon (06:13):
Mm-hmm. That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (06:14):
I love insights that come from tons of data, so this is most excellent. This episode is brought to you by Enterpret. Enterpret unifies all of your customer interactions from Gong calls, to Zendesk tickets, to Twitter threads, to app store reviews, and makes it available for your product team. It's used by leading product orgs like Canva, Notion, Loom, Linear, and Descript, to accurately integrate the voice of the customer into your product development process, helping you build best in class products. 

(06:43):
What makes Enterpret special is its ability to build customer-specific adaptive AI models that provide the most granular and accurate categorization of all your customer feedback and also connect customer feedback to revenue impact, to help product leaders confidently prioritize things that will actually move the needle for your business. If you want a custom model built for your organization so that you can automate your feedback loops and prioritize your roadmap with confidence, get in touch with the team at enterpret.com.lenny. That's E-N-T-E-R-P-R-E-T.com.lenny. 

(07:20):
This episode is brought to you by Webflow. We're all friends here, so let's be real for a second. We all know that your website shouldn't be a static asset. It should be a dynamic part of your strategy that drives conversions. That's business 101, but here's a number for you, 54% of leaders say web updates take too long. That's over half of you listening right now. 

(07:44):
That's where Webflow comes in. Their visual first platform allows you to build, launch, and optimize web pages fast. That means, you can set ambitious business goals and your site can rise to the challenge. Learn how teams like Dropbox, IDEO and Orangetheory trust Webflow to achieve their most ambitious goals today at webflow.com.

(08:05):
Let's dive into the insights from The JOLT Effect. The way that I understand is the big insight is that you're losing most of your sales deals not to competition, but to indecision. Basically, customers preferring to do nothing versus choosing something because they are afraid of making a mistake.

Matt Dixon (08:24):
Good summary. Yeah, [inaudible 00:08:25], if you're busy, you said it more succinctly. I've been doing this for a while now and you said it way more succinctly than I can. Just to back up for a little bit, I think one of the data points I always start with when I present the research on The JOLT Effect is that our analysis showed that anywhere between 40 and 60% of the average salesperson's qualified pipelines, these aren't just leads, sometimes bad leads that are thrown over to us by marketing, these are qualified opportunities. 

(08:53):
These are people we've met with, customers we've pursued, we've engaged, they're in the sales process, 40 to 60% of them will be ultimately marked as closed loss, no decision. That's actually, I think that number is actually on the rise, especially in places like SaaS and the broader tech sector over the past year and a half, but that's a really painful thing. 

(09:13):
If you think about as a salesperson, that for 46% of your deals, you're going to spend a lot of time, energy, resources, a lot of your company's money and their time and resources pursuing these opportunities where you eventually just get ghosted and you don't really know what happened, just like the customer, the opportunity evaporated on you, they ghosted you, they want radio silent. You don't really know what happened there. 

(09:35):
We decided to take this two and a half million sales call dataset, which you could have used to answer lots of different questions, but we were really fascinated by this question, maybe two, two questions. One is why do customers make no decision? Because you understand it's frustrating as a salesperson, but it's also puzzling for customers to do that. They go through the entire process to evaluate a solution, and many of those customers say, "Yeah, I want to buy," and then they ghost to the salesperson and it's so puzzling. 

(10:02):
Why would they waste their own time evaluating a solution than doing nothing? Then, the more important question is probably what are the very best salespeople do differently? What have they figured out to avoid that outcome? 

Lenny Rachitsky (10:13):
Cool, and we're going to talk about that latter part to help people understand why, because it sounds like, okay, I guess this happens, but help people understand why this happens. Why are people nervous to make a mistake and not make a decision at all?

Matt Dixon (10:24):
Let me maybe take us a step back, Lenny. There was a reason we actually even asked that question that you just asked, and the reason was this, when we looked at sales calls, if you think of the typical sales process or buying journey, it kind of moves through three phases. Phase number one, is the customer in their status quo. It's what they do today. They use your competitor's product. Maybe they do use a homegrown solution, maybe they never saw a need for a solution like yours, but that's their current state. 

(10:51):
Step two is we've got to get them to agree that the current state is no longer acceptable and they've got to move forward in a new and different way. We call that agreement on a vision. We've got to get their intent to move forward and to change, and that step number three is you got to get them to buy something. That's the action step where they execute the docuSign, they sign on the line that is dotted and they send the contract back. 

(11:11):
It's a simple three step process, and what we found in our analysis is one of the big places where a lot of deals fall out of that process is between intent and action. It's after the point where the customer says, "Yeah, Lenny, this sounds great. I'm sold. Let's talk." But before the point where that actually deal gets sold, a lot of deals kind of go sideways in that moment and the way this comes across in sales calls is that customers start, if you will, relitigating concerns that they had asked and you thought you'd address much earlier, like what might go wrong and is this really the right answer for us? 

(11:45):
These are things that are puzzling to salespeople because it feels like this thing is slipping through my fingers right before my eyes. I thought we had this closed. I thought you said you want to move forward and now you're asking questions that we addressed three months ago, what's going on? 

(11:58):
What salespeople tend to do, because they've grown up in a world where they've been told, the only reason the customer hesitates is because you haven't put to bed their status quo bias. We all know, we're all human beings, not just customers, but perhaps especially customers, are guilty of status quo bias, meaning we are prone to laziness and doing nothing because it's easier, it's inertia. It's easier to just keep doing more of the same than to change behavior. 

(12:23):
Change is really hard and salespeople have been taught that the status quo is their biggest competitor, and if the customer is starting to get cold feet, it's because they still think either what they're doing today is good enough, what you are proposing is not a compelling enough reason to change, or maybe it's just not a top priority for them or their organization. It's got to be one of those reasons. 

(12:43):
What salespeople have been armed to do is go out and dial up the FOMO and make the customer sweat a little bit. The first thing they do is they say, "Lenny, remember the demos and the proof of concept trial, how excited you were and those benefits, you got to pay for it. You're not going to get all those great benefits for your organization unless you sign the agreement." 

(13:03):
If that doesn't work, I'll try to kind of scare you into action by dialing up the fear, uncertainty and doubt and saying, "Lenny, you told me about these problems in your business. You guys are really struggling right now. By the way, did I mentioned, we're working with all of your competitors and they're seeing tremendous benefits from our product and you're going to be left in the dust and those problems you brought up with me, they're not going to solve themselves." 

(13:22):
I'm trying to create that burning platform a little bit for the customer and get them to realize the cost of their inaction. There is a cost of doing nothing, and if those two things don't work, what most salespeople go to is the 10% discount that's only good this quarter. It's like the price driven urgency. Maybe this will be the thing you need to just get you over the finish line. 

(13:43):
What we were so surprised by which led us to the question you asked, Lenny, was that 87% of the time when salespeople do that dial up the FOMO in those moments, especially with a customer who says that they're ready to move forward, but they start to backpedal and waffle and waiver and become hesitant dialing up the FOMO backfires 87% of the time. In other words, it increases the odds, the deal will be lost to no decision.

(14:06):
If it weren't for that finding, we never would've even bothered asking the question about why do people end up, why do we lose deals to no decision, why do customers make no decision, but this was really puzzling because it flew in the face of everything we talked about, including in Challenger, to be totally candid. We talked about how challengers are exceptional at breaking the customer's status quo bias by showing them the pain of same is worse than the pain of change. 

(14:29):
Again, overcoming that inertia, that not just individuals but organizations suffer from. Challengers are really good at that. Here, we see that the tactics that you might associate with challenging actually kind of backfire, which was, as the author of The Challenger, still a little bit troubling to me, but we'll come back to that, but I think what we realized was we got it right, but we got it kind of half right.

(14:50):
We went into the data and we asked a slightly different question, which is why are deals lost in no decision? What drives that? We found that actually, there are a lot of deals that are lost because the customer does actually prefer their status quo. That is status quo bias. They believe what they're going to say is good enough, what you're talking about, it's not a compelling enough reason to change or this is not a top priority. 

(15:11):
Those are all status quo preference reasons, but it turns out those are only 44% of the no decision losses, 56% of no decision losses are customers who want to buy but can't buy because they're stuck in this no man's land of indecision, and that indecision itself stems from their fear of failure, which you put your finger on earlier, and this is the part I found so fascinating, so we dug into the psych research. We read probably 30 years of cognitive psychology journal articles, many of them from Dutch universities, which I find very interesting, but a fairly very big into this stuff. 

(15:49):
A lot of the Kahneman and Tversky work around loss aversion and prospect theory, et cetera, and one of the big findings we came across is that there's actually a more powerful human bias, even more powerful than status quo bias that rears its ugly head and causes indecision, and that is called the omission bias. 

(16:06):
The omission bias is, if you get down to it, is the fact that people don't want to be blamed for making decisions that lead to a loss. In the human mind, there are two types of loss that we think about. We all like to avoid loss, but not all loss is created equal. There are losses that happen when we do nothing, and then there are losses that happened because we did something. 

(16:25):
We made a decision, we picked a vendor, we executed a contract, and then something bad happened. It turns out that in the human mind, people are okay with missing out. They are not okay with messing up and being blamed, and this is really powerful. It's even more powerful than status quo bias, as I said. 

(16:44):
The shorthand for salespeople is this, dialing up the FOMO can be very effective to overcome status quo bias, but knowing that every human being, including all of your customers, who I include in that definition of human beings are definitely afraid of being personally blamed if things go wrong. The FOMU actually matters more than the FOMO. The FOMU is the fear of messing up or in the not safe for work version of your podcast, I'd say FOFU, but your listeners can figure out what that stands for on their own, but this is really powerful for salespeople, right to understand. 

(17:16):
Look, if you are trying to scare your customer into action, you're going to miss out on these benefits. You're going to miss out on solving these problems. You're just going to pay more later if you don't say yes now. What you're really doing is using scare tactics, but you're trying to scare somebody who's already afraid. The problem is they're not afraid of the thing you think they're afraid of. They're not afraid of missing out, they're afraid of messing up. 

(17:36):
We've got to address that as salespeople. We've got to help instill the confidence in the customer that you're making a great decision. I've got your back. You're going to look like a hero, not like a fool and that's really what The JOLT Effect is about. It's about how the very best salespeople execute that. It wasn't that we're wrong with Challenger, it's just the story was kind of incomplete. 

(17:55):
You got to break status quo bias. If you don't do that, you're never going to have an indecision problem, but even once you overcome the customer's indifference and their status quo bias, you got to second battle you've got to fight, which is you've got to instill the confidence and make them feel good about this. Frankly, leap of faith they're about to take and their fear, you got to deal with the fear that if something goes wrong, they're worried that they're going to be blamed for it.

Lenny Rachitsky (18:16):
We're going to talk about this method you developed for how to actually do all the things you're talking about, but first, to make this even more real, what I'm thinking about is an example. Is a good example, maybe a CRM, like a better CRM product, say someone has Salesforce installed and now they're like, maybe there's probably something better out there we should probably evaluate. 

(18:34):
Then, I'm thinking from the perspective of a startup trying to build a better CRM. There's always this advice, you have to be 10 times better for anyone to pay any attention. I think that feeds into exactly what you're showing is it needs to be so much better that this fear is reduced. Can you just talk about maybe an example, whether it's that one or a different one to make this more concrete?

Matt Dixon (18:52):
We encountered a ton of examples. It's so interesting you mentioned startups and I think sometimes, I was actually with a big enterprise software company and I think when, and I presented this research to some of their sales leaders and one of the folks in the room said, "I'm really glad we are who we are, that we are the 800-pound gorilla, especially in a market like we're in right now," because as the old adage goes, it wasn't IBM, but the old adage is that nobody ever got fired for buying from IBM, right? 

(19:21):
This company is like the IBM of their space. They're the 800-pound gorilla. They've got the brand strength, the reputation, they're the safe choice. This team felt kind of comfortable or comforted, I should say by that fact, especially in a tight environment where it's a battle for deals and for mindshare and for wins out there in the market right now, especially in tech.

(19:42):
What I said is you've got to remember though, that may be true, and I would argue, and I think you're right, that for a startup, yeah, you've got to be 10 times better to get that mind share. It may be even better than that to get somebody to take a leap of faith with you. There is inherent risk in going with the unproven player, but I cautioned these folks and I said, "Now, remember, what are the things that drive fear of failure and indecision?" 

(20:08):
It turns out there are three big ones. The first one is have I made the right choice? I know I want to work with this vendor, but did I configure the solution of the proposal the right way, the right contract length, the right implementation, the right used cases, the right integrations, all that professional services or DIY, all those big questions.

(20:26):
The second thing that customers worry about in their second fear of failure is that they're going to learn something after the contract is signed that's going to make the decision look like not such a great decision. I'll give you a really specific example about this. I spoke to a tech company not too long ago, maybe a month ago, and they landed their biggest deal of their existence. It was an early stage company, seven-figure deal, game changer for this organization. Then, they beat out some big established competitors. This is a huge win. 

(20:54):
They went out. They celebrated. It was just totally amazing, their first big enterprise win and their first seven-figure deal and their first victory against some of these incumbents. Unfortunately, about two weeks after they won this deal, the new Gartner Magic Quadrant on their space came out and they were shown to be kind of, eh, right? They weren't the leader, but they were sort of middle of the pack.

(21:16):
All of a sudden, the client who signed the agreement, the CTO just got crap rained from everybody saying, "Did you see the Gartner Magic Quadrant? It looks like the company we just plunked down seven figures with was kind of seen as so-so by the Gartner analyst? Have we talked to these guys and those guys and why aren't we going with the leaders," and blah, blah, blah? 

(21:36):
They ended up backing out of the contract because the CTO said, "I'm spending every day talking to all the other key stakeholders trying to convince them that yes, we did all of our due diligence, but life is too short and we're probably going to end up going with one of the big players. We're sorry. I mean, that's such a painful story, but that's the customer is like they're going to keep doing research because they don't want to be surprised when some new piece of information comes to light. It's the second big fear of failure driver or failure driver. 

(22:03):
The third one is that the customers are worried they're just not going to see the ROI. They're not going to get the full benefits. You might project for them a 5X improvement in sales productivity. What if it comes in at two or three X and my name's on the agreement and the CFO comes asking why we didn't get the benefits we thought? In today's environment, that's not just egg on your face, you could get fired for that stuff. 

(22:26):
This is the client who's really looking for that vendor to have their back and to assure them that they're going to see the benefits that are being projected and promised through the sale. What I said to this big enterprise tech company was, "Look, you guys, yes, it's tough to be a startup right now, early stage company, there's a lot of risks there, but who's offering more choices, them or you guys? You guys have a partner ecosystem. You have 20 different cloud products. You bought seven companies in the past three years. You have a cornucopia of options, which adds to the buyer's anxiety that they haven't chosen the right thing. 

(22:59):
Second, do you think there's more written about you guys or about them? You could fill a football stadium with all the coverage on you guys. I mean, everybody's got an opinion about you because you are the 800-pound gorilla and everybody's worked with you before and they have opinions, good and bad, and people want to leave no stone unturned. 

(23:17):
Then, lastly, it turns out you guys are a lot more expensive because you're trying to move from selling simple products like these ankle biters out there, these startups into selling big enterprise solutions. You guys are selling not seven-figure deals, eight-figure deals, nine-figure deals to your customers. That increases the customer's anxiety that I really have to see return on this. 

(23:36):
You, in many respects, are getting whipsawed by these factors in a way that the startups are not because they don't have as many choices. There's not as much coverage about that. The investment is lower, and so there's a little bit less risk for the customer. You guys aren't immune just because you're the big brand."

Lenny Rachitsky (23:53):
You're doing a great job making it clear why it's so nerve-racking to buying new software. There's just so many things that could hurt you as a person at a company. April Dunford, I think this is barred from your language that she talks about how it's actually more stressful these days to buy software than to sell software because of all these things you've talked about.

Matt Dixon (24:13):
Yeah, I think she's on point on that one. I mean, your customers are, yeah, they're really, really afraid of this not panning out. It was so interesting, and salespeople can think of so many different occasions where the purchase buying your product, just made all the sense in the world for the customer, it would make things so much better. It would solve such big problems for them. 

(24:37):
They're so dissatisfied with their current approach. It's just a no-brainer, and the customer will look at that and they will agree with you and they still won't make a decision because of the what-ifs, right?

Lenny Rachitsky (24:47):
Yeah. This is got to be very frustrating for founders to listen to and be like, "Come on, our product is so much better. What are you doing?" But I think this explains a lot of the challenges they're probably having. 

(24:58):
This episode is brought to you by Heap, the product analytics solution that shows you everything users do on your digital product, website, mobile product or other digital surfaces. We all know a great digital experience when we see it. It's intuitive. It anticipates your needs, and it makes it easy for you to do your job. If you're trying to build that kind of experience for your users, you need up-to-date, reliable information about what your users do in your product and why they do it. 

(25:27):
Want to know how your users behave across platforms, what keeps them coming back, what they're doing that you're not even aware of? Well, I have some great news for you, Heap captures all of this user activity for you automatically and then gives you definitive answers to all your questions about user behavior in seconds, not weeks. With Heap, it's easy to prioritize the product investments that improve conversion, engagement and retention. Visit heap.io/lenny to get started with a demo. That's H-E-A-O.io/lenny. 

(26:02):
It's a great segue to talking about how to actually leverage these insights to improve your sales process. You have something, I think you call it the JOLT method?

Matt Dixon (26:10):
Yes. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (26:11):
Awesome. Let's get into it.

Matt Dixon (26:12):
The JOLT, it's an acronym. It just so happened it worked out that way, but I like it because it's memorable, but it also speaks to what's happening. Our customers' stuck in their indecisive state. They want to buy from us, but they just can't because worried about what might go wrong. You got to JOLT them forward. We got to JOLT them into action.

Lenny Rachitsky (26:12):
Beautiful. 

Matt Dixon (26:30):
How do we do it? The first thing is we've got to judge their level of indecision, we've got to figure out what we're dealing with. The second thing is we've got to offer a recommendation. The third thing is we've got to get them to stop doing endless research and start trusting us and limiting, we call limit the exploration, and the T is we've got to the derisk the deal. We've got to take some risk off the table, and we establish that safety net for the customer so they feel like we've got their back. 

(26:49):
Maybe we talk about each of those. I'll start with the J because it's first, but also I think the way, while it's kind of linear, I would encourage listeners don't think about this as a process where it's like I do step one, two, three, four, J-O-L-T. Think of it as it starts with the J, and the J tells you what the next step is. Is it the T? Is it the L? Is it the O? Is it the O, and then we got to deal with the T. Then, we got to go back to the O because it comes up again. 

(27:14):
Think of it as sort of the dividing rod. How do we figure out what's got the customer nervous? This is a really, really, really tricky thing because, and I've likened indecision to the carbon monoxide poisoning of sales. It's everywhere, but it's odorless, it's tasteless, but you need a carbon monoxide detector, and that's what the J is. 

(27:37):
How do we get fear of failure on the table? The problem with this is that, and I think most of your listeners will be familiar with this, everybody, especially customers suffers and senior executives especially, especially, suffer from what's called the Dunning-Kruger effect, which is they think they're better at things than they really are and decisiveness is one of those things that buyers will think they will say they think they're decisive. 

(28:00):
In fact, if you surveyed your customers, not that they recommend this, and you add 100 of them, if they consider themselves to be decisive folks, like 99 out of 100 will say, "Absolutely, yes, I make the tough calls. I manage from the gut. I live on the edge as an executive making those big calls," but the research tells a very different story. It turns out that 87% of buyers in our two and a half million sales calls we studied, either showed moderate or high levels of indecision. 

(28:25):
The folks who are not worried about fear or failure were 13%. Yeah, those people do exist. By the way, if you find one of those people, you should sell them everything as soon as possible because they're making the decision quite literally on the dollars and cents and the ROI and whether it makes sense for their business. It's a rational decision for them, but for the rest, they're dealing with a lot of emotion, and that emotion is all wrapped up with fear of failure. 

(28:48):
What's so tough about this is that it's not just Dunning-Kruger like we think we're more decisive than we really are, even if your customer knows that they're indecisive or they're worried about failing or how their boss is going to perceive them, if this purchase doesn't pan out, they don't like talking about it because it's embarrassing. They don't want to talk about like, "God, I got to tell you this better pay off because if it doesn't, I'm already on thin ice with my boss. She doesn't like me already. This is going to be the last straw." Nobody's going to say that stuff. 

(29:17):
How do we get on the table? One of the things we don't think works particularly well are classic open-ended questions like, "Lenny, do you find when you go to the Cheesecake factory, do you leave satisfied or hungry because you can't decide what to order?" I guess, it's not great approaches with customers, you'll end the sale pretty quickly because again, your customers find that kind of offensive. They'd like to think of themselves as decisive people. 

(29:39):
We found a technique, this is actually not in the book, we found it after we wrote the book, called pings and echoes that high performers use. Think of the way a surface ship might detect a submarine in the water using sonar. They send a ping out into the water and they're listening, if you will, using sonar for the reflection back and the reflection tells them, is it a friendly submarine, an enemy submarine? Is it just a whale? Is it heading towards us? Away from us? At what speed are they about to torpedo us? All that good stuff. 

(30:08):
We want to do the same thing in sales. The way this works is that a salesperson will try to articulate but in a non, not to out the customer, but to get confirmation or refutation, if you will, that what they've articulated is actually a concern for their buyer. 

(30:25):
Hypothetically, let's imagine we're talking about a purchase and we've had a lot of great conversations. I've shown you a lot of demos. You guys have liked everything we've shown. We showed you partner options. We showed you different configurations. We did POC over here. We did a pilot over there. You guys are just eating it all up, but I'm kind of getting the sneaking feeling that you guys actually don't know what you want and we've shown you a lot and we've probably made that problem worse. 

(30:49):
What I might say to you is, "Lenny, I'm just curious if we could calibrate here for just a moment, and there's a reason I'm asking this, which is a lot of the customers at this point in our process of working together, they get almost overwhelmed with all the options, and look, I probably made this worse. We're very proud of what we do. I want to show you, paint the art of the possible, but I also know if we're going to do business together, you told me right away budgets are limited and you can't have it all. You've got to decide what's nice to happen and what's need to happen. I'm just curious, are you and your team clear on what would be in and out of the proposal?" 

(31:25):
What's going to happen is one of two things, one you might say, or a few things, you might say, "You know what? No, we don't know and we have liked everything you've shown us, but as you said, we can't have it all. So, we'd be really curious to know what do other companies like us start with? How do we get going? What are the things we can do without and we can maybe add later on down the road," or you might get the customer says, "No, no, no, we were just being polite. There's a lot of stuff you showed us that we're not actually that interested in. It's cool, but it's just not for us. We are very clear on what we want. 

(31:55):
So, let me share that with you now. However, what I'm really concerned about is once we get this kind of specked out and configured and priced, I'm going to take it to the CFO because I've got to get her approval on this and I can't build our business case on the claim you guys make about improving sales productivity by 10% because she'll laugh me out of her office. Help me get grounded in what's a believable outcome for us so that I can sell it and I can be confident we're going to actually hit it." 

(32:25):
Again, it's not designed to embarrass the customer, it's designed to get this on the table so it can be recognized and dealt with and contextualized. You're totally normal. Everybody struggles with this. There's a lot of stuff we throw in front of people and it ends up doing some harm. They don't know what to pick. Let me be of service and value to you. 

(32:42):
That's the first thing that we point to and that's going to tell us, okay, is it a choice problem? They're overwhelmed. They don't know what to choose, like that example we just used. Is it that they're just doing endless research and they feel like they haven't really come down the learning curve yet around this purchase or is it, no, I don't actually know that we're going to get what we're paying for here and we screw this stuff up every day of the week at twice a Sunday and I don't think it's going to be any different and then I'm going to get blamed, so help me manage the downside risk, but it tells us kind of where to go next on that journey, if that makes sense.

Lenny Rachitsky (33:12):
Yeah. Awesome. The advice there is basically get a sense of how clear they are internally on knowing exactly what they want that'll help them make a decision. There's kind of this moment of, okay, let's just help me understand the question, the way you phrased it, are you and your team clear on what would be in or out of this proposal?

Matt Dixon (33:31):
Yeah. That's just a one example. That's if I hypothesize that you're really struggling with what to choose. Now, my hypothesis might be, you know what you want. You've done plenty of research, but you're really worried about the ROI and you're just worried you just aren't going to be able to accomplish that. 

(33:47):
That ping might sound very different. It might be we've been having a discussion about, you've been asking for multiple terms of the ROI calculation and changing parameters and really trying to make it bulletproof, but a lot of customers struggle with that a little bit because that's a big thing. You're putting your name against that. Maybe we should have a conversation about whether that's a concern for you. Is there a believability gap? Is there an execution gap you're worried about on your side or on our side? 

(34:15):
Let's have a conversation about that so I can set the proper expectations so you feel really confident going to the CFO and lobbying for investment here. That ping could go in, but it's based on what I think is holding you up.

Lenny Rachitsky (34:28):
Got it. It's just like at this point, many customers have this question... 

Matt Dixon (34:32):
Yes. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (34:33):
... and that maybe comes from the thing that you think is probably blocking them. 

Matt Dixon (34:36):
Yeah, I think that's perfect language. At this point, most customers like you, are thinking about this or they're worried about that, or they're getting a little anxious about this. Let's have a conversation about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (34:46):
Awesome. Okay, cool. Let's go to step two, offering your recommendation.

Matt Dixon (34:50):
Sure. Oh yeah. This was right with that example we talked about before. Options are really a double-edged sword. What we know from the research is that options are great early on. If you're meeting at the trade show and the customer's swinging by your booth or you're doing a first demo or first, let a thousand flowers bloom, but if you want the customer to actually make a decision, you've got to get the weed whacker out and call it down to a manageable set of choices. 

(35:17):
The science is very clear on this, that too many choices at some point will overwhelm the customer and it leads to a lot of bad outcomes. It leads to the customer not making a decision at all because they don't want to make the wrong decision. I don't want to work with you, but you put so many options in front of us. I don't want to be blamed if I choose the wrong one and it leads to things like post-decision dysfunction, which is, I thought I made the right decisions, but now I'm learning more and people are asking hard questions and maybe I need to go revisit this. Hey, Lenny, we're going to have to scrap that agreement and start over because I don't think we can figure this right way. 

(35:49):
We have to, there's a time and place to offer options, and there's a time and place to narrow choices up. The simple guidance here for salespeople is that you've got to shift your posture from asking the customer what they want and just diagnosing their needs, to actually recommending to them what they should do. Salespeople get a little bit anxious about this, I find, because they don't want to be seen as like, I told you to do A, but you're like, I don't want to do that. I want to do B and now I feel like we're at odds. 

(36:16):
They worry about that. Salespeople have grown up in this world that it's the customer's choice. The customers always right, let me just guide them, but they're the ones should make this decision, but sometimes the customer can't and they don't know enough about these decisions. We know the stuff because we eat, sleep, and breathe it every day as salespeople. We work in this industry, they don't. 

(36:35):
We are in a much better position to be able to guide them toward, you know what? You don't really need X, Y, and Z. You can leave that out of the proposal. Companies like you, they get started in this way. Let me put three options in front of you. I would go with the middle one because I really think that's going to be the best for you in the first year, and then we can expand from there.

(36:54):
Here's an analogy, I'll often tell people to think about the last time they went to a fancy restaurant and they looked at a menu with some expensive entrees and everything looked delicious, but they didn't know what to order, so you asked the wait person what they recommend. How helpful is it if that wait person says to you, "Well, what are you in the mood to eat tonight?" It's no help at all, right? You're no closer to a decision. They basically just dump the problem back on your lap.

(37:17):
But what a great way people do is they say, "If you want my opinion, I love this dish and I'd probably say it's our most popular. We sell out of it every night. We've still got it. So you're in luck. It's a lot of food though, it's a big portion. If you're in the mood for something lighter, there's a vegetarian option. It doesn't get as much play on Yelp, but I love this one. It's absolutely delicious. It's one of our kind of dark horse favorites, if you will, but remember, everything we make here is delicious. If you don't like those choices, you're not going to go wrong with any of them, but those are just my favorites." 

(37:46):
Now, what happens in that moment is what psychologists call the delegation effect, which is rather than the burden of a bad decision being solely on the shoulders of the decider, that burden is now shared. Now, think about it, if you order the dish the wait person recommended and you don't like it, whose fault is it? Well, technically it's your fault because you ordered it, but it's also kind of their fault because they recommended it. 

(38:07):
You feel like there's some safety in getting that recommendation, that endorsement. It's a really simple example, but it works in complex sales as well. Customers are looking for somebody to share in the risk and the burden of making a bad decision and having that partner who's guiding them toward what they should care about and what they shouldn't care about, what they should consider and what they should take out of the proposal, is actually very reassuring and comforting them and it increases the odds of getting some kind of decision from them.

Lenny Rachitsky (38:35):
Amazing. This is a great segue to The Challenger Sale, which we're going to talk about, but let's get through the last two steps and then we'll talk about The Challenger Sale, which is basically this on steroids, this idea on steroids.

Matt Dixon (38:45):
The last two, so L is about this customer who's doing endless amounts of research. Every salesperson has seen this customer, they're never happy with the number of reference calls or the amount of research they've done. They want to talk to more and more people. They're just in information overload mode and/or what we might call analysis paralysis mode because at some point, they're never satisfied with, they always feel like all the answers will be in the next white paper they read or the next reference call they do, or the next person on LinkedIn they talk to. 

(39:15):
What salespeople need to do to stop that, you got to understand I think why customers do that. They don't want to be surprised. That is the main reason, but they also don't trust the salesperson to be forthcoming. They believe the salesperson is paid to sell them more than they need, to put one over on them, hide the dirty laundry, only talk about the things that work in the platform, not the things that don't work. 

(39:37):
You're not going to get introduce any of the customers who hate you. You're only going to introduce the customers who love you, and we know we're going to say great things about us. That's what the customer thinks. That is what is in the customer's mind. You've got to actually shift, get the customer to stop trying to be an expert and start trusting you as an expert. There are two keys to that. 

(39:57):
The first one is you've got to establish some trust. I know that sounds like a platitude, but we found in the analysis, there are specific things that great salespeople do very early on. They are brutally transparent with customers about like, "Hey, I know you were interested in this capability. I got to be honest, we get mixed reviews on that. It's kind of an early capability for us. We're still trying to iron out the kinks," or "I know you are interested in this used case, but I have to be honest, we're actually not the best in the market at that. Our competitors much better at that than we are." 

(40:26):
These kinds of moments show the customer that you're not here to put one over on them. You're here to get them to a great decision. It kind of makes no difference to the salesperson, whether the customer buys from them, doesn't buy from them, it buys from a competitor. You just want to help them get to a great decision. That's step number one is building that trust. 

(40:42):
Step number two is you got to demonstrate some expertise. What we see in so many sales interactions, especially in tech, is that salespeople will show up with the clown car of experts, the subject matter experts, the solutions engineers, the product people, the executive sponsors, and then they will just punt to these people. 

(41:00):
What happens in that moment is dangerous for the salesperson. The customer, it sounds like they're loving it, right? They're loving that. I'm talking to the people who really know their stuff, but what's also happening in that moment is the salesperson is actively getting delegated down to the person they sound like. If they don't sound like any more than a glorified emcee or a coordinator, then that's kind of all the customer will perceive them as. 

(41:21):
What right or ability would you have to guide the customer on what to choose if you've offered no value or expertise? You don't have to be as deep as the product people. You're not going to be, you're a salesperson, you're not a product person, but you do have to be deeper on than the customer, and you do have to demonstrate that expertise. Those are the keys, again, the customer to stop trying to be an expert and start trusting you as their expert.

(41:43):
Then, the T is taking risk off the table. Two keys to doing that, I think the first one happens really early actually, and that is resetting the customer's expectations. Average salespeople love when they get an inbound lead from a customer who says, "Hey, I saw that case study on your website of the customer who got the 10X improvement in sales productivity, and we want that. That sounds great." That company's in our industry, amazing. That's a slam dunk business case for us. 

(42:09):
The average salesperson's thinking like, "If you're excited about that, I'm not going to talk you out of it because that means you're going to be excited to take in the CFO and excited to sign the agreement and get going." 

(42:16):
What great salespeople do though is they know that while they'll stand by those claims, those case studies, those proof points, they try to kind of under-promise and over-deliver and they might say something along the lines of, "You know Lenny, absolutely, that is a great case. I was involved in that sale, but what we also need to understand is everything went perfectly. They resourced it to the hilt. They had no integration issues, no hiccups. It was beautiful and seamless. I don't think you and I can think of many technology implementations that happened that way. 

(42:45):
What I'd rather we do is build your business case around a 5X improvement in sales productivity because we see that at least that, in 100% of our implementations. Then, let's set up to over-deliver against that because I think we're going to do better than that based on what I know about your organization, easily 6, 7, 8, 9%, maybe even 10, but we don't want you to just walking in and promising 10X improvement sales productivity. If we finish the year and we're at 7X, if the CFO is now asking her questions when in absolute terms, she should be thrilled with 7X, right? Let's make sure we set ourselves up for success." 

(43:18):
The other thing you've got to do though is establish some safety net options. There are lots of different shapes and forms. These can take everything from before the deal is closed, pulling the implementation team onto the call, or the customer success team or the account management team so we can start roadmapping, "Hey, as soon as we get signature, here's how we're going to spend our next six months together to make sure you guys are getting all the value you expect, if not more. Here's what we got to do. Here are the stage gates, here are the owners, here are the metrics we're going to monitor. Here's how often we're going to connect with each other." 

(43:48):
Instills a lot of confidence with the customer because it feels like, "Oh, you guys have done this before, right? You've been there, you've done that. You've helped other customers like me get value." Everything from that kind of stuff to adding in professional services support, especially like you think about a tech purchase. I'm not saying give it away for free, but you will find that high-performing salespeople will also add on professional services, but it is not just because selling more, which they are because they're high-performing salespeople. It's the way they position that.

(44:13):
They usually position it as an insurance policy. "Hey, I know you guys want to DIY this. This is one of the great things about our solution. You totally can. You got all the training support, all the videos, you got all the enablement content you need, but I know this is a big priority for you, and I think it would be really smart to carve out a slug of professional services hours that way our A team is lined up in case anything slips and if it does, we get you back up on track because the last thing we want is for you guys to be upset that you're losing ground and you're not going to deliver on the outcomes that you promised to your boss. So, let's set that up." 

(44:44):
There's lots of different ways we can create those opt out clauses in some industries are an option. Not very common in B2B, but in some cases, you can offer those or specialized contract carve outs for instance. There's lots of different things we can do to create that safety net where the customer doesn't feel like they're jumping out of an airplane by themselves, but you are the tandem skydiving instructor that's going to guide them safely to the ground.

Lenny Rachitsky (45:05):
Amazing. All of this, especially this last step, is coming from, they're probably not going to decide on anything that that's what you're fighting is help them...

Matt Dixon (45:13):
That's right. That's right. 

Lenny Rachitsky (45:13):
... be less worried about messing up.

Matt Dixon (45:15):
Yeah, that's right. 

Lenny Rachitsky (45:16):
I especially love this point about under promising and over delivering because so much of, and most of this is B2B SaaS software that you're working with, right? Like B2B SaaS companies?

Matt Dixon (45:26):
Our dataset cut across, I think that it might just be that SaaS is the place where we're seeing the most indecision these days, but it's not suggest it's kind of an easy target, but it is rife within indecision these days, and unfortunately I think it's also rife with a lot of these missteps that salespeople make that actually make things worse, but we had data from manufacturing firms, services businesses that cut across. This was prevalent and consistent across industries.

Lenny Rachitsky (45:57):
With the under promising and over delivering, I think that's especially powerful for where most companies want to get to is net revenue retention being higher than 100% where you can expand larger within the org and it makes sense to help them set up base, feel like, wow, this is so much better than we even thought it was going to be, versus...

Matt Dixon (45:57):
Absolutely. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (46:15):
... it's not delivering what we thought. Amazing. Okay. Any last piece of wisdom to leave listeners with around The JOLT Effect before we move on to The Challenger Sale?

Matt Dixon (46:25):
The only thing I would suggest is that for anybody, I mean, I think just do it is this, is that you should hit the pause button when the customer, because the customers, we all know, are going to get cold feet, often late stage, and it can be very frustrating. The knee jerk reaction for almost every salesperson out there, this happened in our analysis, 75% of salespeople we studied, would immediately go out to dialing up the FOMO. 

(46:47):
Go back to doing that. You're not going to get these benefits. You're going to be stuck in this terrible state of affairs you're in right now. Dial up the cost of inaction, or let's try to use some price base or other delivery window-based urgency driver to get the customer to move forward. But just remember that if the customer's already convinced that the status quo is suboptimal, and you've already got the intent that basically again, you're using fear on top of a customer, selling into a customer who's already afraid and you're actually making it worse. 

(47:17):
Hitting the pause button and just reflecting a little bit on what's really going on here. Is it that they're indifferent or is it that they're indecisive? Those are actually two very different things.

Lenny Rachitsky (47:26):
Amazing. I know you have a meeting in 10 minutes, so this is going to be the most action-packed, high-density podcast episode we've done. We've got 10 minutes talk about Challenger Sale. 

Matt Dixon (47:33):
Sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (47:33):
First of all, how many copies of this book have you sold at this point?

Matt Dixon (47:37):
I think it's about a million. 

Lenny Rachitsky (47:39):
Holy moly. 

Matt Dixon (47:39):
Yeah. 

Lenny Rachitsky (47:39):
That's insane.

Matt Dixon (47:39):
That's a lot, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (47:42):
Okay, so it's a legendary book in the world of sales. I imagine many people have heard of it, at least some people know the teachings. Let's spend a little time there. If I were to summarize the big insight of the book, basically it's the best salespeople challenge their prospects thinking and teach them about the market and what they should be doing versus just helping them get what they want.

Matt Dixon (47:59):
Yeah, very well said. I think one of, just like the FOMO, FOMU kind of shorthand, here's a shorthand I'd give to salespeople is most salespeople are trying to figure out what's keeping the customer up at night, right? It's classic solution selling needs, diagnosis, et cetera. 

(48:15):
The Challenger approach is about showing the customer what should be keeping them up at night. What is the thing you know that they need to know? What is the way that other customers are using your solution to generate returns and benefit for their organization? What's the risk that they don't know about but you do because by the way, you're going to talk to 10 times more customers, or I say you're going to talk to 10 of that customer in a week or 10 times more than a week than they will all year. 

(48:42):
You are a window into the outside world for them, and that's what challengers really understand. It's not free consulting though, because if you remember from the Challenger Sale, it's not just about bringing these provocative ideas that reframe the customer's understanding of the world. It's about leading to your unique benefits. What you're really trying to do is create a fire and then be the only person in town who sells the fire extinguisher that'll put it out.

Lenny Rachitsky (49:05):
Is there an example you could share of a Challenger sale type of sale?

Matt Dixon (49:08):
Yeah, we wrote a sequel to The Challenger Sale called The Challenger Customer. In that book, we talk about a case from a company called Dentsply. Dentsply, as the name would suggest, manufactures or produces dental supplies, right? They sell equipment and product into dental practices and dental offices. 

(49:27):
Years ago, Dentsply had developed, we all know, I think your listeners can all relate to this, when you go to the dentist and the hygienist is polishing your teeth or they're using the water pick, or unfortunately, maybe the dentist is using the drill. That wand has a very heavy power cord that's attached to it and it's attached to this power base and that it feeds water through there and electrical current and all those things. 

(49:51):
Dentsply had developed the world's first lightweight, ergonomic, cordless wand that drill bits could be attached to cleaning, implements, et cetera and it was a total breakthrough. Actually, when they unveiled it was pretty interesting, they gave, you remember the scene in Pulp Fiction where they opened the briefcase and then it emanates like a light emits from it. They gave all their salespeople like this little aluminum briefcase thing with this eggshell foam and a wand in there. 

(50:19):
I can't remember what it's called. Let's call it the XP-9000 Wand, but it had one demo wand in there and they would go around to dental offices and be like, "Ah." It was lit, literally, it had blue lighting inside... 

Lenny Rachitsky (50:30):
Wow.

Matt Dixon (50:30):
... and it was really cool, the reveal and they'd take it out and they give it to the dentist or the head of the dental office and they would hold it and be like, "What? It's so much lighter and it's ergonomic and this thing is cordless? It's amazing. It's a revolution." Then, the first thing they would ask is, "How much is it?"

(50:47):
When they told them it costs like three times more than the current old-fashioned wands they're using with the heavy cord, they would gently put it back in the briefcase, close the briefcase, say, "Can you give me a price on new drill bits or new like polishing attachments?" They couldn't get anybody to want to pay for this thing that was much more expensive than the old one. 

(51:06):
They did a lot of work and they figured out, they knew that this was unique. They knew this was a unique product. Nobody else in the market made this. They're the only supplier who had figured this out, total innovation, but they hadn't given the customer reason to want to pay a premium for that innovation until they figured out the connection between the equipment that hygienists use and absenteeism and workers' comp. 

(51:32):
It turns out that one of the biggest professions that where you get carpal tunnel syndrome, shoulder and neck and lower back injuries is being a dental hygienist. The reason is that they're standing, holding that heavy wand being dragged down by that heavy cord at an awkward angle all day long. That's why dental offices really struggle to keep hygienists showing up, not calling in sick, not out for months at a time for reconstructive shoulder surgery, not with exorbitant health benefits claims and workers' comp claims. 

(52:08):
They came in and they revised their sales pitch. Now, when they come into the dental office, they sit down, they say, "I'd like to talk to you about your hygienist workforce. Are you guys seeing higher turnover? Have you seen any absenteeism due to carpal or lower back or neck or shoulder injuries? What are you guys doing about that? What's the cost to your business?" 

(52:26):
They get the dentist talking and the way they start talking about, "It is not just the insurance and workers' comp costs, it's stuff like when my hygienists get injured, and it's a repetitive motion business and job, when they get injured and they call in sick, I've got to reschedule all these cleanings and all these appointments, and that's a bunch of upset customers who end up then going to the practice down the street or saying bad things about me on Google reviews or what have you." 

(52:52):
There's all kinds of ripple effects for the dentist. The cost of losing a hygienist is massive and the market for hiring them is very, very tight. What Dentsply does is start the conversation there, and then they say, "One of the things that we figured out is that, based on our own independent research, one of the primary drivers of all these bad outcomes, absenteeism, repetitive motion injuries, is related to the equipment that hygienists use. It's because they're holding that old fashioned heavy wand, attached to that big heavy power cable at an awkward angle doing repetitive motion all day, but what if you could solve for that? What if that was no longer a problem?" 

(53:33):
The dentist says, "Well, how would you solve for that? There's no other technology." "That's what we got. We've had the same equipment for 30 years. Let me show you the new XP-9000. We're world's first cordless, lightweight, ergonomic drill. We can show you that it is far preferred by hygienists because they don't get injured as often because it's much easier to hold and it doesn't put stress on the joints and pinch points, if you will, where hygienists tend to experience these injuries." 

(53:58):
It's just a simple example, but you see, again, they're still selling a fancy wand, but before, they were leading with it. Let me show you this and talk about the features, benefits, and that led to how much does it cost. Now, they're leading to it. They're starting with an insight and giving the customer a reason to care about solving this business problem, and it turns out the only way to solve it is buying this XP-9000 drill from Dentsply.

Lenny Rachitsky (54:22):
The key lesson from this book, and I know we don't have a ton of time to dig into it, is start with an insight they may not be aware of. Give them a sense of where the things are going. Help them learn something about the future and the problems that they need to know about that they may not be aware of, and then transition to here is how we can solve that for you.

Matt Dixon (54:40):
Yeah, that's exactly right. Make sure those connections are really tight, right? Getting this right starts with answering the question, why should the customer buy from you instead of your competitor? It's not because you're more customer-centric or more innovative and possible to prove your competitors claim the same thing. It's not that you're the leading global solution provider of whatever you sell. 

(54:59):
It starts with the product or the way you deliver the product or something about your service delivery that only your company does you are only capable of. Nobody else can touch with the barge pole. Then, the second question is, what would have to be true for the customer to want to pay us for that, to pay a premium ideally? That's the core components, if you will, of a challenge or a conversation.

Lenny Rachitsky (55:21):
Amazing. Matt, I promised I let you out here in time. Final questions, where can folks find your books if they want to dig in further and how can listeners be useful to you?

Matt Dixon (55:32):
Well, thank you for the offer. I love being connected with folks who heard me on shows like this one. If you heard me on the podcast, "Hey, I heard you on Lenny's Show," shoot me a LinkedIn invite. I'm pretty active there, love being connected with folks, so please reach out to me. 

(55:45):
If you want to learn more about JOLT Effect, so we do a lot of workshops and training around that methodology, visit jolteffect.com. There's a ton of, there's also a lot of free tools on there that you can download that help you put some of these concepts into practice with your sales teams or if you're an individual seller. Then, of course, the books are available everywhere. Good books are sold, which I think is on the internet these days. 

Lenny Rachitsky (56:10):
Amazing. Matt, thank you so much for being here.

Matt Dixon (56:11):
Thanks, Lenny. It was a blast. Thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (56:14):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Pete Kazanjy (00:00:00):
The thing that I just like to encourage founders and product managers and what have you is just don't be afraid of sales. There's a lot of people out there who would love to tell you a story that it's magical or like, "Oh, you've got to be a born seller," things like that and it's really not. Those people are just talking their book, if you will, and so just getting good at those behaviors, it's going to benefit you in a myriad of ways.

Lenny (00:00:26):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast, I'm Lenny, and my goal here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. Today my guest is Pete Kazanjy. Pete is the author of my single favorite book on sales, called Founding Sales, which I point every B2B founder to. He also runs a huge community of salespeople called Modern Sales Pros. He's also the CEO and founder of Atrium, which is a SaaS product that helps you make your sales team more efficient through analytics and data. In our conversation, we focus on three things. One, why founders should be doing sales themselves for a long time before hiring your first salesperson and also when it's time to hire that first salesperson, we get into how to hire for your first salesperson, what to look for in their profile and the most common mistakes people make, and finally, we cover a bunch of tactical tips for getting better at sales. Pete didn't come from a sales background and he learned everything by just doing it, learning, researching, and repeating. I know that you'll learn a ton from this conversation. With that, I bring you Pete Kazanjy.

(00:01:28):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate growth. If your business stores any data in the cloud, then you've likely been asked or you're going to be asked about your SOC 2 compliance. SOC 2 is a way to prove your company's taking proper security measures to protect customer data and builds trust with customers and partners, especially those with serious security requirements. Also, if you want to sell to the enterprise, proving security is essential. SOC 2 can either open the door for bigger and better deals or it can put your business on hold. If you don't have a SOC 2, there's a good chance you won't even get a seat at the table. Beginning a SOC to your port can be a huge burden, especially for startups. It's time-consuming, tedious, and expensive.

(00:02:14):
Enter Vanta. Over 3,000 fast growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2. Vanta can get you ready for security audits in weeks instead of months, less than a third of the time that it usually takes. For a limited time, Lenny's Podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Just go to vanta.com/lenny, that's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny, to learn more and to claim your discount. Get started today. Hey, Ashley, head of marketing at Flatfile. How many B2B SaaS companies would you estimate need to import CSV files from their customers?

Ashley Mulligan (00:02:53):
At least 40%.

Lenny (00:02:55):
How many of them screw that up and what happens when they do?

Ashley Mulligan (00:02:58):
Well, based on our data, about a third of people will consider switching to another company after just one bad experience during onboarding. So, if your CSV importer doesn't work right, which is super common considering customer files are chock full of unexpected data and formatting, they'll leave.

Lenny (00:03:17):
I am 0% surprised to hear that. I've consistently seen that improving onboarding as one of the highest leverage opportunities for both signup conversion and increasing long-term retention. Getting people to their aha moment more quickly and reliably is so incredibly important.

Ashley Mulligan (00:03:32):
Totally. It's incredible to see how our customers like Square, Spotify, and Zora are able to grow their businesses on top of Flatfile. It's because flawless data onboarding acts like a catalyst to get them and their customers where they need to go faster.

Lenny (00:03:49):
If you'd like to learn more or get started, check out Flatfile at flatfile.com/lenny. Pete, welcome to the podcast.

Pete Kazanjy (00:04:00):
Hey, Lenny, super awesome to see you.

Lenny (00:04:03):
Even more awesome on my part. Ever since I launched this podcast, I have always wanted to have you on it, we're finally here. We've been online buddies for a few years now, ever since I discovered your book, Founding Sales, which we're going to talk about, and it's just been a lot of fun knowing you, so thank you again for being here.

Pete Kazanjy (00:04:20):
The quick story was Lenny had shipped his different genres of marketplaces and how to start the liquidity and growth and whatever and I was obsessed with it, and then somehow, I ran into you at Brianne Kimmel's SaaS School. I gave a presentation on Founder-led Selling and there was a scrum of people around me and I was talking about amazing writers and amazing content online and I referenced the series, and then you raised your hand and you were like, "That was me," and I was like, "What? You're amazing." And then we got beers and now, we're happily ever after.

Lenny (00:04:53):
Look at us now. And then you encouraged me to make a book out of that post, which I have not yet done, maybe one day.

Pete Kazanjy (00:05:00):
Eventually.

Lenny (00:05:00):
Eventually.

(00:05:01):
So, we're going to be talking a lot about sales and a lot of the stuff that you cover in your book. Before we get into it, could you just take a minute to share a little bit about your background and some of the wonderful things you've done, to give folks a sense of your experience in the sales world?

Pete Kazanjy (00:05:14):
I think probably the most important thing to characterize for folks is that I don't actually have a background in sales originally, which were most sales leaders and sellers come from, they graduate from school or a BDR, become an AE, AE manager, or a BDR manager, and then go on to sales leadership. My background's actually in product marketing and product management. I started my tech career at VMware back in the day, tons of amazing, fun VMware diaspora. And then I started a software company called TalentBin, it was a recruiting software company in, geez Louise, 2009. We quickly realized that, "Man, this B2B software stuff doesn't sell itself, irrespective of maybe what people say on the internet," at least back then. So, I had to be our first seller, our sales manager, our first sales leader, and that's where I learned how to do sales.

(00:06:02):
Also, I just realized, "Man, this isn't rocket surgery, anyone can learn this. If I can learn this, other people can learn this, even though there's not documentation on it." So, the software company was eventually acquired by Monster Worldwide in 2014 and then I wrote a book on sales for founders and other first-time sellers, it's called Founding Sales. Mainly, it was the book that I wish I had, rather than having to learn by a narrative from the first round capital portfolio and what have you. And then subsequent to that, I started what became the nation's largest sales operations and leadership community, it's called Modern Sales Pros. It's 30,000 sales operations, sales leaders, et cetera. And then started a new software company called Atrium that makes data-driven sales management software, and then here I am. So, I think a little bit about sales, turns out modern sales, not that old sales, modern sales.

Lenny (00:06:59):
Ooh, I'm curious to hear what that is. But before I ask you that question, I just wanted to mention your book, Founding Sales, is the book I give every founder that is trying to figure out sales. Every time I give it to them or point them to even your site that has it all for free there, they're always just like, "Holy shit, this is exactly what I needed," so we're going to be covering a lot of that stuff in our little chat.

Pete Kazanjy (00:07:20):
Rad.

Lenny (00:07:20):
Can you actually just briefly talk about what is modern sales versus what you called traditional sales or old-school sales?

Pete Kazanjy (00:07:25):
Oh, I just think that there's a little bit of a mindset change. It's a little bit related to some of the reasons why founders and other folks maybe have this perception of sales be like, "Ew, sales, ugh" because people, their only experience with sales is Glengarry Glen Ross or movies with a sleazy used car salesman and stuff like that, whereas the way to think about what sellers are is they're the microeconomic agents in the market that bring supply to demand rather than waiting for demand to find supply. They have supply in their back pocket and they run around trying to find people who ought to have the demand, maybe they have the demand right now, maybe they don't realize that they have the demand, and then they elucidate to them why they ought to have the demand.

(00:08:08):
So, A, that process is very important from a technology deployment standpoint and also, B, it's very measurable, especially in a modern environment with modern CRMs and also all the digital activity that we do, email, calendar, phone, Zoom, et cetera, all this information is now being recorded such that you can then measure, manage, and improve behavior. So, very similar to how back in the day, you do product analytics by licking your fingers and sticking it in the wind, and then Mixpanels showed up, then Amplitude showed up, then so on and so forth, and the same is the case in sales, as well. So, modern sales is a more thoughtful, operational, rigorous, analytical bent, it's been around for a while. It's one of those things, the future is here, it just wasn't widely distributed, but now it's being much more distributed and much more embraced. Like the pre-Moneyball moment in sports and baseball to the post-Moneyball moment, we're now just flipping over there, so that's the delta.

Lenny (00:09:17):
Awesome. I definitely want to talk about ways to get better at sales and things you've learned about just how to improve at sales, but to set a little bit foundation for that conversation, I want to talk about founder-led sales. You touched on this topic, your book is basically named after this concept of founder-led sales. Can you talk about what that is, why it's so important, and maybe why founders often get this wrong?

Pete Kazanjy (00:09:37):
The way that I think about the book, Founding Sales, I like to think of it as the sequel to Eric Eric Ries's The Lean Startup or Steve Blank's Four Steps to the Epiphany or Startup Owner's Manual or whatever, where if you think about the stages, and this is all B2B, if you think about the stages that a product goes through, it's one, you've got to know what problem you're solving and validate that, and it's got to be real. It can't be like, "Oh, well, I thought I had this problem," it's got to be validated. That's customer development, that's customer research, and that's more of a product management function. And then there's building the minimum feature set in order to prove that maybe technology can fit to this problem and solve it.

(00:10:26):
That's how we create value as technologists, is piecing together technology and code or bits and atoms and what have you in order to solve a problem that people have. But then the next step is like, "Cool. Now, I've got to get someone to pay for this and I've got to do that in a reliable fashion and I've got to do it in a scalable fashion," and so there's a little bit of a loop there. It's not like, "The product's done, throw it over the wall, have fun, kids." It's a loop, where the minimum viable version of your product is probably going to suck and then in order to get to the minimum valuable step, you've got to be interfacing with a lot of customers and that's a sales behavior, getting in front of people and being like, "Hey, I think you probably have this problem if you look like these other folks right here."

(00:11:11):
The point is is that you can't outsource that behavior, the founder's got to do that stuff. A lot of people ask me that question, "Well, I suck at sales," or, "I'm afraid to talk to people," or, "Interfacing with non-friendly parties makes me uncomfortable." The way to think about it is, I forget who the person was who said, "Startups versus incumbents is a race between can innovation get to distribution before distribution can get to innovation?" So, this is a related concept where as a founder, it's going to be way easier for you to get good, or minimally viable good, at selling by having interactions with non-friendly parties and having commercial conversations and asking for money in exchange for the value delivery.

(00:11:58):
It's going to be easier for you to do that than it is for some third party to become as expert at the subject matter that you're tackling that you are. Because as a founder, early on, use Atrium as an example, we make data-driven sales management software, which it exists to help sales managers and teams use metrics and data to improve the performance of their reps. The way I think about it is Datadog-y Amplitude-y, but for your sales reps. I'm probably the expert in sales analytics in the world, and so back in 2016 and 2017 when we were doing this, put aside the fact that I already know how to do minimum viable selling, if I had tried to get somebody else expert at that in order for them to go out and do that in the market, that would have been not good.

(00:12:46):
This is why Steve Blank always talks about startups can't get to scale without firing their first VP of sales, it's oftentimes because they skip that step, and so the founder's like, "Hey, man, I'm going to pour a little bit of sales on this, hire some sales leader or whatever, some sort of seller, and outsource this." You really just can't do that, not for the first couple dozen customers, it's just not tenable. You lose that feedback loop, you lose the learnings of whether or not your message fits the market, all that sort of stuff. You're playing a game of telephone with that with a third party seller versus even you just want to keep that in one brain to start, then package it, and then when you have a repeatable while loop, a selling while loop, then package it and hand it to someone else. So, that's my diatribe on why founders have to do this.

Lenny (00:13:35):
I was going to try to summarize the reasons that you should be doing this and it sounds like there's so many. One is figure out what you should actually be building, that's a reason founders should be selling, two is learn how to position and pitch and sell, three is figure out what you could teach your salesperson when you hire them. Is that a summary of why you should be selling as a founder for a while?

Pete Kazanjy (00:13:55):
Yeah, for sure. One, it's going to help you with your product development because you're not going to have that abstracted, for sure, two, you're going to be the person who's going to figure out how to talk about it in an effective way, and then three, it's going to make it such that you can package that up such that other human... Because that's the way that B2B startups scale, is it's not WhatsApp or Twitter or Airbnb or whatever, where you have this scalability via marketing, the way that B2B organizations scale primarily is by adding more salespeople who then have customer-facing meetings with prospects.

(00:14:32):
And then you cap out with the number of hours that are in the week, there's only four or 50 hours in the week, especially as a seller because you interface with other people during business hours, and so the way that you scale up is by just adding more salespeople. So, that's why packaging that up is really important, because then you're going to shove it into the brains of two more salespeople, and then once they're successful, you're going to go to four, and then once they're successful, you're going to go to eight, and then once they're successful, you're going to go to 16.

Lenny (00:15:00):
You talk about this while loop concept, which I love. What are signs that it's time to hire your first salesperson? It begs the question, when do I do this?

Pete Kazanjy (00:15:10):
I'm not a software engineer, but I like to use technical metaphors with technical audiences because I think it's helpful, so it's like when it runs on your local, now it's time to see if it reproduces over here, so if it reliably runs on your local and it doesn't air out, so then what would the definition of not erroring out look like? So, generally speaking, it is to contingent on your sales motion, but it's going to be that you can reliably, at a pretty okay win rate, so maybe 15% or 20% or 25%, turn first meetings into eventual customers and do that in a reliable fashion. It's not like, "I engaged 10 arms-length parties and I got two customers closed." It's like, "Hey, that's great. That's a good start. 5X that, 10X that."

(00:16:08):
Take 50 at-bats, take 100 at-bats, and now that you know that you reliably, for every cohort of ten first meetings, what's known in sales land as opportunities, for every cohort of 10 that you engage, are you closing 1, are you closing 1.5, are you closing 2, or are you closing 2.5, if you're in there? But if you're at like, "For every 30 I interact with, I close one," well, it seems like that's probably pretty inefficient, unless you're selling $500,000 deals or something like that. So, it's at the point where it feels like it's statistically significant, it feels like it's repeatable, because what you're going to then do is now it feels like it's a safe bet to try to abstract that out to somebody else.

(00:16:54):
Because the only way we're going to get to success is we're not going to have Lenny go and sell from morning, noon to night. What we're going to do is we're going to take the information out of Lenny's brain and we're going to put it into slides and we're going to put it into scripts and we're going to put it into email templates and all that sort of stuff, and then we're going to shove that into the brain of two more reps and see if now we can get it to run in the cloud, in the sales cloud here. And then to start out, it may fail, the same way you're like, "Cool, it runs on my local. Uh-oh, it breaks over here. Why?" And then that's the next stage is now you're figuring out how to get those other folks to sell as successfully as you have, and that becomes the next job.

(00:17:39):
Actually, this is the presentation I gave at Brianne's SaaS School, if you Google it's just called Founder-led Selling, it's available online. Essentially, there's a bunch of stages in the B2B maturity journey and you have to go through them in order to get to the next one, if you jump stages, you're hosed. So, in this case, if you know that you can reliably sell this yourself, that's great. Then, the next thing to do is get at least a couple people reliably selling, as well as you, not 10, because you're never going to get 2 successful if you're trying to onboard 10 concurrently. And then if you get those 2 successful, now you've earned the right to go to 4, 8, et cetera.

Lenny (00:18:21):
I love this heuristic that you shared that you want to get to about 15 to 25% of contacts closing to a customer. I see you shaking your thumb. I think that's really useful. So, it's a bit less than a third and doing 50 to 100 attempts is roughly where you want to be?

Pete Kazanjy (00:18:39):
Yeah. Importantly, what you don't want to do is, and I think probably a lot of the product managers who like to listen to Lenny's Podcast here might appreciate this, is you want to bring on cohorts of users and then see what's going on, then learn, and then bring on new co cohorts of users. So, going and doing 100 at-bats and then being like, "Did it work or did it not?" Versus, "Hey, let's have 10 for prospect and try to get 10 first meetings," have all those interactions, see how your conversations land, see how the discovery questions are evoking the right response or not the right response, see how your slides land, see how your demo lands, all that sort of stuff.

(00:19:15):
If it's working well and you're getting to the next stage, "This is great, I would love to introduce you to my boss," that's a good sign. If it's like, "I'm just not getting it." Cool, back to the drawing board, versus doing 100 all at once and being like, "Now, did it work?" We want to break it up and then constantly just be iterating, iterating, iterating. Again, I think your audience might appreciate this, the way to think of a sales motion, so sales motion is a fancy-pants way of describing just all the things that you do in order to take a prospect and bring them through the sales process and then eventually close them. One helpful way to think about it is kind of like software and what you want to be doing is constantly updating it. Oh, that was a really interesting question that the prospect asked right there, I didn't have a good answer for it and moreover, I didn't have a slide for it.

(00:20:04):
You know what I should do? I should make a slide that handles that objection so I can show it to them visually and also, it'll help give me guardrails and a talk track and that'll be nice. So, I'm going to do that and then I'm going to update the source code. Now, my sales motion has been updated. And then the next loop through, ideally the next time that person says, "Oh, I don't know, Lenny, it doesn't really sound like X, Y, Z," you're like, "Oh, a lot of people say that, but here, if you look over here, you can see this." "Oh yeah, that's a really good point." "Wonderful. So, as the next step, let's go ahead and talk to your boss." So, now your sales motion has been updated and the collateral's been updated and now, we're being more effective sellers. You're just going to do that dozens and dozens and dozens and dozens and dozens of time before you have a repeatable sales motion.

Lenny (00:20:55):
What's interesting is with this heuristic, two-thirds of the time, it's not going to work out.

Pete Kazanjy (00:20:59):
Nope.

Lenny (00:21:00):
So, a lot of times, they're going to be like, "Ah, I don't get this, leave me alone." Is there other leading indicators that tell you that you're improving, knowing that only a third or maybe a fifth of the time it'll work out? Is it talking to the boss off more often, what else do you look for?

Pete Kazanjy (00:21:13):
Yeah, exactly. Totally. So, what are the leading indicators of success? Because if you're only looking at lagging indicators, again, it's probably a it's a funnel on a new feature, so the opportunity is an at-bat or a potential transaction, and so usually what you do is you model out the stages in your opportunity. So, generally, there will be different stages depending on the sales motion. So, use Atrium as an example, we sell on customer data. It takes five minutes to turn on an Atrium account, it's really helpful for folks. They just sign in, they OAuth with Salesforce, great. So, a really important stage in our sales motion is, we call it data light, has data been lit up? So, that's a stage, we have a discovery stage, we have a data light stage, we have what we call a preview stage, are we previewing it with the staff? Then, we get to a commercial discussion.

(00:22:08):
So, you can measure how you're getting to those stages, which is somebody lands on whatever page that Lenny was in charge of at Airbnb and did they click on the right thing and do they get to the next thing and did they get to the next thing, get to the next thing? So, in sales, it's kind of the same thing. So, the more sophisticated version of this is looking at stage conversions, what have you, the less sophisticated version of it, which early on, I think is an appropriate way of doing it, is like, "Hey, man, are we getting second dates?" So, just metaphorize it to Hinge or Coffee Meets Bagel or whatever the more recent one is, it's like, "Are we getting the second dates? Are we getting the third dates? Because if we're not getting the second dates, probably something's amiss there."

(00:22:51):
So, what we want to do is we want to say, "Great, of all of our ten first meetings, how many gets to second meetings?" It would be great, the lagging indicator is 2 wins out of 10 or what have you, but I'm going to come into these conversations and out of my ten first meetings, I want seven of them to get to the second meeting. And then of those seven, maybe I want 4.5 of them to get to the third meeting, and then ultimately, I want 2 or 3 to win. That's the way to think about that, those are the leading indicators. So, as those conversions get better like, "Man, I'm not getting any second dates. Oh, okay, cool, you need a haircut or you need a shower," and the same applies to your sales motion, as well. Your message is not landing, you're targeting the wrong people, what's going on here? You need to think about it.

Lenny (00:23:42):
You need a better pickup line.

Pete Kazanjy (00:23:43):
There you go. Now, you're not even getting first dates, man, go all the way up to you need a better Hinge profile picture. You're just not getting any matches, ew.

Lenny (00:23:55):
As a founder, do you have to get good at sales? A lot of founders are like, "Oh my God, we're going to do PLG. We're going to be self-serve, freemium, we don't need sales. I'm just going to let people figure it out." Is it a requirement of a B2B business to get good at sales as a founder?

Pete Kazanjy (00:24:11):
I would say you don't have to get good at it, you just have to get non-zero at it. There's this really great article on Lenny's newsletter on adding a sales organization to a self-serve product that Lenny had me write and then he edited the heck out of it, and it's really a fantastic asset. But what I would say there is that there are a lot of PLG or self-serve motions out there that they've stagnated themselves because they didn't add the sales piece to it. I would encourage people to read that article, I forget what it's called, you added a really cool name.

Lenny (00:24:47):
Oh, The Transition: Layering on Sales to Product-led Growth.

Pete Kazanjy (00:24:51):
See, you're good at naming things.

Lenny (00:24:54):
That's inspired by David Sack's The Cadence, which I love for how to operate.

Pete Kazanjy (00:24:58):
There you go. That is a great article. So, it's not that you have to be great, you just have to recognize that it's important. A good example of this would be, probably the most famous example of an organization that maybe didn't get sales religion as quickly as they should have would be Dropbox. Dropbox has phenomenal early sales leadership. One of our investors here at Atrium is a gentleman named Mike Marg, he's a partner at Craft Ventures, he was an early sales manager and leader there, Kyle Parrish was the head of sales at Figma, Marissa Fuhrer is over at Figma, as well. There's all these just absolutely fantastic Dropbox folks, but the problem was is that the organization, from a product standpoint, never put all as many calories behind product development that would support the ability to sell to across an entire organization.

(00:25:48):
So, the way that I try to succinctly describe that is never mistake your lead gen for your business. I think the good news is that a lot of people took a lot of lumps there and folks have learned that, maybe Slack almost missed that, but then they brought in a bunch of Salesforce folks and other folks, actually, Mike Marg was also an early sales manager at Slack, as well, and really got a religion around that. Because it turns out that people paying 19 bucks a month or 29 bucks a month or what have you is really great, but getting to a $50,000 or a $100,000 or a $250,000 contract, that's where big ARR numbers start racking up, and organizations want to talk to a human in order to navigate that.

(00:26:34):
So, PLG is great for landing and permeating an organization and there's a bunch of great... Craft invests in this like crazy, so Scratchpad is a great example of very bottoms-up. Atrium's pretty bottoms up, as well. It's like, I don't know, what is the Silicon Valley joke, middle out or whatever, because we land with sales managers and SDR managers. What you're doing is you're solving the problem that the user has, but the problem is the user doesn't necessarily have large budgetary authority, so you can get them stoked up, but then you've got to talk to the person who's got the purse strings, and so that's going to require sales. That's okay.

Lenny (00:27:13):
Just to punctuate that, basically 100% of B2B companies end up building a sales team?

Pete Kazanjy (00:27:20):
I would say that's the case. It's more of a question of when versus if, so even the really famous ones like Atlassian. Atlassian, they had a sales organization, they just didn't call it a sales organization and they went pretty far without a lot, but instead what they did was they just priced the product breathtakingly low. I think developer tools can oftentimes do this, where because developers are pretty technical, they can adopt product, they don't need handholding in order to adopt a product that is complicated enough to be valuable. Datadog's a good example or New Relic or AppD, but even those guys very early on had meaningful sales organizations. There's a lot of reasons why Datadog ended up winning that market, but their sales organization is no joke. Even developer tools, you might think, cool, well, the developers can just swipe their credit cards. Yeah, they can, but then you're going to be eventually capped there. Look at Snowflake. Snowflake has, I don't know, 500 salespeople, you're going to need a sales org.

Lenny (00:28:28):
Let's shift a bit to talking about just how to get better at sales, at the scale of sales. I think it's interesting because you don't have a sales background and so you've had to learn how to do this and you did a lot of research and building your business, you've had to get really good at sales. So, maybe a first question, what's the number one tip that you have for getting better at sales?

Pete Kazanjy (00:28:50):
The first chapter of Founding Sales talks about what I call sales mindset changes. Because I think the big thing is it's just so weird, it's just such a weird shift in behavior. Because if you think about it as a product manager or as an engineer or whatever, how many people do you interact with day-to-day? Oh, 6, 10 maybe.

Lenny (00:29:10):
Not too many.

Pete Kazanjy (00:29:11):
It's always the same people and so it's super comfortable, whereas in sales or anything customer facing, what ends up happening is you're meeting multiple new humans every day, if you're doing it right, and that just is such a mindset shift. You're not going to be able to remember everybody. You're going to have to write it all down. You're going to have to use the CRM for that. You're in the starting blocks on the track. You're in the starting blocks and you have 90 seconds or a couple minutes to form rapport, to make somebody feel like they should trust you and they want to be honest with you. You have to be very focused on activity orientation, whereas engineering and product management, there's does a lot of super deep work.

(00:29:52):
It's like Paul Graham's Maker versus Manager Schedule. Salespeople have manager schedules, interestingly enough, where what you're doing is you're constantly contact switching, an ideal salesperson's calendar or a founder who's doing sales is 2, 3, 4, maybe 5 customer-facing meetings a day with different humans. And then moreover, then you're having incremental interactions with those folks later on, like later that week or the next week or what have you, so then you have to keep continuity of these multiple parallel conversations. It's a totally different set of skills and so it feels super weird to start out, but what ends up happening is it's just a skill. You just start doing it, you start doing it, you start doing it, and you just become used to it, you become calloused. You're like, "I'm incorrigible now. You put me in an elevator, I can talk to anyone."

(00:30:43):
So, one, just recognizing it's going to be a pretty big mindset change, and then the second thing you can do is then once you know that there's going to be a mindset change, is you can focus in on making those behaviors be better. So, as an example, one of the things I challenge my staff to do is I call it turbo rapport, it needs a better name. But think about people that you interact with in the world who maybe are a little shields up, they're probably used to interacting with people who are not going to be super nice to them, maybe it's bartenders or a flight attendant or a barista, or fill in the blank. Think about how quickly you can become friends with them, how you can break that down, because that's going to be a really good skill for you to have when you're interacting with a prospect.

(00:31:31):
And then what that's going to allow you to do is then ask them candid questions about their current situation that either, A, they may know about or, B, you ask provocative questions that make them think about the world in a way maybe that you want them to and realize that they have pain they didn't want or didn't know that they had. My friend, Brett Burson, had this great tweet one at one point where he said, "Think about the things that you do in your day-to-day that are like a pianist, like a piano player, playing scales like, 'Da, da, da, da, da, da.' What is the version of that for selling?" That's rapid rapport building, asking good questions, asking follow-up questions, being willing to ask uncomfortable questions, all those sort of things, and asking for money and then shutting up and waiting for them to answer, all these are very uncomfortable things, but the more you do them, you'll just get good at them.

Lenny (00:32:31):
This episode is brought to you by Merge. Every product manager knows the pain of slowing product velocity when developers struggle to build and maintain integrations with other platforms. Merge's Unified API can remove this blocker from your roadmap. With one API, your team can add over 150 HR, ATS, accounting, ticketing, and CRM integrations right into your product. You can get your first integration into production in a matter of days and save countless weeks building custom integrations, letting you get back to building your core product. Merge's integrations speed up the product development process for companies like Ramp, Drata, and many other fast-growing and established companies, allowing them to test their features at scale without having to worry about a never-ending integrations roadmap. Save your engineers countless hours and expedite your sales cycle by making integration offerings your competitive advantage with Merge. Visit merge.dev/lenny to get started and integrate up to five customers for free.

(00:33:31):
One of the things in your book that most shifted my mindset on sales was this shift from you're trying to convince someone to buy this thing to you're trying to help them and maybe this will make their life easier. Can you talk a bit about that?

Pete Kazanjy (00:33:44):
I think this is like the, remember the modern sales versus old-school sales thing?

Lenny (00:33:44):
Mm-hmm.

Pete Kazanjy (00:33:50):
The old-school sales thing is like, "I'm going to sell something to a mark," or the best example of this, "That guy's a great sales guy, he can sell ice to an Eskimo." It's like, "Man, if you're selling ice to an Eskimo, you're an asshole. What is wrong with you? They don't need ice," unless they're visiting Southern California. So, as a seller, the way that I like to frame it to people is that you're a consultant that has a particular predilection for a given solution, your solution. Use Atrium as an example. Atrium's minimum ICP is probably SDRs plus AEs in an organization should probably be at 10 all the way up to 300. So, if someone shows up and they're like, "Man, I've got to get really good at sales, I need to buy your software, Pete," and I'm like, "Cool. How many salespeople do you have?" They're like, "I have one." I'll be like, "Man, I'm not going to sell you Atrium. You're just going to be unhappy, it's going to be dumb, it's going to be a waste of our customer success resources, you're going to churn," all those sort of things.

(00:34:56):
But if instead what you're doing is you're saying, "Hey, I'm going to go out in the market and I'm going to find the people that have a high proclivity that our technology solves and then I'm going to talk with them about how they're solving that problem right now, and ideally, through a series of questions, I'm going to reveal that to them that they're doing it probably not great. And then once I've revealed to them the fact, through this directed questioning, what's known as discovery, that they have this high magnitude problem, that it is causing them lots of money, that it is a pain in their ass, and then I reveal to them that there is a better way of approaching it and magically enough, I happen to be a representative of that solution," well, now that's an ideal transaction and everybody wins. And then scale that up across an entire economy and you can see why I was saying that sales is the grease that makes the economy work like that and also importantly, brings new technology to the market in a way that makes everything better.

Lenny (00:36:01):
If someone's listening to this and they're like, "I want to get better at sales, what's one thing I could do differently tomorrow, this week, to improve my ability to sell my product?" What would that be?

Pete Kazanjy (00:36:12):
There's the non-complicated version and there's the complicated version. The non-complicated version would just be just walking down the street, make eye contact with everybody, and then every person that you stop next to at Starbucks or the crosswalk or whatever, just strike up a conversation with them, figure out a mechanism by which you can start a conversation with them. Compliment their shirt or their shoes or remark on something. Don't use the weather, because that's lazy, but figure that out, so that's the first version. Probably the more sophisticated version is just be very, very tight on your ICP, just be very, very, very crisp around who has your problem and why. Being more crisp around that and then having that understood is a great way of making sure that you're not wasting time on people who don't have your problem and that you're doing more of those loops with people who are right in the white-hot center. So, one is a behavioral thing and one is a more thoughtful thing.

Lenny (00:37:07):
That's great. Can you actually explain ICP briefly, because a lot of people may not know that term?

Pete Kazanjy (00:37:11):
Thank you. So, ICP stands for Ideal Customer Profile. Actually, it's important to think about there's two things in a B2B sales motion, there's the characteristics of the account, which is the company that's going to buy, and then there's the characteristics of the human and the personas that you're going to be interacting with. Let's use Amplitude as an example. Amplitude's ICP would probably be organizations that make software products, that probably have at least a couple of product managers, because if there's a single product manager, it might be too much, they might be at the point where they don't need a full-blown enterprise analytics suite, and that's probably it. And then on the human side, who are the people who participate in that conversation? Well, the product managers are going to be the ones who are going to be the users, but engineering is probably involved in order to make sure that Amplitude can talk to the cloud data warehouse and so on and so forth, and then moreover, the person who owns the budget might be the VP of product, not the product manager, or it might be the VP of engineering or the CTO.

(00:38:18):
So, those three different folks that we talked about there, it's different humans. Ideal customer profile is understanding what those parameters look like for looking at an organization in order to say, "Man, that's an awesome op, let's go get in front of them," versus, "Eh, I don't know if that's a very good opportunity, maybe let's pass on that," and then the personas are, "Great, that's an awesome op right there. I know that I'm going to have my first conversation with Lenny, but with an intention that I'm eventually going to get to the VP of product at Airbnb, and that's Suzy over here. And then once we get validation from her, then I know that the VPE over here is Frank," and knowing who the personas are. So, that's what ICP and personas are.

Lenny (00:39:06):
Awesome. There's a template that you've created that helps you lay out your ICP, so we'll try to link to it in the show notes. I have to find it again.

Pete Kazanjy (00:39:13):
Nice. Sounds good.

Lenny (00:39:15):
So, we've talked about founder-led sales and how founders should be starting sales, we've talked about just how to get better at sales as a founder, as anyone. I want to talk now about hiring salespeople.

Pete Kazanjy (00:39:27):
Sure.

Lenny (00:39:28):
Great mug, by the way, Coffee is for Closers. I love it. Can people buy that online or is that just a one-off?

Pete Kazanjy (00:39:36):
This is a Modern Sales Pros mugs. I think we have a bunch of Yetis that we give away for Atrium, as well, but we're big onto sales jokes here because you have to... We stole this from New Relic, being very user-centric in your swag, so I've got my Sales Nerds jacket on here, I've got my Let's Get It hat here, I've got my Coffee is for Closers mug. These are all inside sales jokes that maybe your audience won't necessarily get, or maybe they will, but our audience very much gets them. They're like, "Oh man, your hat's so funny. Can you send me one?" I'm like, "No problem. You should buy our software."

Lenny (00:40:11):
Love it. So, hiring salespeople, we've talked a bit about a lot of these things, like maybe when it's time to hire a salesperson when you're closing a fourth or fifth of your opportunities when this while loop is kicking in. So, in terms of the who to find for this first sales role, and you mentioned that VP of sales are often let go, it's a very high rate of not working out, is that true?

Pete Kazanjy (00:40:33):
Yeah. Again, this is mapped out in the Founder-led Selling presentation and then also in Founding Sales, the book. Generally, what you want to do is you probably don't want to start with a VP of sales to start, a sales leader, and there's a couple of reasons why there. Even if you figured it out yourself, that's required, you have to get to that minimum sufficiency of 10, 20, 30 customers yourself first. But then the reason why I advocate for folks to hire a couple of sellers or a couple of AEs to start is because, again, you have that software in your brain. Unfortunately, there is no GitHub for sales motions, and so it's in your brain, it's in your documents, et cetera, and so now, you're going to teach these other folks. So, what you want to do is you want to hire a couple early-stage pioneer sellers to take that sales motion.

(00:41:30):
The downside of seeking to hire a VP of sales or a head of sales, or what have you, who actually is a head of sales is coming out of an organization where maybe he or she is a manager of managers or manages eight reps or something like that, is that person hasn't been selling for a hot second. I think actually Jason Lemkin had a pretty funny tweet about this the other day where he was like, "Hiring the VP of sales who's been there and done that before, why exactly does she want to do it again?" Like, "Oh, you scaled up a Datadog or Figma or whatever, you should come to my crappy little startup," it's like, "I'm professionally rich." So, instead, the great folks to look at are the deputies or those early-stage sellers.

(00:42:18):
So, the example I always use here, my last software company was in recruiting, so if you have a new recruiting technology, my buddy, Troy, runs this recruiting software company called Guide. They make this really cool, guided, hey, hiring process for candidates, whatever, but they sell to recruiting organizations. So the early-stage sellers that he would be interested in would probably be early people at Lever or Greenhouse who sell to the same persona, probably around the same average selling price, but ideally, not an AE who joined Greenhouse last year or two years ago.

(00:42:59):
Greenhouse just has a phenomenal sales organization, their sales leadership is absolutely fantastic, the gentleman who's the CRO over there is a good friend of mine, Sean Murray. But early-stage selling takes early-stage sellers or people who have been there, because you're not going to have all the collateral, slides and scripts and whatever aren't going to be all buttoned up and with a bow around them, and so looking for those early-stage, grimier, grittier sellers is a more effective way of going about that. Those are the folks that you want to look for once you've gotten to that statistical significance of your own selling capacity.

Lenny (00:43:37):
To make that just even clearer, the suggestion is if you're, say, a Series A founder, what's a profile of a person you look for? You said it's a deputy at a successful sales org?

Pete Kazanjy (00:43:48):
I'll give you a couple examples. I don't know, say you're doing some sort of design tool, I would go look at the Figma sales organization and I would look at some of the earlier sellers who were there maybe two years ago or three years ago or what have you, maybe you could consider getting a sales manager there who's not super far from selling. A great example of this is there's this woman, Marissa Fuhrer, who works at Figma, she's absolutely fantastic. She works on the enterprise team there and she was at Dropbox previously as a seller for a long time.

(00:44:24):
She would be a great profile for someone who's not too far from having sold and is willing to roll up her sleeves, but ideally, that would probably be the person who you'd want to hire after you've hired those couple of sellers and gotten them to success. Because the other thing, too, with Marissa, she's probably going to look at your organization and be like, "Cool. Prove to me that your product fits the market, because I don't want to necessarily take a bet on you," and then you would say, "Well, in addition to having a 25% win rate with me, I have these two sellers right here and they both have 20% win rates and you can see that they're both closing $50,000 of bookings a month, all I need you to do is scale it up." In which case, that early stage head of sales is like, "Let's do it."

Lenny (00:45:10):
She's about to get a bunch of LinkedIn requests.

Pete Kazanjy (00:45:13):
She's great. This is one of the things that we really love at Atrium, is we have really great customers. We're creating a new category of software and so it's one of those things where more advanced, more modern sales managers and leaders really get it, that's how it always is in category creation. But when you find the people who really get it and really get it, they turn out to be awesome. That's one of the things that just makes startups fantastic.

Lenny (00:45:40):
What's a sign that maybe it's not working out when you hire your either first salesperson or maybe first five, what are signs? Because you said it often does not work out, what are early signals like, "We should rethink this"?

Pete Kazanjy (00:45:56):
This is another reason why it's really important to do it yourself to start, but presuming that you've been able to close business on a reliable basis, again, with arm's length prospects, it can't be Lenny's mother-in-law buying my software-

Lenny (00:46:13):
Huge fan, for real, actually, she is.

Pete Kazanjy (00:46:17):
God bless, but she's not ICP for Atrium. This is the danger of doing revenue trades in your accelerator or whatever, it's not real. So, if you have done that and you've sold 20 or 30 deals, you know it can be done, we have an existence proof of this. So, if someone else can't do it the way that you do it, and this is why hiring two folks to start is effective, you don't want to hire just one, maybe three, but four, it's like, "Ugh, that's a lot to manage," at least to start. So, if you have done that and the person, their win rates are poor or their activity levels are poor, things like that, those are usually indicators that it's not work out, that they're not getting those second dates, they're not getting those third dates, but importantly, they have to have the materials in question.

(00:47:11):
Did you create the slide deck? Did you take people through and did you give it to them? Did you take all the discovery questions that were in your brain and write them down into a Google Doc or a Notion page or what have you? Do you have a demo script for them? If those things are not present, then probably no one's going to be successful, or at least they're going to have to rederive all that stuff that you already did. But if you have all those precursors and it's not sticking for someone, that's probably a good leading indicator that they're not going to work out

Lenny (00:47:38):
How much time do you give these folks before you make a decision?

Pete Kazanjy (00:47:42):
This is why it's so, so, so important to look at leading indicators. This is something that we just think about all the time here at Atrium, from a instrumentation and data-driven sales management, is if someone's not having customer-facing meetings, if they're low activity, you're never going to win anything. If you have a 50% win rate on two opportunities in a month, that's probably still not going to be super helpful unless you have a very, very, very high deal size. So, looking at those leading indicators like, "Are they having first meetings? Are they having second meetings? What does their email volume look like? Are they progressing things through, are they getting things to proposal, and then eventually, are things closing?"

(00:48:24):
I do a bunch of masterclasses for Atrium on data-driven sales management and one of them is on ramping. It's called Ramping For Success, I forget the name of the masterclass, but looking at those leading indicators like opportunity inflow, "Is a person putting meetings on their calendar, are they progressing them? Are they being active in the meantime?" Those are all really good leading indicators. If somebody's not getting first meetings on the calendar, you know within a month, it's like, "Cool, this isn't working out."

(00:48:54):
Now, if they're not getting to second or third meetings, but they are getting those first meetings, well, now you know you've got a different problem, which they're getting those first dates, but they're not getting a second date and they're not getting a second date the same way that you were, maybe that's a coaching issue or maybe it's just a behavioral problem that's that you're not going to be able to surmount. But the point is having instrumentation on the most leading indicator possible gives you eyes onto whether or not things are working or not and you can make judgements fast, because the worst possible situation is nine months in, you're like, "Man, it's not working." It's like, "Man, I bet if you looked at the leading indicators, you would have known two months in this wasn't working."

Lenny (00:49:33):
I like that you gave us a bottom end of the range like, "In a month, you should be able to know, a lot of times." What would be the max by which like, "If things are going okay, by six months, it's probably going to be good," or what is that timeframe?

Pete Kazanjy (00:49:46):
Oh, where you know you're successful?

Lenny (00:49:48):
Yeah. It sounds like maybe from a month to some future month, this is a period where you can get a sense of this person is going to work out. What's that range, in your mind?

Pete Kazanjy (00:49:58):
It's almost like you're continuously monitoring. In the first month, maybe you spend that time onboarding the rep, teaching them, going through mock discovery conversations, mock demos, et cetera, having them ride along with you. In the second month, we would expect them to have 10 first meetings or maybe 20 first meetings and we would expect 50% of those to get to the second meetings, and we would measure those things. In the third month, we would expect some subset of those first meetings and second meetings that happened in the second month to get to a proposal, to get to a commercial conversation, and then maybe we would expect some of the deals in that month to close to win, or maybe the next month.

(00:50:38):
It's essentially like you're looking at the leading indicators in the appropriate timeframe, such that if someone is in month three and they're getting a bunch of their deals to proposal, you can't declare victory yet because the money is not in the bank, however things are looking good. So, if you get to month four and lots of things are getting to proposal, but nothing's closing in month four and nothing's closing in month five, you still can't say "Olly olly oxen free," you should still be very concerned. But if the leading indicator is at the right level for the right period or right interval in ramp, then you can feel confident, but not declare victory yet.

Lenny (00:51:20):
Got it. Something that this is reminding me of is we are chatting ahead of this call and you mentioned that working from home is really bad for salespeople, in your experience. Can you talk about that?

Pete Kazanjy (00:51:31):
It's primarily bad for junior salespeople. Senior salespeople have been selling out in what's known as the field for a long time, but when you think about the behavior that we're talking about, which is learning, so what needs to happen? The new sellers, they need to learn the sales motion and then they need to be audited, instrumented, so the faster the loops are on that, the better off you're going to be. If the loops are once a day of listening to their calls or maybe even a longer interval, then just the correction loops are just going to be way too slow, versus if you're sitting next to somebody or you're sitting amongst three or four people and listening to all their calls concurrently and then they get off of a call and it's like, "Hey, that was really good, correction here, correction here, correction here, correction here. Here, run it back to me."

(00:52:28):
Now, the loops, the speed with which you're able to update their software and make sure that the sales motion is running appropriately on them, is quite high. In early-stage startups, that's the only thing that matters, it's a race against time to make sure that you get to success, so you can raise your next round of financing or get to profitability or what have you, and so having asynchronous distance is really problematic for that, especially for junior folks, like SDRs, junior AEs, all of that, it really is problematic. Once that sales motion is baked and can be distributed, that's potentially a different situation, but very early on, having someone being able to sit side-by-side with your sellers, t's hard to beat.

Lenny (00:53:17):
So, what's the solution, if you're starting, now, a B2B company, your advice is, "Don't be remote, work in an office"?

Pete Kazanjy (00:53:25):
My point of view on that is, especially at early stage, from a founder's standpoint, being shoulder-to-shoulder with your co-founders certainly, but even a founder who has a couple of sellers that they're working with, being side-by-side with them in order to help them learn faster, teach them more, have accountability, and then have training loops is really what you need to do. Because the alternative is there's a whole generation of SDRs who are, it's kind of like learning loss, if you will, there's a bunch of 24 year olds who have never learned the skills that are needed at the same way, at the same clip, that they would have sitting amongst 10 others with an SDR manager sitting in the middle of them, or an AE manager sitting in the middle of them.

Lenny (00:54:20):
Any last pieces of wisdom before we get to a very exciting lightning round?

Pete Kazanjy (00:54:24):
I think probably the biggest thing is, the thing that I just like to encourage founders and product managers and what have you, is just don't be afraid of sales. There's a lot of people out there who would love to tell you a story that it's magical or like, "Oh, you've got to be a born seller," or things like that and it's really not. Those people are just talking their book, if you will, and so just getting good at those behaviors, it's going to benefit you in a myriad of ways. Even if you don't want to necessarily be an early-stage founder, even as a product manager within an enterprise organization or even a consumer organization, selling behaviors and good communication and persuasion and always thinking about what's in it for them, et cetera, those are really good skills for internal selling, for external selling, if you want to interface with customers, et cetera. All these skills are very important and impactful for a myriad of personas.

Lenny (00:55:19):
Amazing. Well, with that, we've reached the very exciting lightning round. I've got five questions for you, we're going to go through it pretty fast. Are you ready?

Pete Kazanjy (00:55:27):
I am.

Lenny (00:55:28):
Question one, what are two or three books that you recommend most to other people?

Pete Kazanjy (00:55:33):
The books that I recommend the most, there would be The Goal by Eli Goldratt. There are two books that inspired Atrium, one is the Goal, which is essentially is a novelization of the Toyota lean manufacturing system, so it's a process engineering book written as a novel, it's really fantastic. Sales organizations are just revenue factories, so if you want to think about systems thinking and processes, but in a way that's not a textbook, it's absolutely fantastic.

(00:56:01):
And then the other one is a book by Bill Walsh called The Score Takes Care of itself. Bill Walsh is a really famous football coach for the Stanford Cardinals and the San Francisco 49ers and he just broke down how you can't worry about the score in the football game, you can only worry about the things that are in front of you, that you can control, and that if you do a high quantity of high-quality actions, whatever your position is, as a quarterback or a linebacker running back or whatever, then the score will take care of itself. That's very applicable to sales, as well, if you focus on those leading indicators and make sure that you're doing it in a high quantity of high quality way, then the score will take care of itself. So, those are two great books I like to recommend to folks.

Lenny (00:56:41):
Favorite other podcasts?

Pete Kazanjy (00:56:42):
Oh boy, I don't listen to too many. I listen to Lenny's and I listen to the All-In Podcast, just so I can get my fill of doom and gloom.

Lenny (00:56:52):
And knowledge, with this one. Favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Pete Kazanjy (00:56:57):
I've got a five-year-old, so we're all Disney all the time, so I think probably the one that's been on repeat recently has been Encanto. There you go.

Lenny (00:57:07):
Love that one. Favorite interview question that you like to ask folks?

Pete Kazanjy (00:57:12):
So, I'm going to change this up on you, it's less about interview questions. One of the things I'm a really big fan of is job simulation, especially in sales, and so I'm a big fan of doing screens, so we actually have a written screen that we do with folks, where it's the Google Doc that has a dozen or so biographical questions that we allow people to answer. You'd be shocked at how well it screens people, 57% people won't do it. These are not complicated questions, it's like, "Lenny, tell me about something that you've built that you're proud of," it's a dozen of those questions. So, one, you can filter out people who are not serious, you can filter out people who have low levels of give a shit. You also can see whether or not people can communicate in a compelling fashion with a beginning, a middle, and an end. You can also see their attention to detail, whether or not it's ridden with typos or they forget to answer some of them or what have you. So, it's not an interview question thing, but that's a huge hiring hack, from my perspective.

Lenny (00:58:10):
This is a form that folks fill out when they're trying to apply to work at Atrium, is that right?

Pete Kazanjy (00:58:14):
Yeah. Or it's just something that for all my portfolio companies, as well, that people just use it. It's a Google Doc and you just clone it, give it to them, "You have edit rights, let me know when it's done." You'd be shocked, people are like, "Oh, I didn't forgot to do it." Great, you told me everything I need.

Lenny (00:58:35):
Amazing. Final question, do you have a favorite story of you or a salesperson closing an awesome deal, something that seemed impossible, something that you're proud of?

Pete Kazanjy (00:58:47):
There's a gentleman in our sales organization named Sean, who was an early seller here, he's now a sales manager, he is absolutely fantastic. I think one of the things that early-stage founders and also sellers have to remember is you're, generally speaking, not going to close the deal on the first time through the pipe. As we discussed earlier, if you have a 30% win rate, that's pretty great. If you have a 20% win rate, that's pretty solid, but that still means that four out of five are not going to close, but the next time around, they might, so win rate on the second time through the pipeline.

(00:59:21):
So, Sean closed, one of our biggest customers is a company called GRIN, they're absolutely fantastic. They make influencer management software for brands, very cool stuff. I think Sean probably ran three or four ops with them before we were able to get a toehold in the account a couple years ago, they were much smaller, and so now, I think they have 100 SDRs and 80 AEs that are being managed using Atrium. So, I think there's a good lesson there, which is it's not necessarily going to be the first time through the pipe and it's maybe not the second time, but you just have to keep pushing that boulder up the hill and eventually, when you do, good things happen.

Lenny (00:59:59):
What a great lesson to leave us with, very empowering. Pete, this was everything I hoped it would be. Two final questions, where can folks find you online if they want to learn more, more about Atrium, the book, and then how can folks be useful to you?

Pete Kazanjy (01:00:12):
I'm pretty easy to find online, I'm the only Pete Kazanjy in the United States, as far as I can tell. Google will autocorrect my name if you Google it wrong, so that's pretty helpful. Find me on LinkedIn, find me on Twitter. You can also find Founding Sales at foundingsales.com, as Lenny notes. The whole book is available online as hypertext, you can buy a physical copy, as well, but the reason why my wife put it into a Squarespace site was because we wanted people to be able to search it and come back to it and use it as a reference and so on and so forth. And then in terms of how folks can be helpful to me, if you work for an organization that has between 10 and 300 salespeople and you're looking to manage them better via metric, make them more efficient, that's a big watch word these days, is efficient sales organizations through better management, Atrium is fantastic for that. Atriumhq.com is the domain, but you can also just Google Atrium sales and we'll be the top result, as well.

Lenny (01:01:13):
Amazing. Pete, thank you for being here.

Pete Kazanjy (01:01:16):
It was awesome. Thanks, Lenny.

Lenny (01:01:18):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Sahil Mansuri (00:00:00):
It's hard to plan what you should do for all of 2023. I think the advice that most founders are getting from their boards is when you have limited visibility, you have to plan in the most conservative way. On the one hand, of course that's true, you have to be conservative. But on the other hand, you don't want to be unreasonably conservative because you don't want to be floundering from like, oh, we're screwed to everything's better, to we're screwed, everything's better. 

(00:00:29):
So the way I think about setting up a plan when you have limited visibility and some major headwinds is setting up a really conservative plan and then having milestones, short term milestones that unlock the ability to lean into growth and spend based on hitting those targets.

Lenny (00:00:49):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast. I'm Lenny, and my aim here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. Today my guest is Sahil Mansuri. Sahil is the CEO and founder of Bravado, which has built the world's largest online sales community of over 300,000 salespeople, and they're now building SaaS products for salespeople. Sahil has one of the most unique perspectives on the art and skill of sales, partly because of the community and the company that he runs, and partly because he was a longtime salesperson himself. 

(00:01:21):
As you'll hear in this episode, he has closed some incredible deals, including a wild story about cold emailing Sheryl Sandberg at Facebook and what that led to. In this episode, we focus on what founders should change and how they do sales during this market downturn, including how you should approach sales quotas, how you should rethink the way you do comp plans for salespeople, how you do forecasting, also why you should refocus on retention and your existing customers, how to improve your sales technique in general no matter what role you're in. 

(00:01:52):
As someone without a lot of depth in sales, I always find it fascinating to learn how to get better at sales. This episode has something for everyone. With that, I bring you Sahil Mansuri. Hey, Ashley, head of marketing and Flatfile. How many B2B SaaS companies would you estimate need to import CSV files from their customers?

Ashley (00:02:13):
At least 40%.

Lenny (00:02:15):
How many of them screw that up? What happens when they do?

Ashley (00:02:18):
Well, based on our data, about a third of people will consider switching to another company after just one bad experience during onboarding. So if your CSV importer doesn't work right, which is super common, considering customer files are chock full of unexpected data and formatting, they'll leave.

Lenny (00:02:38):
I am 0% surprised to hear that. I've consistently seen that improving onboarding is one of the highest leverage opportunities for both signup conversion and increasing longterm retention. Getting people to your aha moment more quickly and reliably is so incredibly important.

Ashley (00:02:52):
Totally. It's incredible to see how our customers like Square, Spotify and Zora are able to grow their businesses on top of Flatfile, this because flawless data onboarding acts like a catalyst to get them and their customers where they need to go faster.

Lenny (00:03:09):
If you'd like to learn more or get started, check out Flatfile at flatfile.com/lenny. This episode is brought to you by Merge. Every product manager knows the pain of slowing product velocity when developers struggle to build and maintain integrations with other platforms. Merge's unified API can remove this blocker from your roadmap. With one API, your team can add over 150 HR, ATS, accounting, ticketing and CRM integrations right into your product. You can get your first integration into production in a matter of days and save countless weeks building custom integrations, letting you get back to building your core product. 

(00:03:48):
Merge's integrations speed up the product development process for companies like Ramp, Drada and many other fast growing and established companies, allowing them to test their features at scale without having to worry about a never ending integrations roadmap. Save your engineers countless hours and expedite your sales cycle by making integration offerings your competitive advantage with Merge. Visit merge.dev/lenny to get started and integrate up to five customers for free. Sahil, welcome to the podcast.

Sahil Mansuri (00:04:21):
Thanks Lenny. Thanks for having me.

Lenny (00:04:23):
So we're going to be talking about sales and in particular what you should be adjusting in your company during these very turbulent market conditions. But I thought first it'd be helpful if you just gave a little background on yourself to kind of give folks a sense of why you have such unique insights into the sales world. So maybe just talk about a little bit of your background and then what you do now, the company that you run now. 

Sahil Mansuri (00:04:46):
I've spent my whole career in sales. I started out in sales when I was in college. I worked on the Obama campaign. We didn't call it sales, right? We called it turning out the votes or street teamwork or field ops or phone banking, but it was sales. We were just selling the dream, literally the American dream as it were. So I've been in some sort of a role where my primary responsibility was to cold call, send emails, have conversations, objection handle, and try to get someone to sign a contract for my entire career.

(00:05:22):
I started selling in September of 2008 was my first month with a quota. So I started selling in the middle of the last financial crisis. In 2009, the company that I used to do sales for, which is called Meltwater, this company, it's a pretty crazy story. It's one of the few companies that has made it to $100 million in recurring revenue without a drop of venture funding. It's a Norwegian company actually. 

(00:05:52):
If I remember correctly, don't quote me on the exact numbers here, but the company had basically gone 10 million to 30 million to 50 million to 70 million, and then in 2009, they went from 70 million to 69 million. It was the first year that they hadn't not only increased revenue, but revenue had gone down. In that year, in 2009, I broke the company record for the most sales by any individual person in one year in the history of the company. I say that not out of hubris or out of pride, I say that because I've literally sold in a downturn. In the middle of a recession, I have been an account executive selling, carrying a quota and have been successful in doing it.

(00:06:37):
Then went on to be a sales leader at a bunch of different places, probably most notably at Glassdoor, where I joined as one of the first 20, 25 employees. Was responsible for enterprise sales there. Personally closed Facebook, Google, Amazon, Microsoft, Ford, Visa, Bank of America, JP Morgan, Walmart. At its peak, at one point I think Glassdoor had about 100 of the Fortune 500 customers and I'd sold about 60 of them myself. I've done a lot of selling in my career, also a decent amount of sales management and sales leadership. 

(00:07:14):
But really my forte is selling. I love to sell. I love to talk to customers. I love to train salespeople. I've been a VP of sales and CRO in a couple different places. Then for the last five years I've been building a community for salespeople that's called Bravado. Bravado is a network of about 300,000 B2B tech sales. That's about 50,000 VPs of sales and CROs, about 150,000 account executives, another like 40 to 50,000 SDRs. Then the rest of it are kind of customer success, sales engineers, sales ops, sales enablement, et cetera. 

(00:07:59):
So it's a network that purely focuses on sales, and much akin to your business, I suppose, marries community learning, upskilling, recruiting as this one place that a salesperson can go in order to beat the odds, be successful in their career, find a great job, or hit and crush quota in their role.

Lenny (00:08:22):
Awesome. I think that gives a clear picture of why you have such unique insights. I don't know if there's anyone that has such a broad access to so many salespeople and what they're doing, what they're thinking about. The core part of the Bravado product, just to make it even clear, is a community or people ask questions, help each other through sales issues, things like that, right?

Sahil Mansuri (00:08:41):
Yeah. So if you're familiar with Stack Overflow and what that network and community means to engineering, Bravado has a product that's affectionately known as the War Room, which does the same thing. So you have 50,000 companies, sales teams that are on Bravado. We get a realtime pulse of which companies are hitting quota, which ones are missing quota, which sales reps are closing deals with which organizations, which industries are doing better or worse. 

(00:09:12):
So we do get a really interesting perspective within the world of B2B tech sales, to be clear, a really interesting perspective on what's happening in terms of companies and revenue and forecast and quota, which gives us hopefully an opportunity to serve those members and the general tech community at large in terms of how they can beat the odds, especially as we're back to that 2008 crunch that we saw then as well.

Lenny (00:09:39):
Awesome. Just to put this out there, I'm a very small investor in Bravado. I'm just a fan of these kinds of companies, community led SaaS tooling. I was really impressed with the way you're building and the way you're approaching it. Also, I don't have a lot of depth in sales, and so I loved this opportunity to learn about how sales works by participating. So thank you for letting me join the journey of Bravado. It's a really unique company and I'm excited to see where it all goes. 

(00:10:05):
So with this podcast, we were planning to talk about sales. Initially, it was going to be how to get better at sales, how to be a better salesperson. But you had this great suggestion that we instead focus more specifically on what founders should change in the coming year knowing the conditions of the market and how things are turbulent and how people are spending less and things like that. So we're going to talk about five things that you can do right now to change the way your sales process works starting now for the next year. The idea is once you listen to this conversation, you can go and do these things immediately with your team. So that sound good?

Sahil Mansuri (00:10:41):
Yeah, it sounds great. I mean, I think, inherent in this conversation will be things that you can do to be better at sales, but I think the way in which you sell has to be different based on market condition. So if we had done this podcast eight months ago or 18 months ago or 28 months ago or 38 months ago, I think we would've had one set of conversation. We would've talked about growing top line revenue. We would've talked about how to get your first 20 customers. We would've talked about how to build and scale a sales team. We would've talked about setting quotas and whatnot. 

(00:11:18):
I think that today, the market has shifted because we know that the cost of capital has gone up. We know that funding has dried up. We know that investors today are only interested in companies that have strong unit economics and have high retention rates. Cold prospecting goes down in favor of cross-selling and upselling your existing customer base because it's hard to break into new accounts when companies have budget freezes and hiring freezes and layoffs, and everyone is watching really closely the capital outflow of their business. So your sale strategy has to fundamentally change in order to meet the moment and meet the market to where it is.

Lenny (00:12:00):
Great context setting. You touched on a few of the things we're going to talk about, so I'm excited to get into it. The first topic I wanted to chat about is forecasting and quotas. You have some advice on how founders should be thinking about adjusting their forecast plans and their quotas for next year. Can you talk about that? 

Sahil Mansuri (00:12:18):
Yeah, so let's start with some data and then we'll talk about why this matters. So on Bravado, as I mentioned, we have 300,000 members, but only about 200,000 of them. So about 65% of the network uses a product called the Seller Portfolio. The Seller Portfolio is a realtime tracker of how you and your sales team are performing relative to quota. You can kind of think of it like mint.com, but instead of being for personal finance, it's for sales. Based on that, we're able to get a realtime perspective on which companies in specific, and then overall which industries and in which sectors are at or above or below quota. 

(00:12:57):
So I'll share some stats with you. So in Q3 of this year, so I guess as of last month, in Q3 of this year, 63% of sales reps missed quota, 63%. That's up from 54% in Q2 and 46% in Q1. So you've basically got 30% more of the sales team missing quota today than you did literally just six months ago. If you broaden that out to a team wide structure, 76% of companies missed their Q3 target. 76% of companies missed their Q3 target. That's up from 59% in Q2 and 51% in Q1. So you actually have 33% more companies that are missing target. 

(00:13:46):
Then at this point, it's gone from being like the occasional company is struggling to pretty much every tech company is struggling. We would predict, based on the data that we're seeing, that over 80% of companies will miss their Q4 goals. So in a world in which the vast majority of sales reps are missing quota and the even larger vast majority of companies are missing quota and their forecast, that on the one hand explains why you're seeing this bunch of layoffs.

(00:14:15):
On the other hand though, it raises the question of what do I do for next year? On the one hand, you don't want to bring down targets too significantly because it's going to raise a lot of red flags in terms of spend and burn and probably meet a lot of really painful decision. On the other hand, it's really hard to have visibility into what the market's going to look like six months, I mean, heck, even like six weeks from now. Things are changing on a realtime basis. 

(00:14:44):
Something interesting that we saw is that we have quarterly tracking, but we also have monthly tracking. So something interesting we saw is that from November until March of last year, companies were basically blowing out their quota, sales reps were blowing out their quota. All of a sudden everything came to a screeching halt in April, and April, May and June were really tough times. You saw that outwardly in the market in terms of layoffs and hiring freezes and such. But we saw it on a realtime basis in terms of percentage to quota and companies missing their target.

(00:15:15):
What was interesting is that a bunch of companies then revised down their forecast for the rest of the year, but then companies started beating those forecasts in July, August, September. So for a moment there, it actually looked like we might be out of the worst of it, and then came obviously a much maligned double dip recession, which then in October, November, all of a sudden everyone just started missing. Many of your listeners, I would imagine, work at VC backed SaaS companies, so they can, in the comments or whatnot, speak about whether this is also true for them. 

(00:15:48):
But I would imagine that for most of companies going into the middle to end of September, they probably felt pretty good. They actually thought like, "Oh, maybe we can actually squeak by in Q3. Maybe we can revise up forecast in Q4. Maybe we can hire into next year and we can go back to growing the way we were for the previous 10 years." Then October was just a bloodbath. On companies that do monthly quotas, 85% of sales reps missed quota in October for their monthly number. I think it's going to be even higher in November based on what we're seeing. 

(00:16:26):
So again, I share all this information with you to just kind of set the stage on what's happening realtime in the market. So given that September felt good, but today we're totally screwed, it's hard to plan what you should do for all of 2023. I think the advice that most founders are getting from their boards is when you have limited visibility, you have to plan in the most conservative way. On the one hand, of course that's true. You have to be conservative. But on the other hand, you don't want to be unreasonably conservative because you don't want to be floundering from like, oh, we're screwed to everything's better, to we're screwed, everything's better. 

(00:17:06):
So the way I think about setting up a plan when you have limited visibility and some major headwinds is setting up a really conservative plan and then having milestones, short term  milestones that unlock the ability to lean into growth and spend based on hitting those targets. So here's an example. Let's say that you did $10 million in revenue this year and next year you have no idea what that's going to look like. Maybe you say, "Okay, let's plan like we're going to be down to 9 million. We're going to lose 10% of revenue next year despite our best efforts because the market's going to be really tough."

(00:17:45):
So that would mean that in Q1 you need to hit 2.5 million in revenue. Let's say in Q1, if we hit 2.5, then we should revise up our targets for the rest of the year and we can unlock this additional budget to kind of spend off of. If we hit below 2, we should revise down our number. So kind of being comfortable with regularly reforecasting. Forecasting, you can't just forecast a quarter out every time. Obviously that's a tough way to run a business. So you got to forecast a year, but then set milestones, checkpoints and kind of make predetermined decisions that allow you to avoid the bias of then walking into Q1 and being like, "Oh, we missed in Q1, but no, no, we're really going to hit it in Q2."

(00:18:29):
You got to set the targets upfront because as founders, we tend to have a bias towards optimism. That's generally how founders operate. In today's market, that's more of a disadvantage than an advantage. So my suggestion is to really think about forecasting conservatively, setting up checkpoints and milestones around what future success may or may not look like. If you hit those goals, then decelerating or accelerating into it depending upon what you get there, and coming to an agreement with your board, with your sales team, with your sales leadership in advance so that there's no debate about what to do when you actually get there.

Lenny (00:19:06):
That is awesome advice. As a PM, it makes me think a little bit about moving to an agile sprint sort of system versus this long term waterfall oriented planning process. Have you seen this need happen in the past? Is this the first time we need to plan to reforecast throughout the year? Or have you been through periods where this is just the way people operate when times are super uncertain?

Sahil Mansuri (00:19:28):
First of all, I think the vast majority of CEOs and sales leaders haven't been through a period of dramatic uncertainty in their careers. I mean, there are obviously people who have been in business for more than 15 years and who have been through other downturns. But unless you were a sales leader, a CEO, an executive in 2008, which I would imagine that not very many people were or certainly not everyone was, then you haven't seen anything like this. People try to analogize it to COVID, but I think that that's actually not a good analog for this. 

(00:19:59):
The reason why is because COVID was an external factor versus this is actually an internal issue, which is to say that there are actually industries that are doing much better these days except for tech. Tech is getting crushed, right? In COVID, everyone's getting crushed. So it didn't matter if you owned a yoga studio or gas pump or whatever, a hotel. There was nothing that was working well unless I guess you owned Amazon Fresh or something. There were very few businesses that were doing better as a result of COVID. But there's a bunch of companies that aren't doing that bad. I mean, if you listen to other podcasts, you've probably seen that tech is the one that is getting the most hammered in this, although I think in the last two weeks, crypto has caught up pretty quickly.

(00:20:47):
But it's really kind of tech, right? So when you see a slowdown in tech that is disproportionate, you have to assume that it may last for a much longer period of time than you imagine. I think that given the lack of visibility and the amount of volatility, I think it is a unique situation for most companies, for most leaders. I think that the only response to which is to try to get really comfortable with being wrong and adding new data in in order to make decisions regularly without the fear of coming across as not knowing what you're doing.

Lenny (00:21:27):
Things seem to have been crazy for a long time. It's interesting that this is the first year where you're finding that companies have to do this. Before we get to the next topic, I wanted to come back to the stats that you had real quick. Can you talk again about how you get those stats? Is this like a salesperson plugs into their system somehow in exchange for getting access to the benchmarking? How does that work because that's very cool?

Sahil Mansuri (00:21:49):
Yeah, exactly. That's right. It's a gift to get model. So the way it works is that you enter your stats, and in doing so, you get global benchmarks of how you're doing versus other reps or other companies. So there's a premium for being accurate here because otherwise you don't actually get a real sense of how you're doing versus others. So there's an incentive structure that's built in to be really precise. Then that information feeds into our kind of global leaderboard where we are able to slice and dice and say, "Okay, of companies that are headquartered in San Francisco, here's how your company's doing. Of sales reps that sell to CMOs, here's how you're doing. Of reps who carried a quota of between 500, 700K this quarter, here's how you rank." So we do global benchmarking for sales reps and sales teams and we share that information for free to anyone who is willing to participate in the ecosystem.

Lenny (00:22:43):
That is very cool. I had no idea that was something you did. How do folks join that if they want to join up?

Sahil Mansuri (00:22:49):
Simple, everything's available for free. Just come to bravado.co and we have something called a Seller Portfolio. Go ahead and build one of those and then enter the information and then you'll start to receive the stats as they come out each quarter.

Lenny (00:23:00):
Sweet. Okay, second topic, comp plans. You have some advice for how teams should think about comp plans for their sales people? What's your advice?

Sahil Mansuri (00:23:09):
So comp plans are, or compensation plans for sales, are very different than they are for most other profession. So in most professions, yours and product management, you have a base salary that encompasses the vast majority of your cash compensation. You then often have bonuses that are either based on company or sometimes personal milestone, which are often paid out end of quarter, end of year. Then you'll have an equity grant that you vest over the course of time. That's not how it works in sales. 

(00:23:39):
So the way it works in sales is that you have what's known as a base and then what's known as an OET. An OTE or on target earnings is how much you make if you hit quota. The most common ratio that you see in SaaS is what's known as a 50-50 split. So let's just use some round numbers. Let's say that your OTE is $200,000. What that means is that your base salary is actually only $100,000. So unlike in most other professions, sales reps make very little base salary, but their OTEs are often higher than in most other professions because they're variable, so the second $100,000 you unlock through your performance on the sales team. 

(00:24:25):
Again, I'm going to use the most common examples for this, and every combines different, et cetera, but what's really common is if you have a 200K OTE, 100K base, 100K commission, then your quota will be $1 million. So the ratio between your OTE and your quota is typically five to one. So your quota is usually 5X. This comes from this idea that your cost for a sales rep fully loaded should be about 20% so you can afford to pay 20% of your salary to a sales rep. So let's talk about what that all means. 

(00:24:59):
So what that means is that you as a salesperson have to sell $1 million of software in order to make $200,000 of money. But that $1 million of software is only around new business. The vast majority of account executives are only responsible for new business, which means top line revenue growth. So let's pick two theoretical examples. Okay, let's say they're sales rep A and sales rep B, and they both have the same quota, same OTE, okay? We're selling for the same product, same sales team. Sales rep A closes $1.5 million in 2022. Just for easy math, let's say that's 15 100K deals. So product is 100K. They sold us 15 deals a year. They would close $1.5 million. 

(00:25:46):
That means that they would hit 150% of quota. When that happens, when you exceed your quota, you hit in sales what are known as accelerators. So it's not like if you hit 1 million, you make 200, but if you hit 1.2 million, you just make an extra on that 200K. You actually often make extra money for exceeding your quota. The more you exceed your quota, the more money you make. So you would imagine that if someone sold 1.5 million, they wouldn't make 300K, which would be 20% cost to sale. They might make 400K. That's pretty common in sales. 

(00:26:21):
So this person who closed $1.5 million in business from 15 deals ends up making $400,000 and they get taken on a free trip to Cabo because they made President's Club and they're put on the leader board and the CEO of the company gives them an award at the end of the year and they are heralded as the pinnacle of all things that are sales. The VP of sales says, "Wow, I can't wait to clone 10 of you." That's how sales teams are set up, right? 

(00:26:47):
Then you have sales rep B. Sales rep B only closes 12 deals for 1.2 million. So they still exceed quota, but they only exceed quota by 20%, not 50%. That sales rep ends up making let's say 250K. So they make $150,000 less money. They don't get to go on the trip to Cabo. They don't get the award at the end of the year. They're not the ones that are celebrated or championed and they're seen as a good performer but not as good as team player A. That all makes a lot of sense in a world in which companies are really focused on top line growth.

(00:27:25):
Nothing is more important than the amount of ARR you're making and how fast you're growing and investors are basically demanding that you go 3, 2, 2, 2, which is common parlance for if you make 5 million this year, you should make 15 million next year, you should make 45 million the year after, and then you can slow down to going 90 then 180. This is how VCs often think about funding SaaS companies. They look for this 3, 3, 2, 2 sort of multiple growth on ARR, new business ARR. That's how the world used to function until six months ago. 

(00:27:58):
Then six months ago, all of a sudden the music stopped and capital got expensive and everybody started being like, "Whoa, wait a minute. We should think about things like net dollar retention and we should think about what renewal rates look like and we should think about how efficient you are at acquiring customers." All of a sudden, profitability, efficiency, retention came into focus as everybody realized that unprofitable growth was no longer going to be rewarded because you couldn't just keep spending in order to acquire customers. Acquiring new customers was going to get harder so retaining the ones you had and making sure they were happy was actually far more important.

(00:28:35):
So let's go back to our example. So team player player A who closed 15 deals for 1.5 million, poster child for the company, got $400,000. Let's say out of their 15 customers, 10 of them churn next year and only five of them actually end up renewing. How much does that affect player A's compensation, their performance, their celebration, et cetera? Doesn't affect them at all. Make no difference. 99% of SaaS companies are set up this way, right? Every SaaS company of, with very small exceptions, HubSpot, monday.com, there's a handful of them, except for very few SaaS companies, no difference to the salesperson's performance. It's seen as a failure of customer success. Other people get blamed for it. Sales rep, no change in their comp work or their success.

(00:29:32):
Meanwhile, sales rep B who closed fewer deals, 12 of them. Let's say all 12 renew, and not only do all 12 renew, but let's say that three of them actually are so happy with the product and service that they're willing to be featured on your website as the folks that you advertise. Let's say six of them are actually willing to be references. So they help you close even more business by getting on the phone with prospective customers and are willing to actually advocate for your product. Let's say that not only do they renew, but four of them actually upsell because they're so happy they end up spending more and they sign multi-year contracts and whatnot. 

(00:30:09):
How much did that affect sales rep B's performance? Do we go back and revise and say, "Well, wait a minute. Actually sales rep B's customers were way better and actually we should probably have rewarded sales rep B because they actually had done the homework of finding the right clients instead of just shoving product down people's throats." No, none of that happens. Again, that kind of made sense up until six months ago, but it makes no sense today. So sales comp plans are stuck in the stone ages. They're stuck in the world of Glengarry Glen Ross, Boiler Room, Wolf of Wall Street, get the dollar in through the door, Matthew McConaughey [inaudible 00:30:45]. That's where sales comp plans are. 

(00:30:49):
What we haven't done is built a modern technical sales compensation plan that actually aligns the needs and incentives of the business, the customer and the rep. So I think that for a while there, I mean, I've been writing and talking about this for years, for a while there it fell on a lot of deaf ears because no one cared. People care now because all of a sudden for the first time, all of the things that we're talking about around retention and renewal rates and stuff are coming up. So I would say that my general advice to companies is to say what are the metrics that matter and ensuring that those metrics are the ones that your sales team is rewarded for. 

(00:31:31):
I also call into question the notion that your sales team should have a 50-50 split on compensation. By the way, that doesn't just extend to the sales team. That's often how the VP of sales is compensated. So your executive, your chief revenue officer, your VP of sales who sits at the same table as your CMO and your CFO and your COO, that person also has a 50-50 split in most cases. Sometimes it's 60-40, but it's very rarely 90-10, which is what it is for almost every other executive on your team.

(00:32:00):
So salespeople get labeled as coin operated and mercenaries and all these other adages because the way we compensate them, the way we treat them, the way we measure them is in a mercenary sort of way. Again, I would call on founders and VCs and executives to rethink that and to instead come up with compensation that aligns the incentives, again, of the customer, the business and the rep and the leader. So I think that setting up a longer horizon where if the customer you sign up today ends up renewing tomorrow, the rep should get a kicker on it. 

(00:32:40):
We should look at what the overall renewal rate is of the sales rep comparing it of course to the renewal of the rest of the business. If one rep is doing a better job of qualifying the right customers upfront, they should be rewarded for that. So things like that I think are missing from sales compensation and I'm excited to see them come to the front this year.

Lenny (00:33:00):
As an outsider, this all sounds very obvious like this is how it should work. I imagine a reason it doesn't is it adds complexity and then there's this feedback loop that's a lot longer because you have to wait to see if they renew. So two questions that I guess. One is you're saying that it works companies are doing it this way. You mentioned a few, HubSpot, monday.com. Are there others that folks can look at to model how they could approach it this way? Then is there any other reason that folks haven't rethought the way comp plans work? Is it just like, "Nah, it's working, we don't have to break it"?

Sahil Mansuri (00:33:36):
I'll answer the second question first because the answer to the first question is really simple. I think that there is a lack of transparency around how a lot of sales compensation plans work and companies tend to make it up as they go along. Oftentimes companies change their comp plans like each month, each quarter based on whatever is the business unit or the goal of the business. So I've seen things like, oh, company release product B after only selling product A. So we'll double the commission on product B because we want to get it in people's hands. Or we really want to target CPG customers so CPG customers are worth extra commission. 

(00:34:12):
So companies tend to weigh down comp plans with basically a bunch of bullshit that doesn't have anything to do with how the compensation plan should be structured, but just has to do with the whims of the executives and the board that month or that quarter. So I don't know of any organizations I think do this excellently. I just know a lot of companies that do it better than most. I think it depends on your company or business and your incentive. But I would say that in today's economy, taking a longer term view to a sales compensation, instead the short term, like you're a hunter, your job is just to close deals and doesn't really matter, a dollar is a dollar no matter where it comes from is not true anymore. 

(00:34:55):
So I guess that's the answer to that. Coming back to the other question though, which is why are sales comp plans not innovated off of because this seems obvious? First of all, it's obvious because of how I explained it. I'm not taking credit for it. It's just that I'm giving you a lot of context that you would not get otherwise, right? The context you would get otherwise if you just walked in and you got your traditional old school VC and CEO doesn't really know what they're doing and just listening to their board is like, here's how sales comp plans work, right?

(00:35:25):
You want to grow revenue, you want to get customers, you got to pay top dollar and you got to fire them up and set aggressive quotas and you got to push them and you want to put these big spiffs out there because that's how salespeople work. A founder doesn't know. This is the problem is that people don't know because nobody really understands sales and salespeople. They just kind of are like, "Well, I can't sell and I don't really want to do that. So I'm just going to hire this 50 year old white guy who's done this at a bunch of different companies and then have him bring in because it's always a 50 year old, it's always a white person and it's always a guy, right?"

(00:36:01):
Sales is one of the least diverse professions when it comes to leadership and it's one of the things that we really champion here at Bravado is this idea that 92% of sales leaders or VPs of sales are white. Over 85% of sales leaders are white. So is that representative of the total population of who should be a sales leader? No, of course not. It's just representative of the fact that like, oh, you don't want to innovate here. Just hire someone who's been there, done that before. 

(00:36:31):
So you get a lot of sludge in the system. You get a lot of people doing the same shit over and over again even though it doesn't work, which is kind of the opposite of that Einstein quote, right? So founders don't know how to set comp plans. They are just listening to what other people tell them should be the way they do it. There's a way it's done and it's really hard to break that. It's kind of like when you talked about waterfall versus agile. Once you do agile you're like, "Wait, why would we have ever done it the other way?" Well, it's because everyone was always doing it that way, et cetera, et cetera. No one ever got fired for buying IBM, et cetera. You get where I'm going. 

(00:37:06):
But the other thing Lenny that I think is problematic is everyone loves to optimize in the short run when it comes to revenue in sales. That's really I think the other big driver. If I offered you a plan that said, hey, you can grow by 20% revenue quarter over quarter or we can spike revenue by 75% this quarter though I don't know what that's going to do to the business in the future. Which of these do you want? Tell me how many founders really are willing to take option A? What do you think? 

(00:37:37):
Let's say I just told you those were your options. I can figure out a way to increase revenue by 75% this quarter though I can give you no promise as to what that means for the future. Or I can make you a plan where we increase revenue 20% quarter over quarter for the next six quarters. Which of those two plans would you sign up for? What do you think is a percentage of startup founder six months ago, eight months ago, 10 months ago to indefinitely that would've signed up for plans?

Lenny (00:38:01):
Yeah, it's interesting. Hearing you describe the way it should be structured and then hearing you pitch this. I would definitely pick goal one. Let's grow. Let's get this. It'll work out, it'll work its way out. We'll figure it out later. Let's just keep new customers coming in. So I don't know. I guess like 99% probably choose that first one.

Sahil Mansuri (00:38:25):
Yeah, I think that's right. Well, I mean that is right because that's what everyone signed up for. But then all of a sudden, and again, that was okay because even if all your customers churned, it didn't matter because you could just go raise more money based on the growth and then just keep pouring more money on it, more money on it. No one gave a shit about the leaky bucket, right? Because you could just keep adding more water at the top. Now all of a sudden the faucet's off. 

(00:38:42):
So given this seismic change in the market, how is it that we can reverse the short term thinking and start to actually build good businesses? Because I think that's the real problem, right? The real problem isn't sales compensation plans and quotas. That's a symptom. A real problem is we all just wanted to have hyper growth instead of thinking are we actually building good businesses. I wouldn't say that we at Bravado were immune from this by the way. It's not like I'm sitting here on my golden throne pontificating to the masses. 

(00:39:23):
We made a bunch of decisions over the course of growing this business that were incentivized for the short term. Every single time we did that, it ended up being really expensive. Now, sometimes we caught that before money ran out and before we saw the problem. Sometimes we didn't and then we were like, "Oh, shit. It's a fire drill." But at the end of the day, there is no replacement for building a product that customers love and having a great go to market motion that brings that product and that value to your clients and ensuring that they actually are thrilled that they bought your product and are getting a lot of value from it.

(00:40:00):
Yeah, it sounds so simple, but the amount of companies that actually don't really care if their customers get value from their product versus just measuring top line revenue growth numbers and logos and whatever is I think more meaningful than people are willing to admit.

Lenny (00:40:16):
Today's episode is brought to you by Miro. Creating a product, especially one that your users can't live without is damn hard. But it's made easier by working closely with your colleagues to capture ideas, get feedback, and being able to iterate quickly. That's where Miro comes in. Miro is an online visual whiteboard that's designed specifically for teams like yours. I actually use Miro to come up with a plan for this very ad. With Miro, you can build out your product strategy by brainstorming with sticky notes, comments, live reactions, voting tools, even a timer to keep your team on track. 

(00:40:51):
You can also bring your whole distributed team together around wire frames where anyone can draw their own ideas with a pen tool or put their own images or mock-ups right into the Miro board. With one of Miro's ready-made templates, you can go from discovery and research to product roadmaps to customer journey flows to final mocks. Want to see how I use Miro? Head on over to my Miro board at miro.com/lenny to see my most popular podcast episodes, my favorite Miro templates. You can also leave feedback on this podcast episode and more. That's M-I-R-O.com/lenny. 

(00:41:28):
That's a great segue to the third topic, which is around retaining your existing customers and putting more focus on that versus top line, or yeah, new growth. Do you have some thoughts on just how to do that and why that's so important?

Sahil Mansuri (00:41:42):
Let's start here, which is cold call, cold email response rates have never been lower. Never been lower. I think you're seeing this across every sales team. Again, if you're listening to this and you have a sales team, you know what I'm saying is true. Top of funnel pipeline is drying fast faster than our planet's drying up in fact. Enterprise sales cycles are just getting longer and longer. We are lucky to have a couple of investors who have really, really broad exposure to the tech market. Everything from really large public IPOs all down to small startups. 

(00:42:21):
In conversations with them, they've been really clear that they're seeing this incredible, the average enterprise sales cycle is 62 days, it's now like 115 days or something. So customers are dragging their feet, everything's going to no decision, no decision typically means I'm not going to say yes now because I don't want to spend the money. I actually like the thing but I'm not going to buy it. Which means the same thing for you as a business, which is that you're not making any money. 

(00:42:45):
So in a world in which you can't sell to new customers, your only hope is to keep the ones you got for long enough to survive and then hopefully even maybe be able to upsell and cross-sell those customers into new products, as well as potentially leverage those customers to get warm intros into a potential new business. Psychologically, when times are tough people hoard, people keep their things close and people trust the safety of those they know versus those they don't. This is basic human psychology, right? 

(00:43:18):
So given that that's the case, if you're a company that doesn't have a lot of customers and you're trying to go out to market and sell your product, you're in a lot of trouble. If you are a company that has a large customer base and you've done a shitty job of engaging, retaining, maintaining relationships with them and prioritized top of line growth, this is your alert. This section is for you. Because what you should be doing, I will tell you the most dramatic thing you could do and then we can kind of work backwards. Take your best sales people and make them CSMs. There's no point. There's no point in having your best salespeople sell.

(00:43:59):
Well, what's the point if people aren't going to buy anyway? If they do, they're going to buy in onesie, twosies, not these big enterprise deals. No one's going to sign these big accounts right now. Who in tech today is like, "Wow, I can't wait to sign a multi-year contract with a new vendor we've never tried." Right? Nobody's doing that. If people are signing things, they're signing for three month pilots or kind of like all sort... I mean, the deal sizes are coming down, et cetera. I mean, this is all very common. Make your best sales people CSMs and be like, "Your job is to make sure that all these great customers we have never, ever, ever leave."

Lenny (00:44:33):
CSM is a customer success manager?

Sahil Mansuri (00:44:35):
Thank you. Sorry, sorry. I'm too jargony. Thank you. So typically most sales orgs are divided into pre-sales and post-sales. Pre-sales worked with companies that are not yet customers to get them to sign up. Post-sales works with companies that have already signed up to help them either find value or retain or renew or upsell. That's how most sales orgs are divided. Typically, you put your best people in pre-sales because it's harder. It's harder to sell a new customer than retain the one you have. That's always the case because you got to actually be able to build trust, build the relationship, evangelize something that they haven't bought before. 

(00:45:08):
So you typically take your best talent and put it in pre-sales, and then you take the people who are really good relationship builders and really caring and nurturing and not necessarily the people who are the most gifted at creating value or whatnot and you put them in CSM. That's obviously a huge generalization because I know many CSMs who are much better at sales and new business. In many businesses, it's actually harder to be a CSM because the product isn't very good. So you actually have to do a lot of selling even after the product is sold. So that was a big generalization. But it is, in broad strokes, true.

(00:45:44):
I would take your best account executives, pre-sales reps and I'd put them into CSM. I'd say it doesn't matter how much new business we work on in the next six to nine months because it's going to be hard anyway. But what we cannot under any circumstances do is lose our existing customers because replacing them is going to be impossible. So it's kind of like you got your leaky bucket, you got to patch that leak really, really fast and really hard. I think putting your best people on it is one good way to start.

(00:46:09):
Now, there's a lot of people who are going to listen to this and think that's crazy. Why would I take my best performer in a tough market and move them to post-sale? This is bad advice. Maybe. Maybe it's bad advice. I can't predict the future anymore than anyone else can. But I can tell you it's what we're doing. I can tell you I'm actually doing it. We're taking our best people and are moving them into CSM at Bravado. We're trying to maintain every customer we have because I believe that doing so sets us up for the best chance of success in the business. Maybe you disagree with that and you think that that's not right for you. You should do what's right for your business. 

(00:46:45):
But I would say that it's not just talk, it's action. I'm doing it. I'm also telling every one of my portfolio, I do a decent amount of angel investing, I'm telling everyone of my portfolio companies to do the same thing. Discussing the same thing with our investors, with our board as well. 

(00:46:58):
Okay so you put your best people on it. What else should you? So I think that what often goes underserved is the opportunity to help your customers themselves survive. I don't know. What's a good product example? Let's take something like a analytics product. Let's pick on Amplitude or Mixpanel or pick your favorite. If I was a company like that and I was like, "Okay, don't know how many new customers I may be able to sell, but I've got a lot of really good customers I want to keep." I would invest a tremendous amount of energy into helping product managers and product leaders get benchmarks and stats on how other product teams, what changes they're making. 

(00:47:46):
Because the advantage you have as a vendor, this is advantage we have in sales as Bravado, but it's the advantage that every vendor has is you get a cross=section of what everyone who fits a certain ICP is doing at the same time. How good are you at extracting value out of that and finding ways of becoming less of a tool as part of the SaaS stack and more of a value added advisor that can help you actually plan and prepare for what to do next. I think most companies are not good at it. They put out a white paper for lead gen. I want to put out a white paper for customer retention. 

(00:48:26):
One thing that we're actually doing is we're basically saying to all of our clients, "Hey, we'll tell you what percentage of companies that look like you are hiring or not hiring. I'll tell you how they're adjusting quotas. I'll tell you how they are changing their comp plans. I'll tell you how much they're paying. I'll tell you what percentage of their sales teams' hitting quota, et cetera, if you stick around with us as a client." I'm not just placing sales reps and say we make our business as a recruiting marketplace. So we help companies hire salespeople. Obviously that's slowed down tremendously because people are scared to hire and spend money right now. 

(00:49:03):
But if they're getting insights on what's happening in the market, that's still valuable. That's still something that they can't get elsewhere that I am uniquely positioned to offer to my customer base. What are you uniquely positioned to offer to your customer base? Let's pick another example that I think is really easy which is Greenhouse or Lever or another app and tracking system. If you're an ATS and all of a sudden every recruiting budget's getting slashed and recruiters are getting laid off faster than any other department because no one's hiring, et cetera, you're probably at the most risk of being ripped out or being downsized or getting downward pressure to your [inaudible 00:49:37].

(00:49:39):
Can you do that nobody else can do in order to give your customers a really good insight into how they should navigate thinking about hiring versus layoffs versus headcount versus burn per department, et cetera? You've got some really interesting data, don't you? You know exactly how many customers have paused, how many roles and whatnot. If I was Greenhouse, I would be putting out all kinds of reports that tell me, let's use me as a customer here, "Hey, of series B companies that have roughly 50 employees, they used to have eight open head count, but now they're down to four. The main area that they're investing are X, Y, and Z. Salaries are moving up and down."

(00:50:21):
You could get a lot of insight from a company like Greenhouse. Then I'd be like, "Whoa, this is so valuable. I can't live without this data because this is actually helping guide my business decisioning." I think moving from a world where you're just focused on how can I jam product down your throat to how do I use my unique perspective in the customer segment we serve in order to create broader insights for the industry is something I would heavily prioritize. I'd take my product marketing team and I'd kind of shift them to be my research team. I'd take a data analyst or two and stick them on the project and start to create content that is exclusive for my customers and have them see that as another point of value that they can get that would maybe help stay off chart.

Lenny (00:51:07):
I love that advice. Be helpful. Find ways to be helpful even if your core product isn't... Basically go above and beyond what you're already doing as a software product and find ways to help your companies be more successful. Feels like there's just a ton of nuggets you just shared. I want to make sure we also get to this other topic that I think is also going to have a lot of great nuggets, which is around just advice for closing deals in this time. You touched on a couple of these, warm intros, a couple things. Anything else you could share of just ways to increase the rate at which you close deals during this wild time in the market?

Sahil Mansuri (00:51:40):
This is a good segue because it'll bridge us back to where you just came from and hopefully move us forward, which is warm intros. So if cold outreach is going to be less effective, then what increases in efficacy in this time is, again, warm intros. So one thing you got to remember as a more general statement is that companies either grow or they die. There are no middle. There's no, "Oh, we're going to cut burn and just try to survive the winter long enough so that..." That doesn't work, right? Because employees get demoralized, investors lose faith, the days become long and the nights become longer and eventually you just run out of energy as a business. 

(00:52:20):
I think startups in particular are effectively energy driven. The more energy, the more belief, the more momentum that you have, the more tailwinds you have, the more things grow and feel possible. But of course if you look at the odds empirically, no startup should never begin because the odds are you're going to fail. That failure meets you in the eye over and over again as you're shrinking the size of your team, as you're shrinking the size of your budget, as you're doing fewer things and you're taking things away. 

(00:52:50):
So I don't really believe in this like, oh, we are just going to survive mentality. I think you have to adjust, of course. I think you have to be a realist. I'm not suggesting that you be blind to reality. I'm just suggesting you also have to keep the energy going. So what I mean by keeping the energy going is to say, "Okay, let's get..." So here's a couple ideas. First is let's cut a bunch of stuff but keep some money that we're going to invest in doing an in-person customer event. Okay, why do I think that's a good idea? 

(00:53:21):
I think it's a good idea because, first of all, we've all been stuck in our houses for a couple years and so when we get a chance to go on a trip for free somewhere, we tend to say yes. That's nice. Secondly, I think that you could be strategic and maybe have the trip be for customers only and in February or something. So maybe you survive the budget cuts this year because people are like, "Well, I got this great trip and I really don't want to miss it. Is there a way we can just keep this tool on?" You might think, "Oh, well, are you bribing customers or whatever?" 

(00:53:52):
I mean, it's just psychology. I think you have to use psychology to your advantage. I would do a big customer event in February, invite all my current customers and say, "Hey, as long as you're still a customer as of Feb 10, 2023, you're invited to this all paid trip to Napa to go drink a bunch of wine for a week." I bet that would probably meaningfully change your churn rate. Yeah, it's not going to change everything but it'll change something. I bet it would. Because at the end of the day, people are people. Sales is done by people. It's a belly to belly human sport. It's not just lines of code on a piece of paper.

(00:54:26):
You got to talk to another human, which is what makes it hard and unscalable and more of an art than a science. But also makes it really fun because it just plays by different rules, a different set of rules than many other things do. Recruiting being the other thing that is this. So in-person customer event. The other reason why I like in-person customer events is because they're a perfect opportunity for you to get new deals done. So how does that work? Does that mean I also invite prospects to the event?

(00:54:53):
No, actually I wouldn't do that. So I think a lot of companies do this where they'll invite customers and prospects to the same event. They're like, "Oh, commingle and sell each other." Not the smartest way to do it. You want only customers in the event and you want to use that again to share thought leadership and such. But then, during all the happy hours and the lunches and the late evenings and whatnot where you start to say, "Hey look, in this market you're finding value in our product. Who are one or two other folks that you know in the same position as yourself that might also find value? Who do you know that has the same problem? Who do you know that's going through this? Who do you know that might benefit from this research paper, et cetera?"

(00:55:30):
You just start collecting a bunch of warm interest. But then you don't just stop at getting the name because a lot of teams stop here. They'll basically get the name and then they'll be like, "Okay, got the name. Now I'm done." Actually not the right way to do it. You get the name and you say, "Great, can you make me an e-intro? Actually even better. Can you connect me over text?" So one tip that I have for all founders, all sales leaders, everyone out there, stop using email. Email is where deals go to die. Text message is where deals get done. 

(00:56:03):
So this notion that I'm going to e-intro you over email and that's how we connect is just far worse than the thing that I would really recommend, which I do all the time. We have a Webflow as a customer. I love Webflow. I know their sales leadership. We try to do a really good job for them. Anytime that their sales leader mentions a company that might be needing to hire or whatnot, my only response is, "Great, connect me over text." Then I get the text intro with the person. 

(00:56:31):
Here's the other fun part. I don't take the introer off the thread. So the other thing we tend to do is we CC the person who responded, but in text you don't need to do that. You can keep the person on a little bit and it holds the person's feet to the fire to actually show up for the meeting. Again, it's these little things, right? 2% here, 3% here. This is how you win in this economy. You got to do all the things right. So you keep the person on the thread long enough so that you've actually built that relationship for the first call, obviously not forever. But in the first 10, 20 messages, I'd keep the person on.

(00:57:06):
That allows you to ensure that the person goes to you, which happens a lot, I'm sure you know. You get an intro and the person never responds or they cancel on you. You can't get back on their calendar. You stay with them. This happened recently where I got introed from one sales leader to another and that sales leader basically then had a family or legit situation but then got busy and was like, "I'm not taking this thing." But I just kept pinging into that group every week or two for actually nine weeks. Then by two and a half months later, the person finally is like, "I'm so sorry, et cetera." Only after my original contact was like, "Yo, you're making me look bad here."

(00:57:45):
So that pressure is what forced... Then we got them as a customer and now things are good. So it just takes all that. It takes those little things. You got to build a bridge from your current customer base to future customers and parlay the goodwill, relationship, et cetera that you've earned in serving your current customers to get new ones. Because otherwise, I don't think it's just relying on a bunch of SDRs and cold emails and stuff is going to get you through the next six to 12 months.

Lenny (00:58:14):
I love that tip. Feel like there's probably more nuggets. I'm going to keep fishing in this well of tactical advice for closing deals. Is there anything else that you've found? I love that texting tip. I feel like I've been on the end of that one. It works great. So yeah.

Sahil Mansuri (00:58:30):
From me. Yeah, that's right. That's right. For example, I didn't have your phone number and I told my wife, "Make sure you take a selfie with Lenny and then send a text message to the three of us on one grad so that I know how to get a hold of Lenny in case he calls.".

Lenny (00:58:44):
Here we are now.

Sahil Mansuri (00:58:45):
Here we are now. That's right. But the point is sales when done well doesn't feel weird, okay? If it ever feels weird, you're a bad salesperson, right? I've been selling now for 14 years. I've sold literally hundreds, millions of dollars worth of deals. I could pretty much call any customer I've ever sold to and have a conversation with them and it would say, "How's it going?" Whatever. That's because I put a tremendous amount of energy into investing and building a real friendship, not relationship, not business, friendship with the people that I sell to.

(00:59:22):
So I'll tell you a couple of sales stories and maybe from that we can mine the nuggets that you're fishing for. I will tell you about how I sold to Facebook when I was at Glassdoor. This is a fun story. So Facebook was the Moby Dick of Glassdoor. I think the first time they tried to sell to them was end of 2008 or something like that. Facebook was one of those accounts that obviously should be on Glassdoor because the way Glassdoor's product worked is that the more people that came to your company page on Glassdoor, the more value there was for you as a recruiting firm to put branding and to put jobs and whatnot. 

(01:00:01):
Facebook was the most visited page on Glassdoor. So by virtue of that, it was the best account to sell to. It had gone from CEO to VP of sales to new VP of sales to rep to rep, et cetera. I finally got my hands on it Feb of 2011. The only reason I got my hands on it is because I closed Microsoft. I think I closed both Microsoft and Google at that point. But certainly at least Microsoft. Certainly at least Microsoft. Well, it's important to the story, not to brag. 

(01:00:32):
So I looked at it and I looked at who we are talking to, Lori Goler, who's the chief talent. I think she's still the head of talent there, but was the head of talent who we had pitched and every time we got the same response, "No, we are not interested in outside partnership at the time. No, we are not interested." I think she had a canned response for all vendors and it was just the same response in the CRM over and over again. So again, Einstein, right? Same thing over and over again, different result.

(01:00:58):
So I tried something different and I sat there and I went through every single review that had been written about Facebook on Glassdoor. First I had it pulled by a data scientist and did a word cloud and did a bunch of analytics on what was being discussed there. Pulled salary ranges, pulled salary ranges for Google and Amazon and Microsoft. So Glassdoor had three types of information. They had the review of the company, they had the outlook of the company and then they had the review of the CEO. 

(01:01:28):
So it was like, "Do you approve of Mark's handling the company? Yes or no?" Mark had I think 96% approval rate. He was one of the highest rated CEOs on Glassdoor at the time. I have no idea what it is today, but that's what it was then. So I basically called every review, all the salaries and then Mark's approval rating, and turned it into a nine page report that broke down how Facebook employees, specifically software engineers because that's what we're specialists at recruiting for, how software engineers at Facebook talked about working at Facebook and how it compared to how Google engineers talked about working at Google and whatnot, salary band comparisons and even reviews of Mark specifically versus the other CEOs of the other big tech companies.

(01:02:16):
Then sent an email to Sheryl Sandberg, a cold email to Sheryl Sandberg whose email address I did not have, but that I assumed had to be one of 15 things. So I think I put ssandberg@facebook.com in the two line and then in the BCC line put every variant I could think of, everything. I mean everything I could think of I put, underscores and dots and first name and last name and abbreviations and et cetera. The title of the email was Mark's approval rating on Glassdoor. 

(01:02:54):
I was like, "Hey Sheryl. I'm from Glassdoor. I was doing research on Facebook and comparing it to all the other big tech companies. I personally work with Microsoft. So I have a little bit of insight in this. Here's what your employees think about you. Here's what Mark's approval rating looks like versus others, et cetera, et cetera." This whole research report, I kind of broke out some highlights, a couple screenshots, attached the report and said, "Hey, I'd love to discuss this with you sometime."

(01:03:18):
I think I sent the email around 3 or 4PM on a Sunday. By 6PM I got a response back from Sheryl Sandberg CC'ing elt@fb.com or something like that, which I later found was executiveleadershipteam@facebook.com saying, "Hi Sahil, this is super interesting. We'd love to meet with you tomorrow. Are you available to come to Facebook HQ at 10AM.' So at the time I was 22, 23 years old or something like that. It was pretty new to Glassdoor anyway. So then of course I said yes. I sent the email to the CEO. He was like, "Do you want me to come and whatever?" I just said, "No, I'll handle it." I brought a customer success person and the two of us went.

(01:04:02):
We actually got to meet first with Sheryl and then I got to go to the fishbowl. I don't know if you know this story, but Mark had a famous office that was all glass in the middle so that he really played [inaudible 01:04:15] or whatever so his known as the fishbowl. So I got to go to the fishbowl. I met Mark Zuckerberg himself. As it turns out that report and that rating got added to their weekly packet because Mark wanted to know on a weekly basis how his rating and how the employees view of Facebook was, how it was changing week over week and what people were writing, et cetera, and it became a thing. 

(01:04:43):
I don't know if it's still a thing today, I have no idea. But I got to have this in depth strategic conversation with the executive leaders of Facebook around their reputation, what their employees thought, their pay bands, their interview questions, leadership, guidings, shared the word cloud, sentiment analysis, et cetera. Needless to say, of course, we closed a massive deal with them and whatnot. But that's the kind of shit it takes in order to close deals, right?

(01:05:12):
So this idea that I'm going to go onto my CRM system and fire up a hundred cold emails and I'm going to close business, that works when capital is cheap and everyone's buying everything and every rep hits quota and every company's growing, et cetera. That shit does not work when you are in tough times and desperate measures, you got to figure out a way to build your business. So what I would say is you got to really over, over, over index in the whole I'm going to teach you something, right? 

(01:05:41):
It's not that I'm going to give you value because that's a really weird thing to say and it's not like my product's going to solve a problem for you because, frankly, I don't know if you know what my problems are. But I think that one thing I would advise is how can I do something that will make this worth your time in a way that it isn't about buying my software or putting job ads on my site. So that's how Facebook became a customer of Glassdoor.

Lenny (01:06:06):
That is an insane story. I feel like those are moments that salespeople live for. How did you feel once you got that email that day? Were you just freaking nervous? Were you jumping up and down [inaudible 01:06:15] might work?

Sahil Mansuri (01:06:16):
I love to play chess. It's my favorite game. The reason I love chess is because I love to think a few moves ahead. I expected to get that email back. I knew when I sent the email that this was going to work. I was like, "There's no way this won't work." The only way it wouldn't have worked is if she never saw it. So if she sees this, she's going to respond because it would be crazy for her not to. The information on here was so good. So I felt a sense of satisfaction that I had played the game right in a way that no one else that my company had. No one else understood the psyche of the buyer. 

(01:06:49):
So to me, sales is I don't care about the commission. I've never cared about the money. I think this is true for most great salespeople. I think this is actually true for most people who are great at something is that they don't do it for the money. They don't do it for even necessarily the trophies or whatever. They do it because they love it. Winning, it's contagious, it's addictive and it's rewarding. Closing Facebook was a blast because I really got a chance to flex into something that I take a lot of pride in, which is being able to deeply understand my customers where they sit and how I can be not a sales rep, but someone who actually changes your perspective and how to do your job. That's what I live for.

(01:07:36):
So I think that's what you have to do in order to be a great salesperson is I think you have to be willing to go beyond just the, oh, I want to hit my quota or whatever. If you're a founder and you're trying to sell in this market, it's like how do I get my product in the hands of customers? You got to go beyond. How do I change the way you operate as a business? How do I do something that is transformative? That Glassdoor rating literally got added to the ELT report that went out every single week. That's the part of the story I'm proud of. 

Lenny (01:08:09):
You just mentioned that you don't do sales, that you're not a salesperson technically anymore. You run this company. Do you miss that job being a full-time salesperson?

Sahil Mansuri (01:08:19):
I think CEOs are full-time salespeople. I mean, think about the job of a CEO, right? Let's start from the infancy, right? Let's start from starting a company from scratch. First thing you got to do if you want to start a company is you have to convince yourself to do it. You got to sell yourself on the fact that you want to do this. This is where most people fail actually. They can't sell themselves. They're not able to convince themselves that they should take this leap. They don't believe in themselves enough to do it. 

(01:08:45):
So first you got to be good enough to sell yourself. Maybe that's delusional. I don't really know how to coin that, but let's just say sell yourself. You got to then sell other more talented people than yourself to join you at a time at which you have no money, often no idea, no traction, nothing. They're typically making a lot of money at a well paid... If you hire great founders, they have a choice somewhere to work and  you got to convince them to believe in you, believe in your idea, believe in the future that can be. This is the second place where most people fail. 

(01:09:15):
Assuming you do those two things, you still got to do one more thing, which is you got to actually sell an investor to give you capital based on typically virtually nothing or maybe very little attraction. Then you have to go and convince your initial customers to believe in you. Because sure as heck no startups product is great. Everyone wants to be like, "Oh we're going to go change the world." But you're not changing the world today, right? You've got 1/100th of the feature set of any of your competitors and all you have is this dream and this energy and this belief and somebody who's willing to take a bet on you. You got to get someone to be willing to bet on you. That's sales. 

(01:09:51):
Then if you do all that, then maybe you need to get some press. So now you got to convince a reporter to write about you and you got to be able to do that. Then maybe you need to hire some more people. So you got to convince some candidates to come work for you. I mean, spend my whole day selling. All I do is sales. All any founder does is sales. It's kind of like venture. People misunderstand this. VCs are salespeople. 100% of VC is a salesperson because they're selling LPs to give them money and they're selling CEOs to take their money in exchange for equity. That's the job of a VC. 

(01:10:27):
All the analytics, all the data and the this and the that, those are just updating their CRM. The core function of a VC is to sell. The core function of a CEO is to be a great salesperson. Like any great salesperson, you have to balance cynicism with optimism. Great salespeople don't have what I call happy ears. This is a problem that people misunderstand. People think that being a great salesperson is being ever the optimist. That's actually not the case because then you'll waste your time on a bunch of deals that'll never close. Great salespeople are extremely pessimistic internally and are great at being able to then still be optimistic externally.

(01:11:09):
Where they're actually trying to disqualify you. They're looking for signals that you're not going to buy and weeding those out, while still at the same time positively spinning you and selling you. That ability to juxtapose is what diverges good from great. Because good salespeople will get misled by customers who tell them they want to buy, but if you would really press harder, you'd understand that they can't or won't or whatever. So you waste your time on a bunch of companies that never buy versus great salespeople know how to prioritize and spend their time properly.

(01:11:39):
The same applies in venture. If you are a CEO who's fundraising, I cannot tell you, honestly Lenny, I can't tell you how many other CEOs I know get constantly misled by VCs where the VC says one or two good things and they're like, "Oh, they're definitely going to invest." As opposed to giving that VC every out to not continue the conversation. If they still are willing to talk to you after that, then that they're for real. I think that being a CEO and being a salesperson are the same job. Different forms of it, of course, different audiences, different products, et cetera. But ultimately they're the same thing. So no, I don't miss it. I do it every single day and I love doing it. I'm learning more and more every day from the failures and shortcomings I have.

Lenny (01:12:36):
It's very clear that you love doing it. It's so interesting just to watch the energy when you talk about sales. I rarely meet folks that do sales. So it's really fun to dive into all this stuff. We promised folks five topics, you've gone through four. The last one I wanted to touch on, and you've already talked a bit about this and maybe there's just a quick tidbit to add here is around just how important growth continues to be for companies at this stage. It's easy to be like, "No, the markets are tough. People are going to give us a little bit of a leeway because no one's going to be able to grow." Your point is it's still incredibly important. Is there something you want to add there before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Sahil Mansuri (01:13:13):
I guess there's just one last thing, which is innovation is often put to the side. People just try to do the things that everyone else is doing. So I'll tell you something that we did at Bravado as an example of this. So we run a recruiting marketplace and competing with LinkedIn and AngelList and hired and all the rest of it. Like all those companies, we have seen a massive slowdown in our business. Unlike those companies, we didn't take that as kind of the end of the road for growth for now. But instead said, "Okay, so let me put myself back in the perspective of my buyer, my customer who are often founders and CROs and CFOs."

(01:13:53):
Those are the people that tend to buy from Bravado because they're the people who care the most about growing revenue. I can't hire anymore full-time salespeople because the market is tough right now and I can't increase my burn or what, but I still want to get new customers. It's just I can't afford to hire full-time people. In fact, I might be forced to lay off my team. What do I do? We kind of just sat there with a think whiteboard and just said, "All right, let's put ourselves in this situation. What would you do?"

(01:14:22):
One of the things that I think would be really interesting is I'm actually willing to pay money to acquire customers. I just can't take the risk that I hire someone and they won't bring me customer. What if we created a 100% commission only sales role? It doesn't exist today in SaaS. It does exist in other places, it just doesn't exist in SaaS really. But what if we created a way for sales reps who can't find a full-time job because the market is slow and companies who can't hire a full-time sales rep but still want customers to work together on a commission only basis.

(01:14:57):
Now a year ago, this product would not have worked, right? Because the supply-demand equilibrium was so tilted where every company needed great sales talent and every sales rep was getting multiple offers. So in that world, this product makes no sense. But in a world in which you have far more sales reps who are looking for work and far fewer companies who are hiring, maybe we can create a new model of sales. 

(01:15:22):
If Airbnb and Uber grew dramatically during the pandemic and actually are somewhat counter cyclical businesses, because if you can't find a full-time job then you find gig work, what would we be able to do for our community that instead of putting them in a different field, lets them use the skills, the network and the expertise they already have in order to do the thing they want to do, but be able to do it in a down market as well. So we launched something called Bravado Flex, which is a way for companies and candidates to work together in a non full-time employment way. 

(01:15:57):
That can mean contract hire, it can mean a hundred percent commission, it can mean fractional work, it can mean small stipend plus milestone base. There's a bunch of different ways at work. Overnight, we went from having a massive slowdown to our business to one of the best months that we've ever had in company history, which was last month, and this month will be even better than that. So while our full-time recruiting business slows, our fractional business grows.

(01:16:25):
So I use that as an example of the type of innovation that companies should be thinking of. As well as if you are a company that is thinking of increasing revenue but doesn't have enough levers to pull, maybe this is one that you might want to explore. But I think it comes back down to that fundamental staring at the whiteboard being like, "If I'm a customer and I'm in this world, what can we do today to change the rules of the game?" Because sometimes the rules of the game are stacked against you. As a recruiting business, the rules to the game were now stacked against us. 

(01:17:00):
No one's got money. People don't want to hire. There's hiring freezes, et cetera. There's more candidates in the market than ever before. Companies are going to be less and less likely to want to pay us to recruit for them. There's nothing I can do about that. I mean, I can stick my head out the window and scream and cry and complain, but that ain't going to get me anywhere either. So what I need to do is change the rules of the game and start to think about the problem differently.

(01:17:23):
I think that not enough founders do that. They just kind of bash their heads against the wall with the same kind of preconceived notions of what success may or may not look like. So I would really advise, and I'll give you some examples of where this goes beyond Bravado Flex, but change your pricing strategy. Now, let's say that you sell a product and it's $12,000 per year. Try charging a thousand dollars a month and going month to month. Try charging 20 bucks a day and going day by day. Then you might be like, "Well, wait a minute. That just changes to every..." But you have to adapt, right? 

(01:17:51):
If your old model is not going to work, it's asinine to just sit there and then try to make minor changes like, "Oh, instead of 12 we'll reduce price to 10 or something." People try to optimize their way out of problems. You can't optimize your way out of a problem. You got to completely change the rules of the game. In doing so, you suddenly will learn something new. Bravado Flex may not work forever. Who knows? But maybe, just maybe, as we've been doing this, we've realized that there's actually a lot of sales reps that prefer this because they can do flex for multiple companies. 

(01:18:26):
So all of a sudden we learn something really new, which is that our audience are the same candidates that we're replacing to full-time jobs, are actually in some cases preferring doing this fractional work. Because now they don't need to go to all the meetings and they don't need to update Salesforce. They don't need to do all the boring shit that sales reps don't like to do. Instead, they can just work for three companies, use the existing network they have, get meetings set up for all of them, pitch the best product to the right customer, and all of a sudden they feel like instead of having to pitch the one hammer that you need to use for every... They have a wide tool set that they can bring to their customers.

(01:19:01):
All of a sudden companies are like, "Well, wait a minute, this is actually pretty cool because now instead of just hiring one person at a time and training them, I can hire 10 people at a time and I can have multiple kind of fish in..." So we just changed the rules of the game around sales hiring as a market. I think that's the sort of innovation that you have to bring to the market if you want to survive in the downturn, which you can't just sit there and just try to do the same stuff over and over and over again. You got to really be willing to break all preconceived notions of what success looks like, innovate something new and then take bigger swings I guess is the thing I would say.

Lenny (01:19:38):
That's a very empowering way to close out our chat. But first, we reached the very exciting lightning round. I'm going to ask you five questions. I'll go through them pretty fast. Whatever comes to mind, fire it away. Does that sound good?

Sahil Mansuri (01:19:53):
That sounds great.

Lenny (01:19:54):
What are some books that you recommend to other people, like two or three, maybe even one book that you most recommend to other people?

Sahil Mansuri (01:20:01):
There's one book that I think every person should read. It's called Stumbling Upon Happiness.

Lenny (01:20:05):
Yeah, Dan Gilbert I think is the author.

Sahil Mansuri (01:20:07):
Yeah, that's right. That's right. It's a really fun book. A lot of interesting studies and readings. I think especially if you're a founder or an executive who wants to learn how to sell and wants to understand how your buyers make decisions, I think it's really impactful and teaches you a new way to think about sales using psychology.

Lenny (01:20:24):
Great pick. Second question. Favorite other podcast that you like to listen to?

Sahil Mansuri (01:20:29):
There's actually only two other podcasts I listen to, so it's a small choice. I listen to the All In podcast because I love the fact that they have really good show notes so I can just jump to the section that I want to hear them talk about instead of listening to like-

Lenny (01:20:42):
We got those show notes here too.

Sahil Mansuri (01:20:43):
That's right. I'm excited for that as well. Of course, I listen to yours, but I figured that was too on the nose.

Lenny (01:20:48):
It's off limits.

Sahil Mansuri (01:20:50):
On the nose, yeah. Then the other one is the How I Built This.

Lenny (01:20:54):
Great choices. What's a recent favorite movie or a TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Sahil Mansuri (01:20:59):
I don't watch a lot of TV or movies. but I would say that a strong exception to that is I really like The Blacklist, if you've seen that show. But it's a pretty good one. James Spader. Yeah, I really love James Spader. I find him to be someone I really, really like. I'm also a big fan of Aaron Sorkin so I liked The newsroom a lot and then West Wing and whatnot. I think the thing is I really nerdy stuff like Jeopardy and Frasier. I never liked Friends. I think it's just the dork in me that I like to watch nerdy stuff.

Lenny (01:21:34):
Final question, what are five SaaS products that you find incredibly useful at your company, especially new ones? But if not, anything that are just I love these products.

Sahil Mansuri (01:21:45):
I'm a huge Luddite because my favorite tools to use are pen and paper. I like to write by hand. I like to write on a whiteboard. I enjoy the tactical part of that. I've tried to use the reMarkable tablet and other stuff like that, but I don't get the same pleasure of writing on actual pen and paper. That's my favorite. I mean, in terms of tools that we use it at Bravado that are hugely impactful, I mean, Slack is the central OS of our business as I'm sure it's for many others. Obviously we use Zoom a lot to meet and that's a core one. 

(01:22:17):
Noshell operates everything for us as well. So I don't think I'm saying anything that that's exciting here. There's a product called Grain that I really like that I think is really cool. Grain allows you to make clips of Zoom meetings and send them out. The reason I really like that is because if I have a customer call, if I have a user interview or a VC call or whatnot, I can take a snippet of something that someone said and let other people hear it from their words. I think that's really powerful and something that I really enjoy.

Lenny (01:22:47):
Great.

Sahil Mansuri (01:22:47):
Maybe that one.

Lenny (01:22:48):
Great. Love it. Sahil, this was amazing. I feel like I want to be a salesperson now. You infected me, but I still would be really bad at it. But there's a lot of nuggets in this episode that would make me less bad. So thank you for that. 

Sahil Mansuri (01:23:02):
I'm going to jump in. You've said that once. you've said that once to me before and I can't let you end on that note because it's not fair because Lenny, you are a salesperson and you are one of the best that I have met. The reason why that's true is because you have built a business from the ground up. I didn't know who the heck you were a couple years ago now. Maybe you had a big brand more than a couple years ago too, and I was just the idiot. But everybody I know now knows and respects you. The reason for that is because, I mean, I think you have really deep knowledge on product. I think there's probably other people that have really deep knowledge on product too.

Lenny (01:23:02):
Many, many more.

Sahil Mansuri (01:23:41):
But you are the best at marketing that and turning that into... You got distribution around it. You've given so much to the world of product and been kind of a bright light that so many people have gravitated around and such so that when you launch Lenny's Talent Collective or Lenny's whatever podcast or whatever's the latest Lenny thing, in fact I remember you did a poll to try to figure out what should be the name of this podcast and ultimately the thing that one was Lenny podcast I think. So I think that is the core of sales. 

(01:24:15):
I want to go back to the first principle, which is that sales when done well does not feel salesy. Sales when done well is a delightful experience. People love paying you money. People love consuming your content because it's good. That's what makes a great salesperson. Facebook didn't regret taking that meeting with me. Facebook didn't regret signing that contract. They enjoyed it, they liked it, they were happy for it and it felt delightful to them and that's how sales should feel. 

(01:24:47):
So this notion that the way you're good at sales is because you're super extroverted and pushy and willing to put yourself out there and whatever is a misguided notion. You are the future of sales. If every salesperson gave a ton of value, played the long game, nurtured their community and created products and services based on the feedback from their customers, the world would be such a better place. So don't sell yourself short, my friend. I think you are a phenomenal salesperson.

Lenny (01:25:16):
Damn. What a way to end it. I so appreciate that. I'm going to deflect from this epic compliment and move on to closing this out, but I really appreciate that. Where can folks find you online if they want to learn more about you, Bravado and how can folks be useful to you?

Sahil Mansuri (01:25:32):
First of all, you can just email me. I'm just sahil@bravado.co. I love responding to emails and meeting people, so I'm always down for that. Secondly, you can find me on LinkedIn where I regularly post content around sales and revenue and hitting targets and all that. Then lastly, if you want to learn more about Bravado, it's just bravado.co. Sign up and check it out. If you like something, let me know. If you don't like it, then please let me know so we can make it better.

Lenny (01:25:59):
Amazing. Sahil, thank you again for being here, for sharing all your wisdom with us.

Sahil Mansuri (01:26:04):
Thank you. Thanks for having me.

Lenny (01:26:06):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

