Ada Chen Rekhi (00:00:00):
It's a terrible outcome to wake up one day and be late career and feel trapped because you have a certain lifestyle or a certain expectations of the people around you that you have to go work this job, but then you look at yourself in the mirror and you're not happy going in there. I think that's a terrible trap that we should all try to avoid as we navigate our career paths and find the thing that's most optimal for us. Which is usually a mix of career success, but also meaningfulness and alignment in the work that we're doing with our values.

Lenny (00:00:36):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast, where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard [inaudible 00:00:42] experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Ada Chen Rekhi. Ada is an executive coach and also the co-founder of a product called Notejoy. In her coaching practice, she focuses on helping founders scale themselves. Before starting her company, she was senior vice president of marketing at SurveyMonkey. Before that, she started a contact management startup that was acquired by LinkedIn where she ended up leading LinkedIn's marketing efforts for their growth team. Two fun facts about Ada. One, she started her current company with her husband, which we chat about whether that's a good idea or not. Also, her brother is Andrew Chen of a16z fame. In our conversation, it explains how to make better decisions with a framework she calls Curiosity Loops.

(00:01:21):
We do a live exercise around my own personal values. She shares a bunch of advice on how to intentionally and practically build your early career path. How to thrive as a woman in Silicon Valley, when to get a coach and what you can do on your own without one and a ton more. Enjoy this episode with Ada Chen Rekhi after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:01:40):
This episode is brought to you by Sprig. Next generation product teams like, Robinhood, Notion and Loom rely on Sprig to uncover blind spots in their product development process. Sprig let's product teams collect user insights fast, allowing you to better understand why users take certain actions and how they feel about the experience. One of the things I love most about Sprig is that they're all about getting product teams the specific insights they need in the timeframe that they need it.

(00:02:07):
As of today's, Sprig is making that even easier with the new and improved templates library. On this podcast, you've heard a lot about how useful templates are for companies as they grow. Sprig partnered with some of the top product teams and product thinkers to build proven playbooks, specifically to solve the biggest challenges facing product teams today from how to optimize an existing feature to improving a conversion flow to troubleshooting drop off. Sprig helps you build better products. Sprig now has a library of more than 85 templates that you can use to get started collecting user insights quickly right in your app. I especially love that Sprig builds templates specifically for product teams, and I was really excited when they ask me to create a template around product sense.

(00:02:47):
One of the questions they get most is how to develop your product sense. So I decided to build a playbook along with Sprig on how to do that based on my experience at Airbnb and from what I've learned interviewing top product folks like, Jules Walter who wrote a whole guest post on how to build your product sense. Explore my product sense playbook and the entire Sprig templates library and build better products faster. Check it out today at sprig.com/templates. That's S-P-R-I-G.com/templates. Ada, welcome to the podcast.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:03:20):
Thanks. I'm excited to be here.

Lenny (00:03:22):
So I've heard such great things about you from a lot of people, including a bunch of guests that have been on the podcast. And you also have this really great event diagram of maybe an ideal guest for the podcast. You've done growth. You've done products. You've started a company. You're also an executive coach to founders. So there's a variety of topics I'm excited to begin too. So thanks again for being here.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:03:22):
Yeah, I'm excited to be here.

Lenny (00:03:45):
An interesting thing that I'll start with is that when we were chatting about what to focus on in our conversation, where you're emailing about this, and you did something that I thought was really interesting. You ran something called a Curiosity Loop where you pinged a bunch of your friends and asked them for input in this really structured way. So I thought I'd start there. Could you just share what this process is, so that we can learn how to maybe do it ourselves, this idea of a curiosity loop?

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:04:08):
A curiosity loop is essentially going to a whole bunch of people. In this case, I sent out an email very quickly to about 10 or 11 people and asking them, "Hey, here are nine topics for Lenny's Podcast. What are two or three of the topics that resonate with you and why?" And I got back such an incredible amount of information for about 20 minutes of work. I don't normally do this, but I actually showed you some of the anonymized feedback from people really just talking about what resonated and what didn't. So I came out of it just so much smarter, and curiosity loops are my method of doing so.

Lenny (00:04:42):
Often, people ask friends for advice on just like, "Hey, what should I do here? What can I maybe talk about on this podcast?" Your approach had a lot of structure to it. So maybe two questions just like, what is the actual structure to this concept? And then two, just people... You can often ask friends for advice, but you also don't want to over bug them with questions. How do you think about just not over asking everyone questions all the time, but all decisions you want to make? So I guess the question is, when do you use this versus just not?

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:05:12):
I think that there are heavyweight and lightweight ways to use this. So the heavyweight way was what I just exemplified by saying, I sent an email and I made a doc. And on the other side, I had all of this really interesting and rich data. The lightweight way to do this is really just make it your ongoing theme of what you're curious about as you interact with people. So maybe it's this thing where every single day as you talk to people, if you have a social topic, you might just bring up the same question over and over again and start looking for are there any differences or surprises in what people are telling you? One of the big reasons why I think curiosity loops are really useful is that it really fights the fact that there's a lot of bad advice out there.

(00:05:54):
And it's not bad because it's not well-intentioned, but it's bad because it's not contextual. So when someone tells you to quit your job and chase your dreams, or they tell you to sit tight and grind through and build some experience before you go off and go start the company that you've always been thinking about starting, which piece of advice do you actually take? Right? A lot of it depends on your situation, what you're considering, what skills and experience you actually have, and curiosity loops actually are this way of really thinking about how do you make your advice contextual. So I'll break it down a bit in terms of how I think about structuring it. So the first piece of a curiosity loop is really just thinking about asking a good question. In the time when I was working at SurveyMonkey in the past, I had this opportunity to spend a lot of time with the survey researchers, and we really talked a lot about what makes a question good.

(00:06:44):
So in this case, a question's good if it's specific, if it solicits rationale, and it's not biased. You don't want to start a question with, here's what I think because people have this tendency to want to please you or to agree with you. So a good example... Well, let me start with a bad example of a question. A bad example of a question is, what should I do with my career next? It's just such a poorly formed question because it's really vague, it's not specific. It puts a lot of cognitive load on other people, and the output that you're going to get from it is probably going to be similarly bad. Garbage in, garbage out. A better example of a question might be something like, "Hey, you know me. I'm a marketer. I've been thinking about doing this webdev thing. So my plan is to quit my job, do a webdev bootcamp and then go find a job elsewhere. Do you think that's a good idea?"

(00:07:45):
There's just so much rich data to actually explore with that. First, are you suited to being a developer? Are webdev boot camps effective? What's the state of the economy in the hiring market right now for junior web developers? And that's an example of maybe a question that's a little bit more specific and gives people something to anchor on. So that's the first piece. The next piece is really around how do you curate who you ask? I think there are two dimensions of this. The first one is the obvious one, which is a subject matter expert who really knows something about the topic at hand. So maybe a webdev themselves, for my example question. Another one, and this dimension I think is really important, is someone who knows you really well and can provide insight on how well does that work for you. And then after that, you really want to ask the question. And this touches on what you said about how do you make it really lightweight?

(00:08:41):
Ask the question in a way that really gets you a useful constructive answer, but doesn't put too much weight on people. So what I usually like to do is just make it very lightweight. So in your case, I said, "Here are nine topics. Can you pick your top two and tell me why you like them?" Some people went above and beyond and scrolled through and gave me feedback on every single topic. Some of them just said, "Here are my top two, and here's one I think you should avoid." I wanted to design it in a way where if you're a busy founder, you're a busy product person, which is the list that I chose for this curiosity loop, you would be able to sit down on your couch at the end of the night, read this interesting email and tap out a quick reply and give me that answer. Because the risk that you're running is either you're getting poor answers or you're getting a really low response rate because you've given them way too much cognitive load in terms of answering it.

(00:09:35):
And then finally, to close the loop, I think a big piece of it is processing that information and then thanking them for it. So a big misconception that people have when they're really getting into this work of asking for advice or input from other people in the community is often that it's really one-sided. I'm asking you for help and you're getting nothing out of it. The reminder that I would have for all of you is that it feels really good to help someone. It feels really good to be heard and give input. And a big piece of that is, if someone comes to you and they said, "You gave me this advice, it changed my life. Maybe it's not at that level, but it really affected my decision and here's how it turned out. Thank you so much." That feels so good, especially if you only spent a few minutes giving them the input that enabled them to make a better decision.

Lenny (00:10:21):
So to summarize, I wrote these pieces down. The concept broadly is if you want advice on a decision you're trying to make, pick some friends and this is... I guess I'll go through the four things you just mentioned. And part two is actually pick the right friends. But one is just, come up with a question that's specific. As in just like, what should I do with my life? But more, should I take the specific role at the specific company? Figure out the people that know you well and maybe have some context on this decision. How many people do you usually email for this sort of thing? What's a number?

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:10:55):
I would try to optimize for getting at least three or four responses. It just depends on the nature of the loop. And then you think about what is your response rate. So if you're emailing really busy people that you don't know very well, maybe you would assume that you only get half of people to respond. If you're emailing people really well and it's really lightweight like, yes or no, and here's why, then you might just send out a handful.

Lenny (00:11:22):
Okay, awesome. So it's five to 10 people, broadly sounds like. Oh yeah, you want to make it really quick and easy. So it's like, here's 10 things, which of these two do you think I should focus on? So it's a quick ask as something you recommend, and then just thank them for it after you finish. Is that broadly the approach?

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:11:39):
Yep, that's the approach. One thing I want to note is that it's actually really useful for personal things as well. So we framed it in this professional context of, I'm trying to change a job. But one example that I have is when we had our daughter who's now three years old, one of the debates that my partner and I were having was how do we actually set up our estate planning in terms of if, God forbids, something happened to both of us. How should she inherit the state? And my partner was basically saying, "18 years old, she gets everything fully unlocked." I was saying, "Oh, well maybe 25." And we're at this impasse. And we actually just started to tell each other, why don't we, in our day-to-day conversations with folks that we trust in our family, people that we think are smart, that have kids ask people what their perspective is on it.

(00:12:28):
One thing was really telling, no one out of everyone we asked said 18. So that really dragged my partner up. And then the other thing that was really interesting was that we learned a little bit about executive function and the research around it. So executive function, which is your ability to make decisions and plans and be thoughtful peaks at the age of 30, and it's all downhill from there. So bad news for people like me that are older.

Lenny (00:12:54):
And then I'm getting [inaudible 00:12:54] or game over.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:12:55):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny (00:12:55):
Just like I'm-

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:12:57):
But if you're thinking about 18, you are so far from your peak. So it dragged us both up in terms of what our set point was to make a decision like that. But we wouldn't have figured that out without a curiosity loop because it's too much work to dig through papers or research or whatever else to try to come to a good decision on it.

Lenny (00:13:14):
So the core lesson here is just, versus just emailing a bunch of people, asking for advice, which I imagine people often do, just what should I do here? Creating a little bit of the structure and even calling it a curiosity loop, I bet, helps people feel like they want to be a part of this and participate and help.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:13:31):
Yeah, definitely. One of the things that I always try to do is I try to explain to people in my ask, here's why I picked you. So for example, I picked you because I really trust you to be a sound source of truthful advice and give me some feedback. So I really value that. Do you mind spending a couple of minutes and just giving me some thoughts on this?

Lenny (00:13:53):
And how often are you pinging people? If you're a friend of Ada, are you getting curiosity looped every week, or how often? What's your rate limit?

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:14:02):
I usually reserve it for bigger things. So probably quarterly or anything where I'm having a big debate, and I'm feeling really indecisive.

Lenny (00:14:12):
Awesome. It also makes me think about this idea of a personal board of directors, and this feels like an asynchronous approach to that concept where instead of a call every, I don't know, quarter month with small group, it's asynchronous. Here's an ask I have-

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:14:24):
Totally. Yep. I think this is really based off of the marketing concept of customer advisory councils. So when I was working in marketing and product at a startup, one of the things we would always have is a group of our top customers on DM, basically. And if we had really interesting product conflicts, we would actually just go ping a couple of them and ask them, "Hey, we're debating this. Do you mind just giving us your quick thoughts and telling us why?" And then being able to as a marketer come back to the product conversation and say, here is the literal voice of the customer and four or five different verbatims on what people think about this really enabled me as a marketer to have a seat at the table. And the insight and the helpfulness of that was really something I wanted to bring to my personal life as well.

Lenny (00:15:07):
That's really interesting. It's basically user research for your life. User research, you're told don't do what people tell you to do. I guess it's the same thing here, where it's just like, here's advice and then you end up making the decision for your own own life.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:15:19):
Right. Right. Yes. That is the big caveat. Don't do what people tell you to do. Take it as an input and look for the hard feedback. Look for things that you strongly disagree with or are surprises to you. Because to me, I think these loops are more about looking around the corner and seeing if there's anything you missed in terms of the integrity of your decision making process.

Lenny (00:15:43):
Sweet. You said that people told you what we should not talk about. They're like, "Don't cover this." What was in that list?

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:15:50):
So I think there were two topics on the list. The first one, it was just how do you onboard and hire and bring people onto the team? And the feedback I got there was like, "There's just so many people who have done this. I'm sure you have some interesting concepts, but I personally wouldn't be that interested in hearing it. And that was really useful to me. And then the other one was actually just about being a woman in Silicon Valley and the experience of that. I actually had someone write, and you probably read this, Lenny, "No. Stay far away from this. There's no winning on this topic."

Lenny (00:16:23):
Oh, my God. Okay, let's touch on that topic rather than, it's going to be great.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:16:28):
Yeah. So let's ignore the advice?

Lenny (00:16:29):
Yeah, let's ignore it. Before we get to that, I wanted to first talk about you. You gave me some homework also ahead of this chat. And the homework was around helping me figure out values and personal values for myself. I did the exercise. So first of all, can you just maybe talk about what this exercise was, and what the goal of it is? And then I'll share what I come up with.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:16:51):
So the homework that I gave you is similar homework that I give to everyone that I work with in coaching, and it's this values exercise. It's this 10 to 15 minute exercise where you're presented with a list of words that might encompass potential values. It's pretty lightweight. You just go down the list, and you pick out all the words that resonate with you, and then we filter them down into groups of values, and then we filter them down into a stack rank and a list. And the output on the end is basically three to five sentences that cover what are the values stack rank that are important to you right now in your personal and professional life? And what I really like is, it's this internal scorecard of what really matters to you in your decision making process as opposed to the external scorecard of status, money, wealth, how other people perceive you, that often we feel really pressured by. So it's this great way to look back and see how well do decisions, or how well do my situations in life align with my values?

Lenny (00:17:53):
Sweet. And what I liked about it is, if someone were to be like, "Hey, come up with your values." I'd be like, "Oh, my God. I'm just sitting here thinking about words and concepts." And it was really helpful because it was basically multiple choice. Here's all the options across tons of categories, just keep picking and then helps you whittle them down. I ended up with six. I feel like that's one too many. Actually, I added a bonus one because it's just one that I really like. But should I read through what I came up with?

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:18:18):
Yeah, that sounds great.

Lenny (00:18:19):
So here's what my values, I guess. Choose adventure, stay optimistic, treat others you want to be treated. Classic. Keep getting better, act generously. And added one that my grandma taught me back in the day that has stuck with me, that had nothing to do with this exercise, but I just wanted to have on this list, which is, first do what you need to do, and then do what you want.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:18:44):
I love it. What a great list of values and what stands out to me from that list too, Lenny, is this idea of achievement or status or success. A lot of the things that we talk about publicly, what your LinkedIn feed might look like don't actually show up in your values. And it must reflect in some of the choices that you've made in your life.

Lenny (00:19:04):
Yes, I hope so.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:19:08):
Let me ask you this. Let's try to apply some of the values in real time as an experiment.

Lenny (00:19:14):
Oh, boy.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:19:15):
If you think about a recent decision that you've had to make or a decision that you're facing coming up, can you share what that decision might be? And then let's try to apply the values to it to think about if you were living up to these values, what choice would you make and maybe some of the pressures you might feel to choose otherwise.

Lenny (00:19:37):
So an ongoing decision I have is I have all these opportunities of things I can be doing. Additional things I can be doing. The podcast, this actually was a good example of I never wanted to do a podcast because I really wanted to... Life is good. I was writing this newsletters, doing great, making a living, doing one great email a week. And I was like, "Why would I do anything more? This is good." So I've constantly resisted, I resisted the podcast for two to three years, and then eventually succumbed. And it was a great decision in the end. But now, I have other things that I'm trying to not do, but they're always pushing into my mind space like, a book for example. Of course at one point, and I paused that just so I could have more time for the podcast. So I guess the decision is just like, what should I say yes to versus say no to?

(00:20:26):
I'm looking at my values a little bit, and one of them is choose adventure, which you would think would be just do stuff, just try stuff out. But I feel like maybe it's just a missing bullet point here of, I just want to do less. I'm trying to take on less and do less and cut out and-

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:20:44):
That's really interesting.

Lenny (00:20:44):
... simplify. Yeah. Because there's just endless things I could be doing, and I want to spend time with my wife. And now, my new child is coming in a couple of months, if all goes well. So that's where my mind goes when you ask that.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:20:57):
Yeah. Yeah. And then maybe if you were to decompose adventure, what adventure actually means to you and you go into that word list, you might actually just find that some of these opportunities like writing a book, at some point, it doesn't feel like an adventure.

Lenny (00:21:13):
Right. That's so true. The beginning of it is an adventure. And then that's such a good point because yeah, once you start a thing... Something I always say about this content creation life is like, it's easy to start. It's hard to keep it going, and it becomes just this treadmill of just, you have to keep creating awesome stuff basically for the rest of your life. I don't know how you get off the treadmill. Not that I'm complaining, but that's just a reality of this path. So that is such a good point that it becomes not adventurous very quickly. So that's really interesting.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:21:13):
I love it.

Lenny (00:21:42):
I guess the other thing is just, what's a cutoff? What am I... I do a bunch of angel investing and so I'm thinking about just stopping that for a while just so I get up more time with my new child and just carve out things that maybe aren't as essential.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:21:55):
So on the values exercise, I think what you've done a really good job of is just really delineating, here are some examples of choices that you have to make. I think that there are some points in our lives where writing a book, it just seems really obvious. It's good for your career. It's the next level in terms of where you go from the community, the newsletter, the podcast and getting to that next level. But where I think there is value is these lists of values can help ground us from those obvious decisions. So in my life, to share a mini example of this, there have been a lot of cases where the next obvious step for me might be to go an executive at a big company and to go chase the dream and continue on the latter climb of my career.

(00:22:40):
As I've examined my own personal values, a big piece of it has really been around prioritizing relationships and really pursuing knowledge and growth on my own terms. And things like independence and autonomy have started to creep up over time, especially once I started a family. It became very clear to me that sometimes the external scorecard of what people think you should go do is very much an opposition of what I actually want to do. Even though it might be objectively better, depending on what scorecard you actually use, I would actually be less happy with some of those outcomes. So I think values are this really nice useful tool to think about how do you make better decisions again to maximize for your own alignment with life.

Lenny (00:23:23):
That's such an important point. It connects back to the course that I taught and then this potential book of, it just feels like an obvious thing I should do. It was great, but it just didn't bring me joy. And other things bring me more joy. So it was a really good reminder of just like, do I really want to be doing this, or is this just a thing that feels like a smart thing to do but maybe isn't for me psychologically? So I love just the reminder of coming back to values as a lens to decide if you want to do a thing versus just, what are people telling you? Smart or... Which just feels like the natural thing to do.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:24:00):
Yeah, and it's really self-aware of you too. I think too. Cut it off because you start realizing that you're doing this course, and it's not giving you energy or it's not quite the right thing. It's really hard to say no to things.

Lenny (00:24:12):
It is. It is.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:24:12):
And I don't think we focus on that enough.

Lenny (00:24:14):
Yeah, I've learned how to do that better. I have all these auto templates of ways to say no in different ways. Actually, ChatGPT, somebody's tweeted this that it has all kinds of good suggestions. If you could ask it, how do I say no to my manager who wants me to prioritize a feature? And has all kinds of clever words to [inaudible 00:24:30].

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:24:30):
Oh. Yeah, that's a great use for it.

Lenny (00:24:32):
The other thing that I realized as we were going through this exercise that I imagine you find also is when you come up with an initial set of values, I was realizing I maybe another value of just keeping things simple, simplifying. And I imagine that's part of the process of narrowing in on what's important to you is you take this first pass and then you try to use it in making a decision and then you realize, oh, there's this other thing that's really important to me and that updates your values.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:24:57):
Yeah, I think you could definitely use that process to force yourself to make a stack ring and to be really clear, and also change it. Change it. It's yours. So change it over time as it suits you.

Lenny (00:25:08):
All right. It feels like there should be a curiosity loop AI bot with your values that you email, what should I do with this decision? And then it's like, oh, you think simplicity is great? You should not do this.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:25:20):
The next big idea.

Lenny (00:25:22):
There we go. Somebody build that. Okay, so it's funny we went into reverse interview, and then I have to asking questions again. So let's do this. You talked about your career and how you resisted these shiny object opportunities to focus on the thing that you were excited about and wanted to do. So maybe a couple questions there. One is just early career advice. You coach a lot of founders. You had a really in incredible career doing all kinds of interesting things. What have you learned about what works best for optimizing in your early career?

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:25:55):
My early career was pretty wild. So I had a really fast run. Over the course of seven years, I went from my first job, which was basically this entry level sales job at Microsoft, working on Microsoft adCenter to SVP of marketing at SurveyMonkey, leading a global team. And when I reflect back on what works across my early career, it really comes down in a nutshell to this career concept of explore and exploit, which actually sounds dark now that I'm saying it out loud, but-

Lenny (00:26:27):
Yeah, sounds great. I love it.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:26:29):
Explore and exploit, if you're familiar with it from growth background, is really just around what mode you're in. You're either in a mode of explorer where you have a bunch of unknowns and you're testing to see whether or not you like it, how well it works, whether or not it fits for you. Or you're exploiting, where you actually have found something that's really rich and really deep and then you're just trying to get more. And when I think about explore and exploit for early career, it's all about exploration. You really haven't experienced that much, but you're doing it with a thesis. You're doing it with that growth mindset where you have a hypothesis. So coming out of school, my first job was at Microsoft. I was at adCenter. The big thing I learned from the 367 days that I was there was that corporate life at that point in my career was just a little bit too slow-paced for me, and I was really hungry to go do something else.

(00:27:19):
But I also learned quite a lot about marketing and advertising. And I had the suspicion that not only did I want to try something smaller, but I also wanted to try marketing. So I moved to this series a startup where I had to sample my desk on the first day called Mochi Media. And I was in a marketing role at a startup and had this great run there over three years, where I learned all kinds of things and even tried product at some point. What I learned from that experience was then I love marketing, games was pretty fun and being in a smaller team was really dynamic. It was this choice on, do I exploit and go deeper into the industry or do I explore more? I was 23 at the time, so I decided I have so little to lose, let me continue exploring. My big thesis was, let me try being a founder. So then I founded Connected, and Connected was this personal CRM that's a little bit like Clay.

(00:28:14):
If you've seen Clay now recently, in terms of how do you do a better job of managing and building your professional and personal network and-

Lenny (00:28:20):
Yeah. It's a beautiful product.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:28:22):
Yeah, it's a beautiful product, much more beautiful than what we built at the time. It was such a great learning experience to discover what it was like to be a founder of a company and an entrepreneur. My personal learning out of all of those things was really just that I was continuously optimizing that I loved marketing. I loved being a founder. I really like small teams. There are pros and cons to this corporate life, where maybe things are really slow paced, but the scale is really important. So that was really what carried me through a lot of my early career. After Connected was acquired by LinkedIn, I moved into this exploit mode.

(00:28:59):
So I was at LinkedIn for a period of time while I was investing, and I really wanted to be intentional about the time that I spent there in terms of how I wanted to exploit it. So unlike a traditional path where you're really focused on trying to get the biggest title, a big team, set yourself up to run a big org, my role at LinkedIn was really explicit. I even told my manager this when I first came in, "I'm here to learn to be a better founder." So there were a lot of things when I started connected, which I didn't know how to do very well, I didn't understand growth. I was fair to middling at pricing. I really didn't understand how to build a subscriptions business and how to price it. So if I can make my LinkedIn experiences match to that, that would be a huge win for me independent of promotion, or compensation or a whole bunch of those things because the plan afterward is actually to go off and start another company.

(00:29:53):
So I managed to get into this great role leading gross marketing for LinkedIn, working with their growth team from a hundred million to 200 million members, read every experiment brief that I could, spent a lot of time with the team, really understanding their process, and then shifted into the subscription side where I worked on LinkedIn subscriptions and ran their sales subscriptions business at scale through the online channel. And saw how all of those pieces and worked together from a financial planning and analysis stage to all of the optimizations that they did. It was just such a rare opportunity, but I wouldn't have gotten those opportunities if I just let them promote me or I followed a strategy where I was just focused on trying to get the biggest title.

(00:30:35):
Instead, I was focused on those learnings and those experiences. Ultimately, the fact that I was a startup founder. I had big company experience. I had growth experience, and I had subs experience. And I was a product marketer. That was actually the winning combination that caused SurveyMonkey to send me a LinkedIn InMail, start a conversation and ultimately bring me in as their head of marketing at the age of, I think I was 27 or 28 at the time. Because their rationale was, you have all these experiences that we really need and you don't have the management experience, but we have plenty of that. We're happy to teach that to you.

Lenny (00:31:10):
I really like this framework. I've never heard it described this way. Explore and exploit connects a lot with what I always recommend which, early on, is to optimize for a variety of experience so that you can figure out where you actually have a good time and what you're interested in versus getting stuck on the first thing something. I don't know if you'll have an immediate answer to this, but I'm curious. Many people don't know how long to stick with something that maybe doesn't feel good but may lead to something. Like, someone may be in a job right now, or just like, "I really don't like this job, but I feel like it'll lead to something great. And I don't want to give up too quickly." So I guess the question is, what are heuristics that tell you to stick it out and stick with something that you think will lead to something great versus hold the recording and get out?

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:32:01):
That's a great question, and it's a really tough one that is contextual on the person that you are. So one of the things that I like to share is this idea of, it's a little gory, don't be the frog. So if you are familiar with the story of the frog, it's this idea of boiling the frog. So if you take a frog, and you throw in a pot of boiling water, it'll jump out. But if you take a frog and you put in a pot and you increase the temperature degree by degree by degree, the frog doesn't notice and before it knows, it's boiled alive. And how I apply this to your question to come back and circle back to it is that, it's really easy to be a victim of inertia. It's really easy for all of us to be the frog where there are little things that make us uncomfortable, and we sit with them or we think, "Gosh, it'll get better. The next manager will get better. I'm always one conversation or one promotion away from getting to that next step."

(00:33:02):
But you really have to be aware of your surroundings. You have to be aware of which way is the direction of the temperature of the water trending. That's what makes the advice really contextual. I really look at it from the lens of learning. What can I learn here, and how am I growing and developing? So there might be an argument for you to stay at a job for two decades. If it turns out that every single day you're being really challenged, you're learning new things, you're deriving a lot of meaningful enjoyment out of your work and you're this happy frog that's hanging out, realizing that things are good and the temperature is not rising. But there are also situations where you might encounter just some really hard walls, where you don't get along with the thesis of the company. You don't agree with the direction of the company that you're in.

(00:33:53):
There are fundamental aspects of the role which are limiting to you or you're not learning a lot, frankly. I think that happens a lot, where you providing a lot of value and doing a good job at a company, but you might not be learning things that stretch you and grow you to achieve your ultimate goal. When you are aware of that learning, I think that's the point at which you have to say, "How do I change that? How do I be an agent in my own career and make a difference in that?" And it doesn't necessarily mean that the strategy is to quit your job and do something catastrophic, and then go do something else, take a course or sign up for something new. It might actually mean a proactive conversation with your manager or the leadership to say, "I love what I'm doing here, and I would also like to learn a little bit more. And here's what I'm interested in."

(00:34:44):
And then try to find a way to either land the right projects. So in my case, it was really growth and subscriptions, that experience that I really wanted. Let's say, you hit a blank wall there, even take it as a gift of time, which is great. I'm not going to be able to get this from my company, but now that I have this extra time because I'm so optimized at this job, how am I going to choose to use that time? And it might be around building relationships with some of the key people at the company or learning something new on your own time that you can leverage in another way.

Lenny (00:35:17):
I like that. Make the most of the time, even if it's not the best opportunity for you. Also love the frog boiling metaphor.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:35:23):
Little gory.

Lenny (00:35:24):
No, it's great. So I guess the lesson there is think about are you that frog being boiled right now and think ahead, is this going to be the end of the-

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:35:24):
Right. Keep an eye on your environment and which way is it trending?

Lenny (00:35:35):
Yeah, the temperature on the thermostat in your office. The other thing this makes me think about is, it's so easy to get caught up in making your resume look amazing and continuing to just like, "Oh, if I get this next role, my resume's going to look so great." And this other logo and this cool title and role. I find that just like, you do that long enough in your life, you end up... You retire, and then you die. Life is that resume. Right? That is your life, you're living, and there's not going to be a point at which you have to realize, okay, I've done all the things to make my resume. Also, I'm like, "What do I actually want to do? Am I enjoying this?" Because it'll never end. You're never going to end trying to make a better resume and a more awesome background for yourself. Do you experience that with yourself or other people you work with of just over optimizing to make an awesome series of roles and logos and then forgetting, do I actually enjoy any of this? What am I doing?

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:36:31):
I have experienced that personally a lot. I think that it may be a generational thing or it just may be my background, but having grown up with the Asian tiger parenting, it's very focused on logos or certain accomplishments or certain achievements like, going to an Ivy League school, working in a company that someone's heard of, being able to have a certain title. At a certain point, I bailed out a bit and I really started to think about who am I trying to please and optimize for? That values exercise that I had you do, Lenny, is actually a big piece of that. So I probably took it for the first time over a decade ago, at this point. I looked at those values and I said, "Well, if I draw a straight line from where I am right now and just extend it forward and play the rest of the movie as it plays out, given the current plot line, how well does that optimize for those values?"

(00:37:27):
That's great. My parents might be happy about my resume or other people might look upon me in a certain way because I've managed these achievements, but in my day-to-day life, what really matters to me, what's really meaningful to me, only some of this stuff really matters. So getting very intentional about that and being clear about who your audience is as you navigate your career. I think it's a terrible outcome to wake up one day and be late career and feel trapped because you have a certain lifestyle or a certain expectations of the people around you that you have to go work this job, but then you look at yourself in the mirror and you're not happy going in there. I think that's a terrible trap that we should all try to avoid as we navigate our career paths and find the thing that's most optimal for us, which is usually a mix of career success, but also meaningfulness and alignment in the work that we're doing with our values.

Lenny (00:38:25):
I love this topic. Thank you for sharing that. This episode is brought to you by Sprig. You already heard me talk about how Sprig helps you uncover blind spots in your product development process, allowing you to better understand why users take certain actions and how they feel about the experience. Just this week, they launched their brand new templates library, which you can find at sprig.com/templates. Which helps you plug and play proven playbooks for helping you identify and solve the biggest challenges facing product teams today. From how to optimize an existing feature to improving a conversion flow, to troubleshooting drop off. One of the questions I get most on this podcast and in my newsletter is how to develop your product sense. So I decided to work with Sprig to build a playbook for how to do just that, based on my experience at Airbnb and what I learned from interviewing top product people like, Jules Walter who wrote a whole guest post on how to develop your product sense, which informed this template that you'll find. Just go to sprig.com/templates to find this playbook and 85 more that is sprig.com/templates. S-P-R-I-G.com/plates.

(00:39:31):
What triggered your reevaluation of that path? Was there just like a, "Oh, man. I need to really rethink where I'm going." And then I have a follow-up question.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:39:40):
Really just a career opportunity. And it was this step where I could do something that was, at the time, really high profile and really exciting and felt great, but also involved demanding travel and grueling hours. And wasn't in a space that I was excited about, but it looked amazing on my resume. And I was talking to a friend about it, and they actually introduced me to this values exercise to say like, "Ada, go through and fill out this values exercise, and apply it to this job." What I realized at the time, after I did it, was that my top three values, the things that I cared about this job would categorically just fail at because I would be gone all the time, in pursuit of glory that I didn't really care about. Instead, my current path at the time was something that if I persisted in, it would actually be able to potentially fulfill all of those values.

Lenny (00:40:36):
It reminds me of a friend who has this metaphor of this ego monster sitting in the corner of the room that's always yelling at them, when they're... To do the thing that's impressive and take on the really cool role, and just get an awesome title, and do something really impressive, that's just like yelling at them from the corner. And my friend's just learned to just like, "Okay, that's the ego monster pulling at me. I don't have to listen to that. Doesn't mean I'm going to be happy if I listen to this guy." And that's been really helpful to my friend just to disassociate that part of the brain.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:41:10):
Yeah. The ego monster is a great way to put it. I use something that Warren Buffet has talked about, which is inner scorecard versus outer scorecard.

Lenny (00:41:19):
Tell me more.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:41:20):
So he talks about how there's an outer scorecard, which is how the rest of the world evaluates you, how you keep score in terms of external factors. So top 10 lists, wealth status, title, maybe things that people really care about. And then your inner scorecard is things that actually matter to you, how you spent your day, how good of a person you are. Did you have an adventure today, Lenny? Were you kind? And there are a lot of things that maybe are in opposition to each other. So really thinking about did you win at the cost of kindness? Did you succeed at the cost of losing access to the adventure that you really wanted? I think really thinking about it in that lens helps you trade off against some of that external pressure and the ego monster.

Lenny (00:42:11):
This might be a good segue to chat about coaching. I imagine a lot of people listening to this like, "Yes, I want to do that. I want to measure myself according to my values and check in on this. And am I doing the wrong path?" It's hard to do just on your own, I find. And I think that's one of the benefits of an executive coach. So maybe we just chat about what should people know about coaching and getting a coach, and does everyone need a coach and how to think about the idea of getting a coach at some point in their career.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:42:42):
I'll have a hot take on this, and it's something that I share to people when I talk to them about coaching. But my hot take is that for the vast majority of people, they probably do not need a coach.

Lenny (00:42:52):
Great.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:42:54):
And what I often push people on is if you're thinking about getting a coach, which is usually an indication that they have a feeling of being stuck or they have a problem that they're trying to solve, I ask them, "What are your goals when it comes to coaching? Roll it forward six months, what have you gotten done in your coaching experience. What have you accomplished, and you're just... It's like, a home run. And then look at all of the potential alternatives in terms of how you could have spent your valuable time and often pricey fees to achieve the same goal, but maybe in a better way." The thing that people don't really think about is if you're looking for a mentor, a coach is actually a terrible mentor in some ways because it's this one person's opinion. It's actually way better to run a curiosity loop, for example, and get the benefit a couple different minds on a specific topic and hit their wheelhouse of things that they know about. Than to go ask one person, what do you think I should do in this situation?

(00:43:58):
If you're trying to learn about a topic in a really robust way, let's say you want to learn about growth, maybe you should take are Reforge course and get access to all of the resources and the insights of the EIRs and the growth advisors that Reforge and get an overview and survey of the landscape instead of one person's experience and the handful of companies that they might have worked with. Likewise, if you're just feeling like you're a little emotionally overcome, I think coaches are this great resource around that, but it's actually better to pay it forward and build a tribe and a community of people around you that you can rely on for support because that's the thing that lasts you for years and years.

(00:44:38):
So one of the first things that I do when people talk to me about coaching is I challenge them and say, "Have you explored all of these other opportunities first, and do you really need a coach? And is a coach actually the best option for you?" Like an anti sell, just so that they know what they're getting themselves into because I don't necessarily think that it's useful for all things, even though it can be helpful.

Lenny (00:44:59):
And then when do you find that it's actually important and valuable and something someone should try to get?

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:45:06):
I wouldn't be a coach if I didn't think that it wasn't important and valuable. I think that in certain contexts it can be super helpful. So when you have situations where you're in a state of hyper growth, and you need very accelerated learning, and you need someone who can point you in the right direction, I think coaches can be really helpful. So I work with founders for example, and founders are just in this unique state where everything is chaos. They have no structure. They don't know what their jobs are. They have fully justified imposter syndrome where no one in their right mind would objectively have hired them for the position that they're in. There's really intense highs and lows. So for a founder, it might make a lot of sense to get a coach because they have to learn a lot of stuff really quickly, and time is of the essence.

(00:45:54):
So a coach might be a really helpful shortcut for them to get there. Related to that, I think it's also really helpful on sensitive topics. So there are a lot of things that we want to be coached on where either it takes a lot of time for us to work through and progress because it's a long-term project, for example, or it's something very sensitive. People issues and interpersonal conflicts. Coaches can be especially helpful in those cases because it's this really safe space for you to work through things, but also have someone who's really rational to help guide you through them with potentially some frameworks and extra advice.

Lenny (00:46:30):
So I had a couple coaches in my career and what made me feel like I should pursue that is when you think about a sports athlete or, I don't know, athlete. No one does not have a coach, the best athletes have coaches and they get great because they have somebody helping them get better. It's not just like an accident. They don't just learn on their own. It just makes you realize that other people in their profession that have a coach helping them out are just going to be more successful because innately, they have someone helping them learn how to do the job better. So that made me realize, man, I should probably get a coach to help me out with stuff. Even though there wasn't anything super specific, I'm like, "Oh, I need to fix this problem." It was just like, wow, this just intellectually make sense. So it was actually really important and transformative for me.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:47:21):
If you go to my site, I actually have this guide that I've written over time on both my take on how do you find a coach, and the TLDR there is actually that I strongly recommend to everyone. If you're thinking about getting a coach, talk to two or three different coaches. And really get a sense of their vibe and how well you get to know them. It's surprising because I did this piece of research, which I also wrote about, and we could link to, but I talked to over 80 people about their experiences with a coach. I talked including coaches, including founders, including executives and there's this shocking data point in there where half of people that founder their coach literally went with the first coach that they talked to. It's that your buddy said, "I work with this great coach." And then you go and you hire your buddy's coach.

(00:48:08):
I think that's a totally fine way to go find a coach, but I would actually really just urge people to talk to a couple because what works for your friend may not work for you. And just being able to see some of the variance in terms of the style and how people get along, I think that can make a huge difference in terms of this reflection of how do you learn best? When you think about acquiring a new skill, do you love structure? Do you not like structure? Do you like it when someone really teaches you and walks you through specific examples, or do you frameworks? Coaches come in all of those different flavors. So I think it's really worth it to explore before you get into such a deep relationship with someone, just so that both people can feel really sure about it.

Lenny (00:48:51):
What's one thing that people may not think about or just something that you find really important that maybe is unexpected when you're looking for a coach?

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:49:00):
I thought that credentials and the relevant experience of the coach was a huge factor in terms of how you should go about your coach selection. But part of the interviews that I did was talking to founders that had had experiences with coaches and asking them to reflect back, and these founders and executives when they thought about it, they actually said so much more about, it was actually this amorphous sense of vibe with the person, how safe you felt with them, how deeply you would explore with them, and how well they got you, and remembered the pieces of the conversation and help you put it together. Way more than potentially some experiences that they'd had, where this person had the perfect background, but they just never really connected on that level. So it was unintuitive to me that there was such a big piece of it that was around personal connection, which is why I've now pushed people to try to talk to a couple different people.

(00:49:55):
And then the other thing which comes back to the sports coaching analogy is that there are different coaches that are really good at different things. So just like how, if you're a star tennis player, you might actually have multiple coaches working with you, maybe an offensive coach or a defensive coach or working on a particular swing. It actually makes sense when you're really performing at a high level to consider having coaches that work with you on shorter term basis to really just work on your speaking or help you with getting into your groove on writing or help you achieve a specific goal. You shouldn't think about it as this long-term commitment to stay with one person, but instead more choosing off of a menu and thinking about what goal are you trying to achieve right now?

Lenny (00:50:39):
Does anyone ever get multiple executive coaches that... I like how we went from, you don't need a coach to maybe need a month [inaudible 00:50:46] hamstrings.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:50:48):
Yes. I know of multiple people that I've talked to, usually CEOs, that either have had a series of coaches or have multiple coaches. It makes a lot more sense, Lenny, when you think about someone who's getting a pitch coach because they're about to get into fundraising.

Lenny (00:51:04):
Got it. Right. Niche skills.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:51:05):
Right. For niche things because they're about to enter a process or someone who's trying to get into a writing coach-

Lenny (00:51:11):
Got it. Yeah.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:51:13):
... in addition to some of their executive and leadership work that they might be doing.

Lenny (00:51:17):
Okay. That makes sense. I love it. I'm going to get four coaches. One for everything I do

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:51:23):
A podcast coach.

Lenny (00:51:23):
Podcast coach.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:51:25):
A newsletter coach.

Lenny (00:51:26):
A writing coach, and a-

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:51:30):
Yes. And then a parent coach. Don't forget that.

Lenny (00:51:30):
Parent coach. A job board coach, and then just a life coach. Okay. I'm on it. Okay. So let's touch on the thing that your friends said we shouldn't touch on, which is being a woman in leadership in Silicon Valley. I guess I'll just frame it simply. Imagine there's many young women listening to this podcast, and many may dream of a career like yours, all the things you've shared. What advice do you have for young women just starting out in their career hoping to find a similar path?

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:52:03):
This is a really delicate subject, and it's interesting because when I try to decompose why people gave me the feedback they gave me on this topic, I think a big piece of it is just that you want to have respect for the inherent challenges of being a non stereotypically great fit for leadership roles or certain career success roles in Silicon Valley and acknowledge that. And also try to push for some of the agency of the things that you can do. So I'm going to start with just this quick story about someone that I worked with who's given me permission to share this, in a coaching context and then back out. So I was working with a seed stage founder, and she's so smart. She is really dynamic, very, very focused, really, really great at taking feedback and actioning it. She's one of those people that is just stellar, and I have no doubt that she's going to make a huge dent in the universe.

(00:52:58):
We've been working together on Zoom for a couple of months, and I'd built this great respect for her competence as an operator, and the way that she thought and took apart problems and then acted on them. And then we met together for the first time in person at lunch. I feel almost nervous talking about this here. The disparity between my sense of who she was as an operator and how she came across to me initially at this lunch was really striking in that it was a weekday lunch and she was dressed as if she was hanging out on the weekend. So old T-shirt, hair back and in a claw, bra straps were showing. She was just incredibly casual in terms of her physical appearance. It took me almost like a little bit of a step back to reevaluate and think, "Oh, this is the same person, but she actually just presents so differently.

(00:53:54):
So then I took the step after we met and I gave her that feedback in one of our next coaching sessions where we invited each other to give each other feedback. I shared a lot of my impressions with her and I told her, "I respect you so much as an operator. I want to tell you that in the physical meeting that we had together, there was this disparity on how I would've potentially perceived you when I first met you in person versus what I've come to know about you from the months that we spent together."

(00:54:27):
Her reaction was like, "Oh my God, Ada. No one has ever connected the dots for me. Thank you so much. It has never explicitly been told to me that some of these elements which you describe, and they're very easy for me to fix and I'm motivated to fix them, are things that might actually trigger certain impressions or biases. No one's actually said it to me before, and I'm about to go into fundraising. It's actually super helpful for me to hear this, that these are controllable elements of my physical attire or my appearance that might actually just affect the way that people perceive me. And then it gives me this extra hump to get over, in terms of getting to this point of credibility for them to see me as a seasoned operator that I am." She took it so well. But what was interesting about it was actually that she'd made it all this way in her career. She'd even raised funding, and no one had ever given her this feedback.

(00:55:21):
So this is, I think one of the big challenges of being a woman in Silicon Valley because getting to an executive role or getting to a funded founder role, it's like an Olympic level sport. You have to get all the way through the funnel and become one of the few that are really chosen to do that. But the difficulty of this game is that no one tells you the rules of the game. You actually don't really know what are the rules on how to get intros or give intros. What's the right way to follow up? What are the impressions that people have about you? It turns out that in a career context, it's so unsafe for your manager to turn to a young woman on the team and say, "Here, let me give you feedback on your physical appearance, and how it affects your competence and how you're perceived in the workforce." That the vast majority of them will just never do it because there's no winning, which is similar to the feedback that I got.

(00:56:16):
SO where I lean in is to say, we're not powerless and there's something that all of us can do if we're in a position where we feel like not even about being female, it's about being perceived as too young or too old, too tall, too short, not the right race. Whatever reason that you feel people may be disqualifying you or not seeing you. We're not powerless, even though this game is rigged. We can study the game, we can help each other, and we can actually start to call out some of those rules and then find ways around them. In this case, for the founder in this example, she really turned to her friends and did a mini makeover and amped up her appearance.

(00:57:03):
And she came back and she reported, "A lot of people have been giving me really positive feedback, that something about me feels more confident and more energetic, and they can't figure out why." But actually, she was getting a ton of people noticing that something was really different about her in a positive way simply because I was in this great position as her coach to give her some of these pieces of hard feedback that she had never heard before. So it's really on us to try to find those and then try to adapt ourselves to play that game if you want to play at that level.

Lenny (00:57:33):
How nervous were you giving her that feedback?

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:57:37):
I was so nervous. I actually almost didn't do it, and then took a deep breath and then decided, what the heck? I think she's great. I think she would really benefit from doing it and I gave it. Even in a position where I'm in a relationship with her where I can have that trust, it was super, super difficult. So I can only imagine how hard it is for people to give feedback like that in another context, but how else are people going to hear it?

Lenny (00:58:03):
I think there was a company culture where they talk about how you're being selfish, not giving someone hard feedback because you don't want to be stressed or risk causing damage to your own reputation. But you're not helping them. So it's a really interesting insight of just like, don't be selfish. Do something that's hard when you think it's going to help someone else.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:58:26):
Right. But I think on the topic of being female or on the topic of physical appearance or maybe even some of the topics around being an immigrant, if you're in a position where you can give that feedback, I think the struggle is often will it be well received? And that's where the feedback comes from me from the curiosity loop for this piece, which was there's almost no winning in doing it because the upside is something great happens for them. But there's just so many downsides to giving advice or giving someone input like that the default course is just to avoid. But then that person never learns the rules of the game.

Lenny (00:59:05):
Yeah, absolutely. It makes me think also a little bit about Radical Candor, basically. I don't know if you read that book, but

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:59:14):
Yeah, Kim Malone Scott, I think.

Lenny (00:59:16):
Yeah. And Sheryl Sandberg had a similar story where she... I think Sheryl Sandberg gave her a really hard feedback and she didn't take it that well, actually. I think you did a better job, or your friend actually took the feedback and did something with it. I think the whole book was just like, "Hey, I actually do this where people actually listen." I think the framework is, you got to communicate that you care deeply about that person, but you want to challenge them directly also at the same time.

Ada Chen Rekhi (00:59:40):
Yeah, it's a great story. I think Sheryl Sandberg took her aside after one of her meetings and basically told her that, "If you say um, it makes me sound stupid." And she didn't take that well, but at the same time, later on in retrospect, she reflected that it was so brave and so helpful of someone like Sheryl to go give that feedback because there's a real cost to it. There's real risk to it.

Lenny (01:00:09):
Any other thoughts or advice along these lines that you want to leave people with?

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:00:13):
The biggest piece of advice that I have that comes to mind is really around trying to be really thoughtful on something I call eating your vegetables. So I have all these branded terms for things, but-

Lenny (01:00:13):
That's great.

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:00:30):
... eating your vegetables is really this idea around how little kids don't really develop an appreciation for vegetables until they're 10 or 12 exposures in. So the researchers say, "Expose kids to vegetables 10 or 12 times, even if they don't like it, because that's what it takes to get someone to like something." So when I think about career strategy and when I think about improving yourself and I think about how do we look for some of the hard feedback, eating your vegetables is this really important component of it because it's about how do you identify dislike for something because you're bad at it or you're new to it or you've never done it before, compared to genuine dislike where you've done it and you really don't like it. So to make it a little bit real, if we think about the world of podcasts, Lenny, I think it's something like 75 or 80% of podcasts never make it past the first podcast.

(01:01:25):
You have to do things a number of times before you really develop an affinity for it. Because the first time you do it, you're just not going to be good. So my mini example of that was early on in my career, I was really awkward and not very good at networking. I moved to Silicon Valley and one of the things that people told me about Silicon Valley was that it's really important to grow your network. It's all about the people. Totally agree about that. However, I didn't know anyone, and I didn't really understand this networking thing. So I gave myself this rule where I had to go out once a week for a couple of months, go to an external event, and I would count out 10 business cards. And the rule was, I had to hand out all 10 of those business cards by introducing myself to people that were new, and touch the back wall of the venue of that event and then I could leave.

(01:02:15):
I did that a couple of weeks in a row, and it was horrible. It was really awful, but it got a lot better. What I realized about that was actually two things. One that, as I started going and I saw familiar faces, it became a lot easier for me to just break in and meet people, just by seeing who people I knew already were talking to. And then second, I got a lot better at just breaking in and introducing myself and understanding how this intro and networking thing worked in terms of meeting people and moving through a crowd. Some of those relationships now from that first job and those first couple months are pretty much foundational to the network and the people that I know today. So it really paid off for me because I really focused on eating my vegetables and powering through that initial discomfort.

(01:03:00):
So to title back when it comes to thinking about how do you progress in your career, think about the obvious things that maybe you're not very good at, and then think about what are some of the actions that you can do to be very deliberate and intentional about practicing it to get to the point where you have some faculty at it because it's just really important in some cases to be good at certain skills.

Lenny (01:03:24):
I really like that. I also really like the physicality of that rule of touching the back wall. It just forces you to go through a room, and I just escape really quickly. Is there any other examples of things you've seen or recommend for doing things like, eating vegetables? That was a really good example of just forcing yourself to go to a networking event, touch the back wall. Is there anything else, any other examples that come to mind that you've recommended or found useful, doing something really hard that was really impactful?

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:03:53):
Yeah. So there are actually a few of them. A lot of them around content creation because it's just so hard. So one of them that comes to mind is, I know a lot of people have talked about doing a LinkedIn 30. So 30 days of posting something on LinkedIn in terms of content every day for 30 days straight, and just getting past that barrier of sharing. And then looking at it over time and seeing out of the things that you posted, what really resonated. I also think it's helpful to start thinking about things like getting into DMs. Right. It takes a lot of work to think about, "Oh, this person's really smart, let me DM them. Let me try to strike up a conversation because we're well out of the world of physical business cards. I don't think anyone has those anymore.

Lenny (01:04:34):
No.

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:04:35):
But modern networking is finding people that are really interesting on the internet and then finding some way to connect with them. It takes a certain amount of extroversion in that case to start meeting up with people and having conversations with them. So forcing yourself in some way to really think about, "Well, instead of having one outreach and then failing at it and saying, 'I'm never doing that again.' How do I actually create a pattern where I can learn or a sequence of trying to do this 10 or 12 times, and see what I get out of it?" Because that's really how you learn and how you grow.

Lenny (01:05:07):
The LinkedIn 30 idea, I like a lot. Something that I'll share as a tip is when you hear that, I bet a lot of people are just like, "Oh, my God. Going to link post on LinkedIn. So cringey. I don't want to be this self-promotiony LinkedIn person." But what I find is if you reframe it to, "I just want to crystallize a thought that I have and just share something that is useful to me or an insight I've had, and not think of it from, I'm trying to get as many likes. I'm trying to go viral with this post, or I'm trying to just build some following." Just don't think of it that way. Think of it as just want to communicate a thought I have and use this opportunity to crystallize it in a really simple way. That helps motivate. That, at least, works for me. It also ends up being useful for me. It's not like I'm trying to grow some following as a result of that.

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:05:59):
I find that really helpful as well. One piece of advice that's similar to that that I've heard is, write for an audience of one. Imagine you're just talking to a friend or you're trying to talk to someone that's a trusted colleague, and just write for them. I think that's really helpful, and it helps us with the problem of getting in over your skis, really over fixating on the outcome of, I did a post and I didn't get my 5,000 followers. And instead, just thinking about I did a post because I wanted to share an interesting idea, and then how cool, some people resonated with it.

Lenny (01:06:31):
Yeah, I love that. You could just even say, something I found useful day one and just approach it that way. That's the stuff that end up being most interesting to people. The less it feels like you're trying to be thirsty for followers and likes and all that stuff. And the more it's just like, here's the thing I've found useful. Enjoy it, if you can.

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:06:49):
Yeah. Yeah. People can really tell when you're being genuine and authentic online.

Lenny (01:06:53):
Absolutely. More and more. Maybe a last question. You started a company with your partner. You're both co-founders, you and your husband. I'm curious, what's your take on that approach to starting company? Would you recommend for other folks or not?f

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:07:10):
If you had asked me when I first started the company, it would've been an enthusiastic hell yes. I totally recommend. Now, I have a couple asterisks on top of it, and-

Lenny (01:07:10):
Go on.

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:07:23):
... I think it really just goes back to what I was talking about earlier where being a founder is such a traumatic and crazy experience with all these intense highs and lows and lack of structure that when you throw romance into the mix, it's just this really volatile combination. So what I've found is that it seems like it either goes really well or it goes really badly, and there's no in between. And asterisks are there because we've actually had a couple of friends try it, and it's been such a mixed bag of results. So my personal experience is I love it. My partner Sachin, and I work really well together. And the main benefit that we have is that the active founding is such an active obsession that you spend so much of your time thinking about your business and the concepts of your business and whatever problem you happen to be facing.

(01:08:11):
That when I had this thesis of I want to be a founder too, we played it out and said, "Well, okay, now we're going to walk around being obsessed about two completely different things. We may never see each other, and so why not try the same thing?" So our first experiment was actually trying it together, and we were nuts. I actually had a 30, 60 and 90 day plan where we would have check-ins. And some of the explicit questions in the check-in, is this affecting our relationship? Because I just wanted to make sure we were putting our relationship first. It worked well for us to the extent that we've done two companies together. And then when we were at LinkedIn, we actually moved across multiple teams in the company and continued to be counterparts and product and marketing together. So it's been phenomenal. The thing that I would say really helps us in terms of making it a successful relationship was things that I think apply to anyone that's thinking about, should you work with a person and should you be a co-founder with this person?

(01:09:08):
We had a very, very good set of complimentary domains and skillsets, so we had really clear decision making rights. Sachin does product design and engineering. I focus on marketing, operations, finance, everything else on the business side. And because of that, it's really clear that we take input from each other, but ultimately who makes the call and who's driving and owning that project. So that was really helpful for us. And then the big part that I think is the murky Meyer for couples and maybe even for close friends working together is how do you engage in constructive conflict? How do you get to the point where you're attacking the problem and not each other? So if your partner comes to you and says that work was not good, that marketing plan or that product roadmap that you put together, not good, do you take it as the plan is not good and let's talk about what we can actually do to fix it?

(01:10:06):
Or do you take it as, "Oh, gosh, they think I'm not good. They think I'm too lazy. I saw that look that they were giving me." And take it as this personal offense. So the ability to be really truth seeking and take the most respectful interpretation when you're giving feedback to focus on trying to get to a smart good outcome that benefits the business, I think that's actually one of the most crucial things that you have to think about. If you're going to work with anyone. Much less your partner or a close friend on starting a company and what's really worked for us,

Lenny (01:10:37):
I am very impressed with how you're able to execute on this. I don't think I could do this with my wife. That would not go well, I think. You should probably write-

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:10:37):
That's self awareness.

Lenny (01:10:48):
Yeah. No, we're aware. You should write a post on how to successfully build a company with your partner. That seems like you have a lot of really interesting frameworks and insights on how it's worked. The fact that-

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:10:57):
That's a good idea.

Lenny (01:10:58):
... [inaudible 01:10:58] for so long. Yeah, it could be its own little book. Is there anything else you wanted to share or touch on before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:11:06):
I think you covered most of it, Lenny.

Lenny (01:11:08):
With that then, we have reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got five questions for you. Are you ready?

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:11:15):
I am ready.

Lenny (01:11:17):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:11:20):
Persuasion by Robert Cialdini. I think it's a great book, if you're a marketer. It's a great book, if you're a founder or product person. But it really is a breakdown of what are the different strategies to get people to say yes and help persuade them toward things. I think it really helps in terms of thinking through that and designing a product or a business around it.

Lenny (01:11:40):
I've got that in my bookshelf behind me.

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:11:43):
Oh, yeah. It's a great book. Yeah. The next book that I also recommend is a book called Designing Your Life, and it's out of the Stanford Design School. And it's by, let me look, Bill Burnett and Dave Evans. They're two Stanford D School professors, and what they're doing is they're applying design principles to life design. So how do you actually map that next level career that's both meaningful and fulfilling and also achieves maybe some of the success factors that you really care about, and brainstorm and be really creative about it. So when people are stuck or thinking about career strategy, that's actually one of the books that I always point out for them.

Lenny (01:12:23):
What's a favorite recent movie or TV show?

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:12:25):
So Ted Lasso is back, so I'm watching that, the newest season. I am also a Star Trek nerd, so I'm watching Star Trek: Strange New Worlds.

Lenny (01:12:25):
I didn't know there's a new Star Trek. That's good to know.

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:12:41):
Oh, It's so good. I think the thing I love about Star Trek is just that, unlike some of the classic storylines that you see right now on TV coming out now, sometimes the episodes are just happy. They explore a planet. Nothing bad happens. They see something really wondrous. They all leave happy, and they pat themselves on the back for having explored something. It's something that's missing in the genre of TV that they still have, this happiness factor where sometimes life is good and sometimes life is bad.

Lenny (01:13:09):
I like the sound of that. Although, I've learned about storytelling for a story to be interesting. There needs to be some conflict or problem. So I imagine there's something going wrong somewhere in the middle.

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:13:20):
But it's not wrong. It's something interesting happens.

Lenny (01:13:23):
Oh.

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:13:23):
And then it's resolved, and it's happy. Right. But it just doesn't always need to be, something tries to kill you.

Lenny (01:13:28):
I got to watch that. That sounds great. I was a huge Star Trek fan back in the day. Didn't know they were still making new ones. What's a favorite interview question you like to ask when you're interviewing people?

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:13:37):
What's a common misconception people have about you? I usually like to throw that in toward the end of the interview, and the reason why I think it's really useful is it's a way for me to reset my bias. I may have had a certain impression about them, and this is their opportunity to speak up and say, "Hey, a lot of people think this about me, but it's not true." It's also this reflection of their self-awareness.

Lenny (01:14:01):
Great. What are some products that you've recently discovered or use regularly, SaaS products or even consumer fun random products that you want to share?

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:14:14):
Yeah. I can't go through this podcast without giving a shout-out to Notejoy. So Notejoy is a fast and focused notes app for individuals and teams. So that's the company that I work on. So I use it for everything from Noora product roadmaps to my coaching notes, to even prepping for something like this podcast. I use Notejoy all the time. Another one that I really use a lot is Captio. It's been around for a while, but it's a little iOS app. I don't know if it's on Android, but basically it's a blank notepad. You can dump your brain into it, and there's one button, and it emails it to you. So when I find that I'm really distracted, or I just want to remember something, I use Captio all the time just to quickly capture my ideas. And then I process it later in my inbox.

(01:14:53):
And then something that I just downloaded this week is Arc, the new browser. I'm actually really excited about its vision. I'm not sure if I'm going to work it into my workflow yet or how it fits in, but it's really beautiful and it's really cool to see someone iterating on the cluster that is browser tabs.

Lenny (01:15:11):
Yep. Love Arc. Went deep on Arc in the previous episode and I used Captio, however you call it. And I found another app, actually, the similar thing that I found even more simple. It's called Note to Self, just sits on my doc. Anytime I want to email myself a thought, I open it up and this type of thing. Somehow, it ends up being even easier. So that's another one to check out, Note to Self. Final question. You're really big on productivity. What's one tip that you found that has been really helpful for you in your day-to-day life, being more productive?

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:15:43):
Figure out, maybe the night before, the one thing that you want to get done in your day, and then at the earliest opportunity, just try to give yourself five minutes on it. Just five minutes. And the reason why I say five minutes is that there is this challenge that I experience and maybe other people experience as well, which is really just productive procrastination. Even though I know something is really important that needs to get done, I will often do other things that are useful and need to get done simply because I'm avoiding that one thing. And then before you know it's the end of the day and I'm like, "I still have to go do that thing." By really focusing on what's the number one thing and then just getting started on it a little bit. It just makes it really lightweight. And usually, what I find is that five minutes turns into a solid hour just knocking that thing out early in my day, and I feel really accomplished. But it's a mental hurdle that I really struggle with.

Lenny (01:16:37):
I really like the approach of the five minutes because that's such a trick to get you to like, "All right, I'll just do five minutes. I got to get this done."

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:16:44):
Right. It's quick.

Lenny (01:16:44):
I need to bring it. Yeah. There's a book that many people on this podcast have recommended called Make Time, and there's a framework within that called The Highlight, where you pick the highlight of your day, and that's the thing you got to do first and make... That's like, if you do nothing else, do your highlight and-

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:16:59):
Yeah, really similar then.

Lenny (01:17:01):
Yeah, and they don't do the five-minute thing, so I think that's a clever element of it. Ada, this was amazing. This chat was full of feelings, and frogs, and vegetables, and frameworks and insights. Thank you again so much for being here. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to learn more, reach out and how can listeners be useful to you?

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:17:21):
You can find me online. On Twitter and LinkedIn, I'm Ada Chen, A-D-A-C-H-E-N. I have a website, adachen.com, and you can always just shoot me an email, adachen@gmail.com. In terms of how listeners can be useful to me, any feedback and riffs on some of the ideas and topics that we've shared. I'm always eager to learn from other people. So feel free to drop a note and say hello. And if you're a founder and you're interested in learning more about coaching, I'm always happy to talk.

Lenny (01:17:51):
Awesome. And then Notejoy, how do they check that out?

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:17:54):
Notejoy.com.

Lenny (01:17:56):
So easy. Great domain. Ada, thank you again.

Ada Chen Rekhi (01:18:00):
Thank you.

Lenny (01:18:01):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
Many people told you your class at Stanford made them feel like their entire college tuition was worth it.

Carole Robin (00:00:05):
Even more rewarding for me are the, "I'm pretty sure your class just saved my marriage."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:11):
I want to talk about how to give feedback well.

Carole Robin (00:00:12):
I feel that you don't care and I feel you're being insensitive are not feelings, and that's where we make our biggest mistakes when it comes to feedback.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:19):
How do you avoid people getting defensive?

Carole Robin (00:00:22):
Questions that start with what, when, where, how. Stay away from why.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:25):
I think it might be helpful to talk about this concept that you call the three realities.

Carole Robin (00:00:28):
We don't understand that we are only privy to two out of the three, so I know what's going on for me and I know what I did. I have no idea what happened on your end.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:37):
That's a really profound point that anger is a secondary emotion. Really what's going on is you're afraid or you're hurt.

Carole Robin (00:00:43):
What a disservice to not help people understand that anger is a distancing emotion and there are other emotions that are connecting.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:54):
Today my guest is Carole Robin. For over 20 years, Carole taught the legendary course at Stanford's Graduate School of Business, nicknamed Touchy Feely technically called Interpersonal Dynamics, which helps people learn how to build strong relationships and become much more effective leaders. She then went on to start a non-profit called Leaders in Tech, which brings these same lessons to leaders of high-tech growth companies, and she also wrote an incredibly impactful book called Connect, which distills all the key insights and lessons from her decades running this course. I've had so many friends go through the Stanford course or the Leaders in Tech program, and every single one of them was transformed in terms of how they relate to other people, how they communicate, and how they lead. In my conversation with Carole, we talk about why we're often trapped in mental models that we formed when we were younger and how they now limit us and limit our potential and our ways of seeing world.

(00:01:49):
Why disclosing 15% more than you naturally feel comfortable will make you a more effective leader? Why there are actually three realities around us at all times and how that insight changes the way you relate to people. We also get into how to give feedback to anyone about anything, why vulnerability is so essential to great leadership, how to build exceptional relationships, and why they're so important and so much more. This is a very special and very unique episode and I am so excited to bring it to you. With that, I bring you Carole Robin. After a short word from our sponsors, and if you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing and feature management platform built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams.

(00:02:43):
Companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth and for understanding the performance of new features. And Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I left most was our experimentation platform where I could set up experiments, easily, troubleshoot issues, and analyze performance all on my own. EPO does all that and more with advanced statistical methods that can help you shave weeks off experiment time and accessible UI for diving deeper into performance and out-of-the-box reporting that helps you avoid annoying prolonged analytics cycles. Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insights with your team, sparking new ideas for the A/B testing flywheel. Eppo powers experimentation across every use case, including product growth, machine learning, monetization, and email marketing.

(00:03:40):
Check out Eppo at geteppo.com/lenny and 10X your experiment velocity. That's geteppo.com/lenny. Let me tell you about CommandBar. If you're like me and most users I've built product for you probably find those little in-product pop-ups, really annoying, want to take a tour? Check out this new feature, and these Pop-ups are becoming less and less effective since most users don't read what they say. They just want to close them as soon as possible, but every product builder knows that users need help to learn the ins and outs of your product. We use so many products every day and we can't possibly know the ins and outs of everyone. CommandBar is an AI-powered toolkit for product growth, marketing and customer teams to help users get the most out of your product without annoying them.

(00:04:25):
They use AI to get closer to user intent, so they have search and chat products that let users describe what they're trying to do in their own words and then see personalized results like customer walkthroughs or actions, and they do pop-ups too, but their nudges are based on in-product behaviors like confusion or intent classification, which makes them much less annoying and much more impactful. This works for web apps, mobile apps and websites, and they work with industry-leading companies like Gusto, Freshworks, HashiCorp and LaunchDarkly. Over 15 million end-users have interacted with CommandBar. To try out CommandBar you can sign up at commandbar.com/lenny and you can unlock an extra 1,000 AI responses per month for any plan. That's commandbar.com/lenny. Carole, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Carole Robin (00:05:19):
Thank you so much for having me, Lenny. I'm delighted to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:22):
I've heard from so many people over the years how much you and your course have impacted their life, both friends of mine, and also people when I shared on Twitter that you were coming on the podcast, so many people left comments just like, "Oh my God, that course and Carole's changed my life in so many ways." So I am really excited to have you here. I'm really honored to have you here.

Carole Robin (00:05:23):
Thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:43):
I wanted to start with when we were preparing for this podcast, you shared this quote with me. You told me that "I was put on this planet to help people learn that it's possible to learn how to build and develop robust, meaningful relationships." What are robust, meaningful relationships and why are they important to you? Why are they important to people?

Carole Robin (00:06:05):
I think that most people experience a richer, fuller, more meaningful life when they have at least some high quality relationships or maybe put the other way. If you have none, it's unlikely you're going to experience quite as rich and full a life. So I often talk about relationships exist on a continuum. At one end of the continuum is contact and no connection, or we could also say dysfunction. And by the way, contact no connection. Those are thousands of Facebook friends. Those are not relationships and those are not friends in my vocabulary. At the other end of the continuum is what my co-author David Bradford and I came to call exceptional, and exceptional relationships have a particular set of characteristics that I can get into if you want to. But before I even do that, we're not suggesting, and I'm not suggesting that everybody needs to turn every one of their relationships into something exceptional.

(00:07:05):
That would be, first of all, impractical, second of all, unnecessary. But it turns out that the skills you need to move along that continuum actually take you from contact and no connection and dysfunction to at least functional and robust. And then once you've acquired those skills, then you can decide whether or not you want to take a few of those relationships a lot farther, take them all the way to exceptional, but at least you've gained what you need to know in order to get to functional and robust. And I believe if we had a critical mass of human beings on this planet who had those skills and knew how to get to at least robust and functional, we wouldn't just have more functional teams and organizations, we'd have stronger communities, we'd have more functional schools. We might, in my wildest dreams, even have a more functional government. And so that's my life's mission.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:03):
Hopefully this episode is going to actually do exactly that, help people build from-

Carole Robin (00:08:07):
From your mouth to God's ears.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:10):
To give people a little more motivation to really dig in and pay deep attention to this. What are some of the benefits you've seen from people moving further along the spectrum, building more robust relationships and more exceptional relationships?

Carole Robin (00:08:23):
Obviously, I taught a course for many, many years at Stanford Business School, and it was the Stanford Business School, by the way. It wasn't hidden away somewhere in the psychology department. And that's because the premise of the course is that people do business with people not ideas, not products, not machines, not tactics, strategies, not even money, they do business with people. So you better get the people part right if you really want to succeed. And that interpersonal competence is a determinant of both personal and professional success. So, to your question, I've lost track of how many hundreds of emails and calls and visits I've had from former students who come to tell me I just became a CEO. I'm pretty sure I owe it all to you. I just raised my third round. I'm pretty sure I owe it all to you.

(00:09:20):
I just figured out how my co-founder and I are going to navigate this very difficult situation we're in. Thank you for everything you taught me, and those are exceedingly satisfying. And I'll tell you, even more rewarding for me are the, "I'm pretty sure your class just saved my marriage." I just reconciled my relationship with my brother who I hadn't talked to for two years because he voted for X and I voted for Y. We don't need to get into who X and Y are. And now I get thank you for finally writing a book because my VP of product didn't go to Stanford and doesn't understand what I'm talking about. So at least I bought them a book and now I've got more and more folks sending people to Leaders in Tech, which we can talk about later, which is the nonprofit I started after I left Stanford, so that more and more people can learn this from more than just a book.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:19):
Amazing. And I think what I love, you also shared this point that many people told you that that one class at Stanford Business School at GSB was made them feel like their entire college tuition was worth it from that one class, which is so surprising because it's called Touchy Feely, it has nothing to do specifically with business.

Carole Robin (00:10:38):
Except of course it has everything to do with business.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:41):
So to follow that thread, can you just talk about what this class is trying to do, what the goal of this class is and what actually goes on in this class? And again, people call this class Touchy Feely. I think it's technically called Interpersonal Dynamics.

Carole Robin (00:10:57):
That's correct.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:58):
Okay.

Carole Robin (00:10:58):
That's correct. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:00):
Yeah. What is this class all about? Help people understand what goes on here.

Carole Robin (00:11:03):
Well, first of all, it's a quarter long class at a really fundamental level we've already really talked about what goes on there. People learn how to be more interpersonally competent or how to connect with other people in more functional ways. And what I mean by connect is learn how I need to show up in order for you to trust me, in order for you to feel closer to me, in order for you to want to spend more time with me in a leadership. By the way, this is part of the leadership curriculum I taught, in a leadership sense that makes you more likely to want to follow me because in the end, that's the question leaders should ask themselves, "Why should somebody follow me?" And you know what? You could study other leaders. Why did somebody follow Steve Jobs? Why did somebody follow Ursula at Xerox? Why did some people follow Sheryl Sandberg or why should somebody follow me? Because I'm not any of those people. So the question I ask my students to sit in and now my Leaders in Tech participants to sit in is why should somebody follow you?

(00:12:18):
Now, there are lots of reasons why people might follow you. You've got a great vision that's very inspiring. You have a product that they want to bring into the world. They think they may make a lot of money if they hitch their wagon to you. Those are all good reasons. But if you want to build a sustainable long-term legacy, then you probably want to think about showing up in a way that other people come to see you as a referent figure, somebody in their life that they say, "When I grow up, I want to be more like that." And that is a form of power. There's a lot of research that supports this, referent power. You're a referent figure, and then people are much likely to be open to your influence, and open to working harder, and open to doing some of the things that you believe are going to make you great as a whole organization.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:27):
The class is quite unusual in that there's not just a bunch of lectures and talks, there's a lot of experiential pieces where you have to do quite uncomfortable things in order to learn how to do this well. Can you share an example or two of some of the things you put people through, whatever you're able to share?

Carole Robin (00:13:45):
Sure. I mean, I think that we don't learn to be... And I don't learn how to connect with you by reading about it in a book, which by the way is why it took us four years to write our book because at the end of every chapter there's a, here are things you can go do with what you just learned in the reading. And likewise in the class, the lectures are scaffolding on which you can hang your experience. But most of the learning happens in these small groups called T groups. The T stands for training, not therapy. And sometimes people think they sound like therapy, and they sometimes even experience them as feeling a little bit like therapy, but that's not what they are. We call them training groups. And what happens in that group is that there's 12 participants and two facilitators, and they are, for example, given a task, I might pair two students up and say, okay, you've got 10 minutes.

(00:14:51):
Allow the other person to get to know you. And that's the only instruction I give. Okay, so now you and I look at each other and we're like, "I don't know what the heck that's supposed to mean." And then maybe I share something about myself or maybe I ask you a question or who knows what I do with that, and then who knows what you do with that? So after 10 minutes, then I stop them and I say, okay, so take a moment and recognize that you just had a bunch of choices that you actually probably never even think about. You had a choice whether you began by sharing something or you waited for the other person to be in. You had a choice whether you began with a question, which was a nice, safe place to be, or whether you began with a disclosure.

(00:15:40):
Then you had choices with regard to how you responded to what your partner did. And the whole course is about having interactions and then having the guidance and the space and the time and the focus to unpack what just happened. So now do you want to have a more conversation with this person or less? Are you intrigued or are you like, "Can I just get paired up with somebody else?" But now we get to talk about it. And then I put them into a second conversation and I say, okay, now having learned that, by the way, one of the ways we build relationships is through disclosure, through allowing ourselves to become more known. So that's a little mini lecture. And then I say, okay, now go back into your pair and see whether or not you want to make some new choices.

(00:16:33):
And then of course, that's all I always say, confidentiality is a very important aspect of all this work. So in the pair conversations, in the group conversations, I call them the Vegas Rule. What happens if Vegas stays in Vegas. And so I don't ask for any specifics, but I'll ask them for, was there a qualitative difference between the first and second conversation? And they inevitably say, "Oh my God. The first conversation is the conversation I have in the bar all the time with somebody." And the second conversation was a little more uncomfortable, but I sure feel a lot more known, and I think I know my partner a little bit more and now they've had a little taste of what it's going to be like.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:18):
Amazing example. So what I want to do with the rest of our chat is basically go through many of the lessons and insights and lectures that you give in this course. Obviously, they're not going to be able to practice the way they would practice in a class. But before we get in there, let's actually talk about, so there's this course at Stanford, and you also now have a program called Leaders in Tech where anyone can participate. They don't have to be going to Stanford Business School. Talk about what this is and how people can participate if they want to go deeper on the stuff we're going to talk about.

Carole Robin (00:17:47):
So Leaders in Tech is a nonprofit that two of my co-founders and I started, I guess in January of 2018. We started it with a program called The Fellows Program, which is a 10-month program that starts with a four-day retreat that's like Touchy Feely on steroids because Touchy Feely is a quarter long class, and then it continues on a monthly basis for a day or half a day a month to get the rest of what we might call Carole Robin curriculum because I also taught a course called High Performance Leadership. I also called Taught Leadership Coaching and Mentoring. So there were other things besides Touchy Feely. Then what happened was that our fellows who went through our first couple of cohorts said, because the Fellows Program is open to founders, either current or previous founders or co-founders of a company that has not gone public.

(00:18:51):
And what we're trying to do is we're trying to influence the cultures of the future of Facebook's and Google's of the world, not the current ones. And so that program has a more limited number of people that can apply to it. However, one of the things that happened was we got a lot of people who said, but I'm not a founder and I still want that. And we also had fellows who went through the program that said, what about my people, my chief people officer, my VP of engineering? So then we'd started just a four-day version of the Touchy Feely, which anybody could apply to. I mean, actually not anybody. You do have to be a manager of some kind, and you do have to be in tech for now.

(00:19:37):
So that's where people get the real on the ground experience. They all get a copy of the book, and of course, if you don't want to go through the program or it's not the right time or you want to start somewhere else, you can start with the book. But if you just buy the book and you read it and you put it back on your shelf, you're not going to learn anything. Don't waste your money. If you're going to buy the book, buy at least one other copy and give it to somebody with whom you actually want to develop a stronger relationship and read it together and do the activities at the end of every book, and then you start to get a taste of what it's like to go through the course.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:18):
So just to close the loop there, how do people learn more and apply and join this program?

Carole Robin (00:20:21):
Www.leadersintech.org.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:25):
Awesome. And around the time this episode comes out, there's a deadline roughly around that time?

Carole Robin (00:20:31):
There is. Around when this episode comes out. So we do these four-day retreats all year, so there's no deadline to apply for that, but if you're interested in the ten-month program that starts with the four-day retreat and then has all that additional stuff, then deadline for that is May one. Actually, it might even how many days? It might be April. I don't remember how many days there are in April, but it's either the last day of April or May one.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:00):
April 30th.

Carole Robin (00:21:01):
Yeah, there you go. So it's probably April 30th. So check it out. You have to be nominated in order to apply. Don't let that stop you. If you look at it all and you decide you want to apply, just apply and say, Carole, I listened to Carole Robin on this podcast, you told me to apply.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:23):
Okay, great.

Carole Robin (00:21:25):
Don't waste time trying to find somebody to nominate you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:27):
How amazing. Okay. Or you're going to be flooded with applications.

Carole Robin (00:21:31):
Again, from your mouth to God's ears.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:35):
Okay, so let's get into a lot of the stuff that you teach. So you mentioned progressive disclosure, so that might be a good place to start. What's the lesson there? What is it that people get wrong? Why is that important?

Carole Robin (00:21:46):
So first of all, when we disclose, we make ourselves more vulnerable, and vulnerability and disclosure tend to be reciprocal. If I hold my cards really close, you're going to hold your cards even closer. So one of the things to learn to do is to experiment. And what works with one person isn't going to work without somebody else necessarily because every relationship is its own fabulously interesting and always unfolding dynamic is to experiment with allowing myself to be a little bit more known, and then seeing what happens and whether or not you reciprocate. Now, a really important concept we teach that you and I have talked about before is called the 15% rule. And what that is that we all have a comfort zone. Imagine a circle in the middle called the comfort zone, this picture's in the book, and that we don't think twice about what we say, and then there is a danger zone, which is a circle way on the outside.

(00:22:57):
So these are concentric circles if you're not watching the video, and I never in a million years say that or tell you that, but there's this really important circle in the middle, which is called the learning zone. In academia, they have to have fancy words for very easy concepts, it's called the zone of proximal development. But basically it means that's where you learn. And you have to step outside your comfort zone in order to learn anything, and especially in order to create a deeper connection with somebody. However, my students used to say, "But Carole, the minute I step outside my comfort zone, how do I know I'm not in my danger zone?" I hear this learning zone, but how do I know I didn't go too far? So we came up with the 15% rule. So step a little bit outside your comfort zone. If you step a little bit outside your comfort zone, you're very unlikely to freak yourself or the other person out.

(00:23:53):
But you'll know, you'll feel it a little bit, you'll be like, okay, I feel just a little uncomfortable saying this, but I think I'm going to try. And then depending on how you respond, then we settle into a new comfort zone, a slightly larger circle, which is our comfort zone with each other. Then we can go 15% beyond that, and that's how we learn and grow and deepen our relationship. The same thing by the way applies to feedback when we get into that later. So we have to step outside our comfort zone in order to deepen and strengthen relationships.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:27):
What are some examples of stepping outside your comfort zone, disclosing what is it that you find people maybe aren't disclosing enough of or areas they should disclose? Is it challenges they're having in their life?

Carole Robin (00:24:38):
Well, of course, context matters. It depends on who I'm talking to. And by the way, disclosure, I want to underscore a concept that we also very much teach, which is appropriate disclosure. If I'm the VP of marketing and I get up in front of the troops and I say, "Well, third month in a row we've lost share and I have no idea what's happening or why or what to do about it, and I'm feeling pretty crappy about myself, I'm not even sure I should be your VP of marketing." That might be vulnerable and disclosure, but it is not appropriate Vulnerability and that it's not what we're talking about. The flip side of that is that I get up in front of the troops and I pretend nothing is happening. That doesn't build my credibility either. So I can get up and say, okay, probably no secret to most of you, that's the third month in a row, we've lost share.

(00:25:39):
And man, I wish I could stand up here and tell you I know exactly what's happening and I know exactly what we should do about it, but I don't, and I have never needed you all more. Now, who would you rather follow? So I think in business, and for a very long time, leaders were socialized to, first of all, leave all feelings in the parking lot. I've got an anecdote I often tell about my very first job, which I'm happy to tell you if you want. And there's no place for vulnerability or for sharing feelings. Are you kidding, feelings in the workplace? Now, I ask you, how do you inspire anybody with no feelings? How do you motivate anybody with no feelings? How do you become seen as a real person with no feelings? Why should somebody who is a robot who is robotic follow you? And the answer to that sometimes in the valley especially is because they're going to follow you for a while because you've got a really great idea. And the minute they've got another choice, man, they are out of there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:50):
And so a lot of this connects to this broad piece of advice you always give people is just and focus on vulnerability. You spend a lot of time teaching people just the power vulnerability, which is not intuitive. A lot of people try to move away from showing vulnerability. There's this quote I saw somewhere that "A willingness to be vulnerable makes you not less influential as a leader." Can you just talk about why that is?

Carole Robin (00:27:15):
Yeah, you asked me whether or not I held any contrarian views and I said, yeah, that's one of them. I actually think that a leader who is willing to be appropriately vulnerable is a stronger leader. And so I'll give you this short example of what happened to me because it encompasses a lot of what we've been talking about. So in 1975, I went to work for the largest industrial automation company in the world as the first woman in a non-clerical job. I was a sales engineer, and yes, I am old, but the dinosaurs were not roaming the earth. And the first thing I learned was you leave feelings in the parking lot, whatever you do, you never talk about your feelings or express feelings in the workplace. It's unprofessional. I was like, okay. I got pretty good at it. In fact, I got very good at it.

(00:28:13):
Ironic, given that I eventually became known as the queen of putty-feely at Stanford. But at the time, I got very good at it. I'm not a career academic. I've had six different careers. And 10 years later I'm at an off-site and I've been promoted many times, I'm now running a $50 million region. I've got a half a dozen guys that work for me. And yes, ladies, if you're listening, I did finally fix that, but at that point, I still hadn't quite fixed it. And we're sitting there and I had an idea, it doesn't matter what it was, but I got a little excited about it and I got crickets and I got a little more excited and I got crickets. I was like, "Come on you guys, this could be really cool. Why can't you see how cool this could be?" And one of my guys leans in, looks at me and says, "Carole, is that like water in the corner of your eye? Oh my God, are you going to cry?" And then he says, "Are you human after all?"

(00:29:09):
Are you human after all? And then I burst out crying and I tore up our agenda and I said, "You don't think I'm human?" I don't think there is anything more important for us to spend our off-site talking about than that. And we spent the next two days talking about who we were, why we were there, what we wanted, what was important to us, how we could help each other. To this day, I believe that was the day I became a leader. To this day I know for a fact any of them would follow me anywhere.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:40):
To help people build this muscle and start to practice this to try 15% disclosure, try to be a little more vulnerable. Is there any other examples or just tidbits you can share of like, here's something you should start doing more and more?

Carole Robin (00:29:54):
Let's start with you can start admitting mistakes, especially when everybody knows you made one, you actually lose a lot more credibility by ignoring it. And you can start again 15% by experimenting with sharing what's going on for you, particularly with regard to feelings a little bit more often. So there's a recent course is called Touchy-Feely emphasis on the feely and not the touchy. And that's because so much of our ability to develop this competence comes down to the appropriate use of feelings. That's why a vocabulary of feelings, how sad is it? We had to develop a vocabulary feelings because that's how hard it is for people to even access what they're feeling. So there's a vocabulary feelings in the syllabus, in the course, in the appendix of the book. Every member, every person who ever goes through a leaders in tech program gets it. And it starts with allowing yourself to be known, not just in terms of facts and... Feelings give meaning to facts.

(00:31:12):
Let me give you another example. If I tell you I went ziplining, well, that's interesting. Maybe you learned something about me. Maybe you start to make up all sorts of interesting stories about me. But if I tell you I went ziplining and I was terrified, but I went because I felt coerced by my family and I didn't want to be left alone back and then miss out. Well, you learned a lot more about me, didn't you? One of my most satisfying moments at the very first Leaders in Tech retreat we ever did was of a former student of mine who had taken Touchy Feely 15 years before, and who said, based on everything I learned 15 years ago from Carole, I couldn't imagine what I would learn if I came back. So I'm back. And he said, but Carole or no Carole, I will not sit around for four days talking about how we're all crushing it. I will leave.

(00:32:15):
I was like, "Oh," I was so proud. And now there are times when a leader does have to stand up and say, yeah, we're crushing it. So another really, really important thing that people don't understand is that all of this is very nuanced and very context dependent, and most people unanswered Tell me what to do when X happens. Well, did X happen with this person or this person? What relationship do you have with them in the first place? Are there 20 people in the room of 250? Is this being recorded? There's just so many different things. Who's going to have access to it? There's so many things that you have to consider, and especially today, I know I'm old and this will sound predictable, but I am not a social media fan. I think it has done more to destroy strong relationships and to destroy people's ability to even learn or think about what it takes to have a great relationship.

(00:33:26):
Anyway, we could do a whole podcast on that. I have a former Leaders in Tech fellow who sent me this fantastic, here's another great example, sent me an email and maybe he called me, I don't remember. It doesn't matter. He said, "So I had my all-hands meetings are every Monday morning, on Friday, I found out we had missed a major deadline on a product release, and I spent the entire weekend just furious, pissed off, wanting to fire a lot of them," and he said, "And then on Sunday afternoon, I remembered part of what you taught us was that anger is often a secondary emotion and often under anger is either fear or hurt. And then I realized, oh yeah, I'm actually feeling pretty scared here, that nobody is as worried about this as I am."

(00:34:24):
And so he said, "So on Monday morning, instead of getting up and blasting them all as I was prepared to do, I got up and I said, so, gang, I am deeply worried and afraid that I'm the only person here who is as concerned about this missed deadline as I am and what it's going to mean to our customers." And he said, "I have never had my troops rally to fix something faster." So appropriate use of feelings is something most people don't know how to do. They don't even know how to access the feeling. I told this particular anecdote about anger being a secondary emotion at a very big workshop a number of months ago, and a woman walked up to me and said, "Wow, thank you so much. I've never understood that my husband Carries so much fear and so much hurt because he only ever leads with anger. It never even occurred to me something else might be going on." And anger is a distancing emotion, whereas hurt, fear, sadness, loneliness, happiness, joy are all connecting emotions. So those are kinds of things people learn when they come through our programs.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:47):
Oh, man, you're blowing my mind already. I can see why marriages are saved by a lot of these things you teach. That's a really profound point you're just making there that anger is a secondary emotion. Really what's going on is you're afraid or you're hurt. Is there anything more you can add there because this feels very important?

Carole Robin (00:36:06):
That is normally what's going on, except we've all been socialized not to be vulnerable, especially in business and naming any of those other things makes us feel vulnerable. So somehow being angry doesn't make us feel vulnerable. That's the okay emotion, as long as you express it in an appropriate way, but it's a distancing emotion. What a disservice to everybody in business. What a disservice to professional learning, to not help people understand that anger is a distancing emotion and that there are other emotions that are appropriate and that are connecting.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:46):
This connects so beautifully to your first point we talked about of being vulnerable and disclosing more and how I completely see how if you were just to share, I'm afraid of this, how that brings people closer to you and feels like they will trust you more versus you not sharing that.

Carole Robin (00:37:03):
Right. It connects to something else. You and I talked about one of the biggest gifts I think people get out of taking Touchy Feely or going through the Leaders in Tech program or even reading the book is that they learn that they hold some mental models, some beliefs and assumptions. If I do this, that will happen, or if I don't do this, this will happen. And those are beliefs and assumptions that we develop very early in our careers like I did. Whatever you do, you leave your feelings in the parking lot. And it served me really well initially. If I'd burst out crying two months into the job, I'd have never ended up running a $50 million region and then it over served me, and then it cost me because I never had a reason to update it.

(00:37:56):
Because I never realized I was paying a cost for continuing to hold that belief that drove my behaviors. And mental models, then we developed them very early and they're grooved and we need new experiences in order to even believe that they're maybe subject to testing. Gee, I will forever be grateful to this fellow who said, "Oh my God, are you human after all?" I was like, how did this ever happen that I became seen as not human? Again, we go back to some of the stuff we talked about earlier, which is that leaders, if a leader doesn't show up with a willingness to update their mental models and their beliefs, they're certainly not going to inspire anybody else to do that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:59):
I'm glad you got here because this is exactly where I was going to go next, is this mental model challenge we run into where we develop these mental models early on and then they end up hurting us later in life. Are there common mental models people have that hurt them as they grow? Or is it very particular independent on people's experience?

Carole Robin (00:39:17):
I mean, there are some that are pretty tried and true. I mean, the first one is, if I tell you more about me, you'll take advantage of me. Or if I am vulnerable with you or disclosing, you'll think I'm weak. And inevitably, somebody has had a time in their life where that has been true, and maybe it was true a lot, but then they decide that's the only outcome that's ever possible as opposed to part of growing up and becoming more mature is differentiating and being more discretionary in who we open up to and how we open up to them. It's like I have a colleague who often says, we have to think about these things as dials, not switches. It's not an all or I don't tell you everything or nothing. I don't share every single feeling I've got or none. It's a dial and you move it at 15% rate.

(00:40:22):
Another mental model people hold, and this becomes a huge learning for people who go through our programs, is people think if I give you feedback, it's going to ruin the relationship. It's going to weaken the relationship. Whoa, that's really common. Even though everybody's always wanting, I want more feedback, I want to know how it can be better, but everybody believes that giving feedback is going to create a problem. And that's because most people have in fact been on the receiving end of feedback poorly given or they've given feedback in a not very good way. They've stepped in piles of doodoo, yes. And it does not mean feedback ruins relationships. It means feedback the way you've always seen it done or done. It ruins relationships pretty important. And then one of the things that we arm people with, I think one of the most powerful pieces of learning that people get is learning how to give feedback in a way that is going to build relationships as opposed to, and it's going to build a relationship.

(00:41:29):
If you see that my reason for wanting to give it to you is that I'm invested in you and in us it's similarly, we hold mental models about expressing what we call pinches, which are just those little things that people do. Then we're just like, eh, I'm not going to make a big deal out of it. I'm not going to say anything, but mental model is, eh, it's a small thing. The problem is, if I'm doing something that's mildly irritating and you don't tell me, then what am I going to do?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:01):
You're doing it.

Carole Robin (00:42:01):
And then are you going to get less irritated or more irritated?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:02):
More irritated.

Carole Robin (00:42:04):
Yeah. Now, if I get less irritated or it doesn't change, then you're right. I shouldn't say anything. But if I have the wherewithal to notice, this is why we talk about two antenna, which I'll come back to notice that I'm getting more and more activated, more and more irritated, then it's really important for me to say something. And by the way, address it while it's still small and then it won't get big. That's why we call it talk about a pinch before it becomes a crunch, and then it becomes a much bigger deal. But most of the time we say it's not worth it. So I always tell students, okay, substitute the pronoun, substitute the word it for I, you, we. I'm not worth it, you're not worth it. We're not worth it. And then ask yourself again whether it's worth raising.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:56):
This episode is brought to you by the a16z Podcast. Every week on this podcast, you get to hear from product leaders and growth experts from some of the world's most impactful companies, whether it's Airbnb, Slack, Figma, or Stripe. But what will the next wave of companies look like? One firm might have a clue, and recent Horowitz invested in all four of the companies I just mentioned and their flagship podcast, the a16z Podcast features conversations with the very founders and technologists shaping our future. Recent episodes feature folks like Marc Andreessen, longtime builders like Adam D'Angelo from Quora and Mark Pincus from Zynga, even some voices from the government like the CIA's first-ever chief technology officer, Nand Mulchandani. From drones to DNA to deep learning, you can eavesdrop on the future with the a16z Podcast. I want to talk about how to give feedback well, but I think it might be helpful to talk about this concept that you call the three realities and the net, because I think that sets up a lot of this.

Carole Robin (00:44:00):
Yeah. And in fact, it is fundamental to giving feedback.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:03):
Well, awesome.

Carole Robin (00:44:04):
So they're very related. You were right on the money. And you know what, let me just take a moment and talk. I mentioned the two antennae, and this is in the book, but we're all equipped with two antennae. One is tracking what's going on for me, my internal antenna. The other one is trying to pick up signals on what might be going on for you. And first of all, recognizing those two antennae exist. Second of all, learning how to hone our ability to pick up subtler and subtler signals make us more interpersonally competent. That's also why I'm a big believer in meditation and awareness. So, anyway, if we now fast-forward to your question about how to give feedback well, which has to do with understanding the three realities. It starts with in any exchange between two people, there are three realities. There is my intent, how I see the world, my background, my history, there is what I do or say or don't do, verbal or nonverbal.

(00:45:09):
So my reality is reality number one, my behavior, verbal or nonverbal is reality number two. And whatever happens on your end is reality. Number three, the impact of what I've said or done, how you see things, your background. So there's these three distinct realities. And the trouble we get into when we don't recognize that those three realities exist is we don't understand that we are only privy to two out of the three. So I know what's going on for me, and I know what I did. I have no idea what happened on your end. You know what I did and how it impacted you. So your two are... The only one we share is the one in the middle in common, the behaviors right now, we draw a metaphorical net between reality number one and reality number two to help people understand. And anybody who's ever taken Touchy Feely in no matter which context knows the saying, "Stay on your side of the net."

(00:46:28):
Meaning stick with the two realities you know because we get in trouble the minute we start thinking we know the other person's reality. Right? So I've told this anecdote many times, it might even be in the book, but I come home... I'm sorry, my husband comes home after a very long day in the valley. He was an executive. I've got two little kids, infant and a 2-year-old. I've been waiting for him to come home. I come running into the front room. In those days, by the way, we still had newspapers. He's reading the newspaper and I say, "Oh my God. Oh my God, you're home. I can't wait until I tell you what happened tonight. I can't believe what happened. Why are we living in Palo Alto, Jesus Christ? I don't want to raise kids in Palo Alto. It's a terrible town. I wish that new nursery school, it hasn't even opened. It's already closed. Oh my God."

(00:47:18):
And then he says, "mm-hmm, great. "So then I say, you're not listening. And by the way, people have been taught iMessages, I feel that you're not listening is exactly the same thing, it doesn't have a single feeling word in it. I don't know whether he was listening or not. I'm over the net. I'm in his court unless I'm in his head. I don't know whether he was listening or not. But then he says, yeah, I was listening. You're all worked up. You went to that new nursery school. Actually it's more like this. Yeah, you're all worked up and you went to that new nursery school hasn't even opened. You're all worked up. Now I get a little bit more activated and I say, "How can you not care?" First of all, he didn't say, I don't care, did he? I don't know whether he cares or not. And by the way, "How can you be so insensitive?"

(00:48:13):
And I feel that you don't care and I feel you're being insensitive are not feelings. They're attributions and imputed motives, and that's where we make our biggest mistakes when it comes to feedback. And what that does is it makes the other person defensive. So calling my husband insensitive is the most insensitive thing in the world because he's one of the most sensitive people on the planet. So it wasn't until I learned to stay on my side of the net and say, so when I speak and I'm all worked up about something and the only thing I get back from you are either a grunt or an affectless repetition of what I just said, that's reality number two, anybody watching the video would say, that's what happened, I don't feel heard. He can't say, yeah, you do. And when I don't feel heard, I feel hurt and I feel distanced.

(00:49:11):
And the reason I'm telling you that is because I can't be here for you in the way I want to be when I feel that way. So the formula is when you do insert behavior, I feel pull out the vocabulary of feelings and I'm telling you this because, or I'm hoping the outcome of you knowing this is. And so then what happened is he said, "Well, if you want my undivided attention, then you've got to give me some time to unwind when I get home." What a reasonable request. I said, "Well, how much time do you need?" He said, "I don't know, half an hour." "I was like, half an hour?" I've been counting the minutes. How about five minutes? We settled on 15. And by the way, that is the purpose of feedback. When it's constructive feedback, move into a problem-solving conversation, don't change the other person. Move into behaviors that will work better for both of you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:14):
Amazing. And this structure, so the structure you just shared, and this is similar to nonviolent communication structure?

Carole Robin (00:50:14):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:21):
Okay, cool.

Carole Robin (00:50:21):
It is.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:22):
So there's books people can read on this-

Carole Robin (00:50:23):
Right. Ours came before, but that's okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:26):
Oh, wow. Okay. Good to know.

Carole Robin (00:50:30):
I will say anything that spreads the word and anything that helps people learn how to engage with each other in ways that build relationship, I'm all for.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:42):
I love that attitude. Okay, so the structure again is just when you do some behavior, I feel an emotion. By the way, is there a flyer or handout? I think the book has these of just emotions. Okay, cool. And feelings.

Carole Robin (00:50:58):
The vocabulary of feelings is an appendix in the book.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:01):
Okay, great.

Carole Robin (00:51:02):
As is the formula.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:04):
Amazing. Okay, great. So by the book, if you want to get really good at this stuff, is there anything online we can point people to, or?

Carole Robin (00:51:10):
We got a picture of the... I'll send you a couple of slides.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:14):
Perfect.

Carole Robin (00:51:16):
And then you can just say, here are the slides.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:17):
Amazing. So we'll link to that in the show notes. And as you talk through all of these lessons and pieces of advice, it makes so much sense why this is something you need to do. Because I imagine what's happening in the class here is you do this with someone and then you hear the reality and it often surprises you. Right?

Carole Robin (00:51:36):
Exactly. Because often we say it takes two to know one, I don't know what impact I'm having on you until you tell me. And I have to be willing to be a little vulnerable to ask. And if we go back to that first activity that you asked me to describe way at the beginning, then we put them back in pairs and we say, okay, now that you've learned a little bit about feedback, tell your partner what they did that made it easier for you to disclose more and be more willing to be more vulnerable and/or what they did that made it a little harder. And right there in the moment, you learned something about yourself that you might never have known. Somebody says, you looked away as I was talking, you might not have even known you did that. You looked at your watch. And I love this.

(00:52:34):
One of my greatest moments when I was teaching was that I asked a question. I was teaching in a big lecture hall at the law school, and they didn't have any clocks on the wall. And I asked a question and a student began answering, and I just glanced at my watch just because I was trying to figure out where I was in terms of when I had to wrap up. And he walked up to me after class and he said, "Professor, I felt disrespected when you looked at your watch while I was answering," I hugged him. Well, first I asked him if it was okay, "Is it okay if I hug you?" And then I hugged him.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:12):
And I love how so much of this is like, we never get this feedback in real life. No one ever tells us this thing you did is distracting them, annoying them, making them feel like they're not being heard.

Carole Robin (00:53:22):
And then guess what? Then he leaves and then somebody says, how was that? He says, oh, she's really disrespectful. And then pretty soon nobody's ever even been there. But my reputation is that I don't respect students. That's how stuff gets out of control.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:36):
Yeah. And you wish people would tell you, right? Everybody wants this, but it's so hard and uncomfortable to tell anyone negative feedback.

Carole Robin (00:53:45):
Which by the way, I never used the word negative when it comes to feedback.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:48):
Okay. Okay.

Carole Robin (00:53:50):
So feedback is either constructive or complimentary. Constructive feedback is there's something you're doing that is problematic, and the purpose of it is let's move to a problem solving conversation like with Andy and me. The purpose of complimentary feedback is, wow, that's the third time you've handed in that report early and completely, and you even went above and beyond and did this and this. I can't tell you how much I appreciate that, how lucky I feel that you work for me. And if I'm telling you this, because if there's ever something that you want that we're not giving you, I want to make sure you know that I want to talk about it. By the way, same formula. Now compare that to nice job, thanks, right? All feedback is data. So all feedback is positive. More data is always better than less data.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:46):
I agree. That's a great lesson there. To maybe make this even more practical for listeners that are maybe working on a product and say they have to give feedback in a product design or to a colleague who did something wrong. Is there an example that you could share of just in the workplace.

Carole Robin (00:55:03):
I'm glad you asked that, because first of all, we're not talking about performance feedback and we're not necessarily talking about feedback on a task. What we're talking about is interpersonal feedback. And the reason it's so important is that if you don't take care of that, then that other feedback becomes unresolved. When you leave the interpersonal stuff unresolved, then the other feedback doesn't go well because the real problem is that I'm still pissed off that you never answered my phone call. So now I'm going to make it all about how this feature really is never going to work. Here's an example. Somebody walks into... A manager or a team leader or whatever, walks into a room meeting, starts a meeting by say, so I want to make sure we hear from everybody. I want to make sure that we have a very full conversation.

(00:55:58):
I want to talk about X. And now let's say that I start to say something and before I have finished, he says, yeah, and the other thing we should talk about is blah, blah. And then a little later a similar thing happens. I start to suggest that there's another way to look at this and he turns back to somebody else, what somebody else had said and never says anything in response to what I just said. And I'm being very specific here, very behaviorally specific. And then after a while, what happens to me is I feel less and less inclined to offer up anything. Now, maybe he doesn't care, but if he cares because he started by think he wanted to hear from everybody, then I'm not being very caring if I don't tell him what the impact was of his behavior. So I don't call him out in the middle of the meeting because I don't want to embarrass him, but I might go to his office later and say, "So, John, do you have a few minutes?" I have an observation.

(00:57:07):
I've got something that I experienced that you might want to know. "Sure, Carole." So when I started to say x, you did y. When I started to say z, you did it. I said, and when that you started the meeting by saying you want to hear from everybody. When that happened, I felt less and less... I felt shut down, and I felt less and less inclined to offer up my opinion. Maybe that's okay, but I wondered whether you knew that that was the impact. And I'm telling you, because as far as I am concerned, in that meeting, you did not accomplish your stated desire. Your desired outcome was to hear from everybody. And after a while, I just gave up trying to give you my...

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:52):
Well, it's like you need to solve these pinches as you described early, because all of this comes back to these are relationships, they matter because that's the way we get everything done. And if you just ignore these things, your relationship's going to be hurt. You're not going to be able to accomplish the things you want to accomplish. It's almost like something you need to do even though it feels hard.

Carole Robin (00:58:14):
Absolutely. And that's why I say that feedback builds relationships because by the way, if I'm doing something that I'm, I wish I hadn't done, it's not that I'm going to be like, "Oh yeah, I'm so glad I did that." But if I recognize that it would've been easier for you not to say anything because it would've been more comfortable, but because you cared about me, you actually said something to me, that talk about something that builds relationship.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:45):
Coming back to the antenna as you described feels like one of the most important skills you teach people is to build this antenna both of yourself, which is you could to think is easier, but maybe often not, but also understanding how the other person feels. And you have this concept of the art of inquiry and how powerful that is. Can you just talk about what that is?

Carole Robin (00:59:06):
Oh, yeah. I'm glad you brought that up, because inquiry is a fundamental component of strong interpersonal relationships for a couple of reasons. And first of all, let's stop and note, inquiry comes the root of the word inquiry is quest. Quest means to be in search of and not knowing what you're going to find, not the way most people think about questions and inquiries. Most of the time people ask a question to confirm a hypothesis. "Don't you think you're just trying to discredit John by doing that?" That's not inquiry. "Don't you think you'd just be better off letting that go?" That's not inquiry. And by the way, another thing to note in artful inquiry, first of all, you have to suspend judgment. You cannot be curious if you've already decided you know what's going on someone else. You can always go back to being judgmental, but you got to suspend it long enough to see if there's something for you to learn.

(01:00:12):
And then the way you ask the question matters, questions that can be answered with yes or no are typically limiting questions and aren't going to be very productive. Questions that start with why, why did you do that? Are going to make me defensive? Or worse, why are you crying? Well, is that going to make me want to tell you more about why I am upset or why are you upset? Right away I'm going to go into, "Oh no, I'm not upset. It's not a big deal." Or I'm going to go into a place that's not necessarily very productive because this reminds me of how my mother always scolded me. Neither one is going to be very productive. So questions that start with what? What's this about? What's going on? Where is this manifesting? When did you see this happen last? How might we go about unpacking what's going on? Where is this happening most? When, where, how, stay away from why. And it's a whole art.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:14):
Something else you teach people and you're big on is that people can actually change themselves. I think a lot of people might feel like, I'm just not good at this. I'm not good at giving feedback. I'm not good at maybe asking questions. I'm just like, I don't know. Talk about what you found about the change people see and why it's actually possible and how.

Carole Robin (01:01:35):
Well, for starters, to any of your listeners, one of my very favorite authors is Carol Dweck who wrote a book called Mindset and you put a word yet at the end of any of those, I don't know how yet, I'm not like that yet, changes the meaning of the whole thing. And by the way, talk about updating a mental model, instant update of a mental model. And the other thing that I'll say is we are all capable of changing our behavior. We cannot change our personality. We are born wired with personalities. I am very outgoing and extroverted as might come as a shock to all of you. And you know what? When I overdo it, I suck all the oxygen out of the room and one of the behaviors I had to learn, and it takes discipline to engage in was zipping it a little more so that others could speak up more.

(01:02:40):
And my incentive was that I actually really wanted to learn more about what was going on for them and I wasn't going to learn anything unless I shut up long enough for them to tell me. So behavior is something we all have control over. Now when I give somebody feedback and they tell me, well, I can't do that. If I've asked them to change a behavior, then I'll say, I'm sorry, I don't think I can accept I can't. I will accept I don't want to or I don't have it, but I don't have to accept I can't. So I'd just like you to own the fact that it's a choice that you're making.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:25):
Kind of along those lines, something, I don't know if this is from your book, but I saw somewhere you said that it's possible to say almost anything to almost anyone if you have the necessary skills. How do people build these skills? I know we talked about a lot of this through the structure focusing on your side of the net, but just how do you avoid people getting defensive?

Carole Robin (01:03:43):
First of all, let's make sure that we point out that what we're doing here is we're shifting probabilities of success, we're not guaranteeing anything. And let's say that you do your best and you stay on your side of the net and you give somebody feedback and they go bonkers and they call you all kinds of names and they write... Now there's an opportunity to learn something else that everybody learns in these programs, which is called repair. How do you repair when something goes sideways? Because no matter how good you are, no matter how skilled you get, no matter what your intent was, sometimes it won't work. And then you've got to know how to repair. And that's why, remember I told you that our facilitators have a unique set of skills? And that's because they have to allow messes to happen otherwise nobody's going to learn how to repair. And repair often goes back to some of what we've already talked about. Let's start with I come in the kitchen, my husband's struggling. I say to him, "Can I help you with that?" He says, "Don't tell me what to do."

(01:05:04):
I'm sure none of your listeners can relate to this story. And I say, instead of, "I wasn't trying to tell you what to do, I was just trying to be helpful. What a kind of way to respond to my offering help is that?" I say, "What did you hear me say?" One of the most powerful things you can do when somebody responds in a way that feels very unexpected and out of whack with what you just said is go back to, "What did you hear me say?" Because nine times out of 10 what they heard is not what you said. He said, "I heard you say I didn't know what I was doing." Now, by the way, it didn't matter. That's not what I said. And I didn't say, that's not what I said. I said, "Wow, really glad I asked, because now that I understand that that's what you heard, I understand why you reacted the way you did." And I said, "Let me try it again."

(01:06:04):
One of the ways that I show somebody that I love them is I offer to help and what would you like me to do if in a situation like this when I see you struggling? He says, "Wait for me to ask." And that was 25 years ago, and that has served us very well because we've been married 37 years, 39 years. And if we go back to feedback, you give somebody feedback, they get super defensive. By the way, net jumping invites net jumping, so they're likely to net jump too. And by the way, the minute you label somebody or you're over the net. In fact you sent me something that was really interesting that I wanted to find here because you said "Nobody is born with genes for being rude or self-involved." Well, guess what?

(01:06:56):
Rude and self-involved are labels that is not behaviorally specific. So calling somebody rude or self-involved is just going to make them defensive. But saying, I was interrupted three times, and I'm telling you this because you said you wanted to hear my opinion and I just thought you should know that I was put off by being interrupted, much less likely to incite defensiveness.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:34):
Absolutely. Just hearing what actually happened, staying on your side of the net.

Carole Robin (01:07:38):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:39):
So again, this always comes back to I could see this being so effective doing this in a class versus just listening to us and like, okay, I'm going to start staying in my side of the net and I'm going to prepare relationships. Are there any other examples of exercises you do in the class that might be helpful to people just to hear how you learn some of these things?

Carole Robin (01:07:57):
Every chapter in the book has a section at the end called Deepen Your Learning and those deep in your learning sections, every single one of them has a suggested activity, something you can go do, and some of those come from some of the things we do in the classroom. So that's one place to start in terms of trying to find very tactical and practical ways of applying some of this. The other thing that we often do, I often do in leaders in Tech, I used to do this less at Stanford because they did a lot of this in their T groups and they were actually in real time with each other putting everything they were learning to use. But sometimes with my execs in Leaders in Tech, I will, for example, put them in a trio and I will say to you, so Lenny, I want you to think of somebody who you would like to give feedback to and I want you to tell me what's the behavior they're engaging in?

(01:09:04):
How does it make you feel? What would be behind you wanting to tell them? What would be your desired outcome to the conversation? Then I become you, you become your difficult person because you know them and I don't, and we role play because you've now told me what you need, what you want, what's going on for you, and then you have to play your difficult person as well as you can. The third person's usually the observer who pinch hits and says, "Carole, I think that was over the net." "Carole, I don't think that was a behavior." And by the way, we say, I feel insert feeling, nine times out of 10 people say, I feel that, or I feel like, I feel that you don't care is not a feeling.

(01:09:56):
I feel like it doesn't matter, is not a feeling. I feel that you're not committed is not a feeling. In fact, they're all over the net. You're almost guaranteed to be over the net when you start I feel and put in like or that, guaranteed. Very easy hack. I feel pull up vocabulary feeling, you can't say grammatically correctly. I feel that sad or I feel that angry, or I feel that irritated or I feel like disappointed, doesn't work.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:28):
This is amazing marriage advice going to, I need to remember these things.

Carole Robin (01:10:34):
Yeah. Many married couples have bought the book together and read it together actually, which is cool.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:41):
There's a few other things I want to touch on that I love. One is a tip that you share. You call it advise hinders relationships.

Carole Robin (01:10:49):
Oh, I'm really glad you asked me about that because two things, a couple of things. First of all, leaders often believe this is another mental model that they have to have all the answers, and that is actually a pretty, it's not a very productive mental model or belief because first of all, puts a huge amount of pressure on the leader. Now suddenly I always have to know and what happens when I don't know. Second of all, I believe a leader's job is to ensure the best answer is found. It doesn't matter whether it comes from me or anywhere else in the organization. It also allows for the possibility that somebody else may have a better answer than me. And a really, really good solution has been squelched and never surfaced because people are afraid to say, well, I see it a little differently. What if we did this?

(01:11:50):
We had a or disaster as a result of that. The other thing about advice is that it creates even bigger power differentials between people. So if you're the leader or you're in the higher power position to start with, then giving me advice is only going to make me feel even lower power as opposed to, well, let's think about this together. Let's be thought partners. Often when we give advice, it's a good thing to stop yourself and ask yourself, "Who am I doing this for? Am I doing this for me so that I can puff myself up with everything I know or am I doing it for you because this is really going to help you and make you better?"

(01:12:34):
Nine times out of 10, being a thought partner as you explore the various options and coming to your own solution is both going to help you develop more, and then you're not going to have to come ask me again if the only time you ever learn is when you come ask me and you don't go through any of the work or figuring out how I got to that answer, well, then I've just made more work for myself.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:03):
There's this great Harvard Business Review post I just read about monkeys on your back. Have you heard of this?

Carole Robin (01:13:09):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:09):
Yeah. Where basically as a manager, people are always trying to put monkeys on your back to have you solve their problem, and your job as a manager is to keep the monkeys on their own backs and help them.

Carole Robin (01:13:19):
Yes, and I'm glad you brought that up because people then have become so used to the quick shortcut is you'll just give me the answer. First of all, you have enabled powerlessness. You certainly haven't helped them learn and grow. If you at all think your job as a manager is to at least sometimes do that, and sometimes people will say, "Can't you just give me the answer?" And then I always just say, I could and here's why I'm not going to because I don't think that'll serve you because that's not my job. My job isn't just to give you the answers. My job is to turn you into somebody who eventually will just know what the right answer is.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:03):
But just give me the answer. Does this apply to friendships also? I know often people come to you as a friend, I need some advice on this. Does this apply as well? Often try not to give advice, or is it a different dynamic there?

Carole Robin (01:14:20):
Well, some of the same power differential can happen. I think chapter four in the book is about two guys who were good friends and one of them is always trying to give advice to the other one. First of all, it can be annoying if you didn't ask for it. So I certainly wouldn't give advice unless somebody asked for it, and I might not immediately jump to the advice, I might want to explore. What have you already thought about? How have you already approached it? Where are you stuck? I might ask more questions before I immediately go into advice because by the way, nine times out of 10, you end up giving advice on something that's not really what the person was worried about or wondering about. So first go to inquiry. You can always come back to advice.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:21):
I find that every time I try to resist or I make myself resist giving advice and instead ask more questions, every single time, I realized, okay, I had no idea what they were actually looking for or what was going on, but it's hard to do. I'm just like, here, I just want to tell you, here's the thing.

Carole Robin (01:15:39):
Totally. Because you know what? It's another mental model. I serve you best by just giving you advice when you ask for it, that's the loving, caring thing to do. Well, it's a mental model. Try testing it and seeing whether or not it really turns out to still be valid.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:58):
And so maybe the more correct mental model is how would you describe it that it's often better to help the person figure it out, or is it that you just often don't actually understand what's going on?

Carole Robin (01:16:09):
The best thing to do first go to inquiry. Because by the way, I also, as you might imagine, I tend to err very much on the side of transparency, and so I'll say, man, I got all kinds of things going on in my head about what I think would be great for you to do, and I'm going to resist that because I, first of all may or may not hit the mark, so I'd really like to understand more. And second of all, I wonder if in the end be even more fruitful if we explore different things together.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:46):
Just a few more questions. One is, so we have this segment on the podcast that I call Failure Corner, where people share failure in their career and what they learn from it, and you have a really constructive way of thinking about failure with this great acronym. Can you talk about that?

Carole Robin (01:17:02):
The acronym is A-F-O-G, another F-ing... I don't know your audience well enough. Don't want to offend anybody.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:11):
Go for it. If you feel like-

Carole Robin (01:17:12):
Another Fucking Opportunity for Growth. Every student who ever took a class from me, every client who I have ever coached, every participant who's ever gone through Leaders in Tech knows that acronym because my question, when something has gone wrong or a person has experienced a failure, my first question is always, so what did you learn? Because there's always a lesson, and then usually what follows is, yeah, you just had an AFOG. And as a person who's had a lot of AFOGs throughout my life, it puts it in perspective. I like the perspective that it offers, so it's not the end of the world. Sometimes AFOGs are more painful than others. Some AFOGs take longer to recover from than others. Most of the time they're recoverable, particularly if I've invested the energy in really unpacking what there was for me to be to learn.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:27):
Yeah. So the advice here is when something goes wrong, when you fail, think of it as another fucking opportunity for growth, AFOG.

Carole Robin (01:18:27):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:27):
Okay.

Carole Robin (01:18:35):
That's exactly right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:37):
To even go full circle to where we started building exceptional relationships, building robust relationships. In the book, you have this checklist of just how to build an exceptional relationship. I know you don't have all this in your head, whatever.

Carole Robin (01:18:49):
Actually I probably do.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:50):
You probably do. What's on this list of just things you can do to build exceptional relationships?

Carole Robin (01:18:57):
Well, you can go back to the fact that there are six characteristics of exceptional relationships, and actually those are the characteristics that are present as a relationship is moving down this continuum that we've talked about. And the more each of these exists, the farther down the continuum you are. So the first one is I'm better known by you, and of course there's skills involved in how do I allow myself to be known. The second one is, I know you better and there's skills involved in getting to know you better. We've talked about many of them. The third one is we trust that our disclosures won't be used against us. The fourth one is we can be honest with each other. That's where all the feedback comes in. The fifth one is we know how to resolve conflict productively, and the sixth one is we are committed to each other's learning and growth. And when all six of those are present to varying degrees, you've moved farther down the continuum.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:00):
You wrote somewhere that you know your relationship has become exceptional when you and the other person don't have to hide important parts of yourself and can deal with major issues even if it feels scary.

Carole Robin (01:20:10):
Yep. I did write that somewhere and I stand by that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:15):
If you zoom out from all of your work and teachings, are there any overarching themes that continue to come up that you think are important for people to take away from this conversation?

Carole Robin (01:20:28):
Well, for starters, we're all works in progress, which means every relationship in your life is a work in progress. Because if I'm a work in progress and you're a work in progress, then by default so is our relationship. And so remembering that what worked with you two years ago may or may not work for you now because we're different people. So I think that's a biggie. I think stopping and becoming aware of what are the mental models that are driving these choices that I'm making, every behavior has in front of it a choice. If we stop long enough to become aware of it and in front of every choice, there's some belief. So I try to march myself back from the result to the behavior, to the choice, to the mental model that drove it or the skill or lack of skill.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:36):
Something that we didn't talk about at the beginning of this because it might distract people, but you've been dealing with Long COVID for almost two years at this point. Where are you at with it? How are things going and is there anything you've learned from this unexpected part of your life?

Carole Robin (01:21:54):
It's given me an opportunity to live a lot of what I teach. So I always taught in my leadership classes that the worst thing a leader can do is make an organization too dependent on them. If you care about building a sustainable long-term organization and a legacy, then it behooves you not to make the organization very dependent on you. So over the last 20 months, I have slowly and surely given more and more of my responsibilities to more and more members of the team to the point where hot off the press, I'm about to become only an advisor and step out of really all of my operational duties probably by the end of this year. Now, there was a point at which I was like, and oh my God, what happens if I get better suddenly? Because people do get better, and one of my very wise children said, "Mom, I'm pretty sure that if you suddenly get a lot better, they'll be happy to give you lots of stuff to do." So, anyway, that's one of probably the biggest lessons, and also it goes with a lesson around acceptance and accept.

(01:23:25):
I wrote a LinkedIn, I think a LinkedIn, not a blog paper, one of those LinkedIn things. If you go to my website, you can look at things I've written, I think it was called Long COVID and Acceptance or something like that. But it's about how acceptance is not resignation, and it's about having an opportunity to rethink a lot of things and reframe beliefs. And I think the last thing I'll say about it is that it has made me a much more empathetic person, and I think one of the really interesting and important things to learn and have always continued to learn in doing the interpersonal dynamics work we do is you never know what's going on for someone else.

(01:24:26):
And one of the worst things we can do is assume we know what's going on for someone else, and it's really easy to get really... I think I said this before we even got online, which is in the absence of data, people make shit up. So if you don't want people to make shit up about you, you're better off disclosing more because then you'll have more control over your self-definition, not less. People like to make sense of things. They will connect dots however way they want to unless you help them connect them the way you want them to. Another case for self-disclosure.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:04):
Well, Carole, I'm incredibly thankful that you made time for this. I know it's not the easiest thing to do these things.

Carole Robin (01:25:10):
Thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:11):
To remind people where to find Leaders in Tech and how to apply, tell them the website and who it's for specifically, so the right people go there. And then finally, just how can listeners be useful to you as a final question?

Carole Robin (01:25:23):
I'm on LinkedIn. You won't be able to just connect with me. I've got one of those things where you can't just connect. You need my email address so you can put my email address in the notes. Anybody's more than welcome... But if you connect with me, please don't try to sell me anything. The only reason it's set up that way is that too many people were trying to sell me too many things and I got exasperated. That's the only reason they wanted to connect. So I'm just going to trust that you'll reach out to me because you want to connect with me because you're interested in my work and that you'll also know and be sensitive to the fact that I have Long COVID. So my capacity to respond to messages and emails is definitely impacted. I used to be one of those you could count on me to always respond. By the way, another learning. It turns out everybody didn't write me off just because I couldn't respond to them right away.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:14):
That is a really great learning. Okay. And then the website for people that may want to apply and the applications are still open basically by the time this is leadersintech.org?

Carole Robin (01:26:23):
Right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:24):
Amazing. Carole, you are wonderful. Thank you so much for making time for this. Thank you for being here.

Carole Robin (01:26:32):
Thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:33):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Chris Hutchins (00:00:00):
Yes, there are four million podcasts. However, there are only about 150,000 podcasts that have had 10 episodes and have published in the last 10 days. So the easiest way to be in that top 5% ish. I don't know what the math there is. About 3%, 4% is to just stick to it. Like if you just do an episode a week for 10 weeks, you're now in the top 4% of all podcasts that anyone has created.

Lenny (00:00:30):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast. I'm Lenny and my goal here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. Today my guest is Chris Hutchins. Chris is not only a former product manager, founder and investor, he just this month went full-time on his podcast and the independent creator path. When I was looking for advice on how to build a podcast, Chris shared this awesome deck with a ton of great advice that he's built throughout his journey, and so I thought it'd be fun to spend an episode talking about all the things that you should know about launching and growing a podcast. Chris's podcast is called All the Hacks, covers all the ways to financially optimize your life, and it's one of the biggest business podcasts in the world. Chris has also been on the Tim Ferris Show actually, interviewing Tim Ferris.

(00:01:15):
He's also head of new product strategy at Wealthfront where he took some big, bold bets within the company, which we talk about. Chris is awesome and I am excited for you to learn from him. I bring you Chris Hutchins after a short word from our wonderful sponsors. This episode is brought to you by Notion. If you haven't heard of Notion, where have you been? I use Notion to coordinate this very podcast, including my content calendar, my sponsors, and prepping guests for launch of each episode. Notion is an all-in-one team collaboration tool that combines note-taking, document sharing, wikis, project management, and much more into one space that's simple, powerful and beautifully designed. And not only does it allow you to be more efficient in your work life, but you can easily transition to using it in your personal life, which is another feature that truly sets Notion apart.

(00:02:06):
The other day I started a home project and immediately opened up Notion to help me organize it all, learn more and get started for free at notion.com/lennyspod, take the first step towards an organized happy team today, again at notion.com/lennyspod. This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate growth. If your business stores any data in the cloud, then you've likely been asked or you going to be asked about your SOC 2 compliance. SOC 2 is a way to prove your company's taking proper security measures to protect customer data and builds trust with customers and partners, especially those with serious security requirements. Also, if you want to sell to the enterprise, proving security is essential. SOC 2 can either open the door for bigger and better deals or it can put your business on hold. If you don't have a SOC 2, there's a good chance you won't even get a seat at the table.

(00:03:05):
Beginning a SOC 2 report can be a huge burden, especially for startups. It's time consuming, tedious and expensive. Enter Vanta, over 3000 fast growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2. Vanta can get you ready for security audits in weeks instead of months, less than a third of the time that it usually takes. For a limited time, Lenny's Podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Just go to vanta.com/lenny, that's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discount. Get started today. Chris, welcome to the podcast.

Chris Hutchins (00:03:48):
Thanks for having me. I'm excited.

Lenny (00:03:50):
This is going to be a pretty unique episode, I think. You're a product manager and we're going to talk about some of the things you've learned being a PM on some really killer products. But what I want to spend most of our time on is talking about how to launch a podcast. You've built one of the most popular, biggest business podcasts in just like a year and a half. You've taught me some stuff, you've helped other people with their podcast and so I just thought it'd be really helpful just to talk about just the skill of building a podcast and all the things you should know. How does that sound?

Chris Hutchins (00:04:21):
Sounds great. You just did a episode about growing a newsletter business, which I was like, "This is awesome because I have a newsletter and I want it to be bigger." And I think anyone that's has knowledge to share. I talked to a PM yesterday who was like, "Oh, I've got all these product ideas. Maybe I'll start a podcast." So totally, this is fun.

Lenny (00:04:36):
Awesome. That's exactly how I've been thinking about it. First we did the newsletter and then podcast maybe the other things, I don't know what's left.

Chris Hutchins (00:04:42):
YouTube channel.

Lenny (00:04:43):
YouTube channel?

Chris Hutchins (00:04:44):
[inaudible 00:04:44] I don't know if you feel this way, but YouTube. I feel like just putting a podcast on YouTube isn't enough, I need to learn the skills of YouTube.

Lenny (00:04:51):
Yeah. All right. I got to get MrBeast on, that's the next goal. To set a little foundation for folks, to give him a little sense of your background and some of the things you've done in your career. Can you just talk about some of the biggest things you've done in your career, which you've been up to and then what you're up to now and also about your podcast?

Chris Hutchins (00:05:09):
I'm kind of like a happenstance product person. I basically really liked startups, but I didn't know what job I could have as a non-technical person. And I joined my first startup probably 10 years ago and was like, "I will do anything." And they were like, "Do business development." But it turns out we didn't have anyone who also was doing products, so they were like, "What should we build that people will buy?" So I was like, "Well, I got to figure out how we turned this API we were building for location services into a product." Left that to join other startup with a few people we co-founded, did the Jack-of-all-trades role at a startup and then quickly were acquired by Google about a year in, and I went through the interview process and they were like, "You're a PM." And I was like, "Oh, great, what does a PM do?"

(00:05:51):
I didn't really totally know I'd never worked as a PM. Went through Google's kind of like week of training and got thrown into it and I think I've now learned with a lot of time that being a PM is awesome. Being a PM at Google when we were working on Google Plus was not awesome. Transitioned pretty quickly over to Google Ventures, did venture capital for three years, left to start another company trying to make financial advice more affordable, more accessible. Grew that for about two, three years and we ended up selling that company to Wealthfront where I ran a new product strategy. I most recently just left that role after three years and started going full-time on All the Hacks, which is my effort to help everyone upgrade their life, their money, their travel. I'm the spreadsheet for everything, optimizer and do all this research to try to help people live better, happier, wealthier, healthier lives. And I have a podcast where we share all the hacks to do all of it.

Lenny (00:06:43):
Amazing. While we're on the podcast, we're going to dig into this stuff more. Where can folks, find it. It's called All the Hacks.

Chris Hutchins (00:06:48):
Anywhere you listen to podcasts right now, search All the Hacks, you can find it at allthehacks.com. I'd be surprised if someone listening to this is more of a newsletter reader than a podcaster, but allthehacks.com/email is the newsletter too.

Lenny (00:07:02):
Oh, newsletter. I love it. All right, coming back to your last gig at Wealthfront, from what I understand your title was New product Strategy and Andy Rachleff, who was the CEO for a while, kind of legendary figure. He co-founded Benchmark. He's just like this brain that... I listen to him every time I hear him on a podcast. He basically pulled you into Wealthfront and specifically wanted you to focus on figuring out new business ideas, new business lines, new product lines within Wealthfront. Is that right?

Chris Hutchins (00:07:31):
Yeah, so we had an engineer at the time who came up with this idea called Self-Driving Money. I was like, "Gosh, what if you could automate and optimize your entire financial life and you didn't have to rely on human financial advisors?" And we heard from our customers forever that they pay us to not talk to someone, our demographic doesn't want a bunch of humans in the mix. And so we had this idea but we didn't really know what it was. So Andy was like, "Gosh, you've been spending time thinking about financial planning and software and as an entrepreneur, could you come in and help us build Self-Driving Money?"

(00:08:00):
And I was like, "What is it?" They're like, "Well, we got a bunch of ideas from an algorithmic standpoint about how to do it." But, "What exactly is it?" So it was thrown into, "Let's do a bunch of customer research, let's talk to a lot of people and let's try to come up with as audacious of an idea as we could for how you fulfill the promise of automating and optimizing someone's entire financial life to the point that they don't have to think about their finances on a daily basis and they know the right things are happening."

Lenny (00:08:28):
When I think Self-Driving Money, I'm picturing money just driving around, like a Tesla. Money meets Tesla.

Chris Hutchins (00:08:34):
Yeah, the vision I had was what are the core pieces of financial life that are stressful? It's like, "I got to move money, I got to contribute to these different accounts. I want to make sure I have enough to pay my bills." And so what we ended up with was a product called Autopilot that would monitor your core banking account, whether it was a checking account at Wealthfront or not at Wealthfront or whether it was an account at Wealthfront. And we would say, "Let's make sure we leave a certain amount of money." And you could tell us that much. And then we would say, "Great." Now we had basically a series of things to fulfill with any excess. It was like, "Let's make sure you keep this much as a three-month emergency fund, max out your Roth IRA. Let's make sure you max out your 529 for your kids and let's put the rest in your kind of taxable just brokerage account." And we would just periodically say, "Oh, you got extra money, let's sweep it over and do what we need to do with it so you don't have to think about it."

Lenny (00:09:22):
Can you talk about the impact this had on the company and also just how long of a endeavor this was within Wealthfront?

Chris Hutchins (00:09:29):
It was a quick endeavor to try to start talking to people. This was just throw in the mix. I have a very poor sense of time, but let's say somewhere between six and 12 months maybe before we put something really in front of someone that could execute on all the features, there was a lot of prototype UI testing. I think Andy, he's legendary. If anyone listening to this, wants to learn about product market fit, Andy is your guy. I believe he coined the term, he teaches the class at Stanford. And the lesson was really find something people are reaching over the table want, and make sure you have that validation. And so we were putting things in front of people, clickable, full prototypes, and I remember we got to one where someone was like, "Can I go get my husband? I need to show him this."

(00:10:12):
And then I created this thing, which I'm sure is not that new, but I would start pretending that the product existed in the interviews. Only to find out, at the end, people was like, "Oh, it's not out yet." And they're like, "What I want to use..." You could really feel the like, "No, no, no, no, this has to be out. I want to start using it." So we found this thing that a small number of people were very excited about and we knew that a product, this was going to be a high risk bet because people don't automate their financial lives today. People drive to go pick up fast food and if you could with a push of a button, bring it to their house, you're making a thing that they do much more efficient. Right now, well, technically they do this manually, but trusting software to do it is something that we knew would be a higher risk bet.

(00:10:59):
And I think the takeaway, I would say the impact on the company was not as high as we had wanted in that it didn't become this wild top of funnel. I think it's similar to Tesla's autopilot. It's like nobody goes and says, "I just want to buy this car because of this feature." I'm sure some people do, but once you're in the ecosystem, it had huge impact on making it easier for people to start saving more, making it easier for people to be more confident in their finances and just automate all that behavior. So I would say the letdown was, it wasn't the big, huge top of funnel thing where people are like, "Oh, this is all I've ever wanted." Even though if you interview people and you're like, "Gosh, would you like a product that could just automate all this stuff?" They're like, "Yes, I would love it."

(00:11:43):
And then you hand it to them and you're like, "Do you want to use this thing?" And they're like, "Well." It's very hard to test that. And so what we found was it was a win in terms of it. It moved a lot of metrics for saving more money, increasing contributions and that kind of stuff, but it didn't become this growth channel, which Andy would say product market fit is exponential organic growth. So I would say by that metric, we didn't have product market fit, but as a tool to make a system of products so much better. We have the cash account with all the checking features, we have an investing account, we have retirement accounts. So this really brought it all together and that was super valuable.

Lenny (00:12:18):
Awesome. So here's my big question. What have you learned? You spent a lot of time thinking about big bets, big innovations, working within a company to come up with something totally new. What have you learned about how to approach that within a larger company? How do I successfully innovate? How to think about launching big bets, how to structure teams, anything along those lines?

Chris Hutchins (00:12:37):
I've learned a few things and I think some of them I've learned came naturally being a founder before being a PM. But you think that customer research is all you need to build a product at a company, but figuring out how to create excitement internally and get buy-in from other teams because they're the ones that are going to build it. They're the ones that are going to help market. It's all a team effort. Sometimes you get caught up, at least I found, as a PM of like, "Oh, we got the customer insights, we did the testing. It's all positive." And then you show the ratings you got from sub survey or the engagement or some clips and that's not the end of it. The end is creating this compelling vision for what you're building. And then the thing I learned from being a founder is, gosh, you have to state your vision and your mission and why you're here, every all-hands.

(00:13:27):
It seems so crazy because it's core to you why we would build this, what it's purposes, why it's amazing. But as a founder, I was like every week I was like, "Hey everybody, before we get started, this is the mission we're on, this is why we're doing it. This is the thing we're doing in the world." And as a PM sometimes you're like, "Well, I told people three weeks ago and I put it in that email that I sent out to everyone and it was in the top of the PRD, so why hasn't everyone understood why this product exists?" And I realized very quickly that, that same thing is true. So if you want to make a big bet, if you want to make a big impactful product, you have to bring people along with you. And your ability to speak publicly, persuade people, build influence within the company. Those things are all as important as your ability to identify a user need and build a product that solves it.

Lenny (00:14:15):
Awesome. This reminds me a lot of Airbnb, where the founders, all-hands share the vision and the strategy that they came up with that year. Every single all-hands. And it's always like, "Yeah. Yeah, we know. We know." But to your point, it's so powerful and important.

Chris Hutchins (00:14:28):
And some people don't know. Some people we're not paying attention that one all-hands, we're kind of missed it out, skip all-hands. Often there's just, you need everyone to be able to in... And this is a little segue to podcasting and we'll come back to it, but I start my show with saying, "Hello and welcome to another episode of All the Hacks, the show about upgrading your life, money and travel." Because I just want everyone to know this is exactly what this show's about, so when their friend asks them a question, they're like, "This is exactly what it is." And the same thing is true about a company's mission, a product, vision, anything you want everyone to really understand it, be able to talk about it succinctly and just have a very cohesive narrative in their head. That's a really big one. I think the other one is just understanding the customer, not just by talking to them, but just being in the mix, playing with all the products.

(00:15:14):
Something I asked a few of my colleagues before this, "What are things that I've particularly done well?" And they were just like, "Gosh, I feel like you understand what's happening outside of the walls of our business better than a lot of people." And maybe that's talking to a lot of other people who are founders talking to a lot of other people, starting companies, going to read all the comments on new financial products on Product Hunt. Really just trying to understand people beyond just customer research. And so that was another thing that I think... As a founder, you're always looking for product market fits, you're always trying to learn. Sometimes at a company it's really easy to get caught up in the research you've already done and the customers you've already talked to and you forget to kind of step outside and go talk to other people and see what other people are doing. And I'd say don't get caught up in what competitors are building and try to feature parody them, but just understanding the space outside of the walls of your business.

Lenny (00:16:06):
One thing I'll add to your point about reminding people of the strategy and the vision is if you can also help them understand how their team and project connects up through that, create kind of a little tree of, "Here's all the teams, what they're doing. Here's all connects to the pillars of focus and themes and then here's how it connects to the North Star metric and or vision mission. "That kind of adds another wrinkle of like, "Oh, wow. I get it. I get why this team's important."

Chris Hutchins (00:16:30):
There's a great analogy, I'm sure if I send a link you could put in the show notes or something about a football team. And it's like the GM's goal is to sell out the tickets and win the conference championship and it actually tiers it down. It's like, "Well, there's a defensive line coordinator." I'm not even that big of a sports person, but it's like the defensive line coordinator's job is just one specific thing, but they kind of explain how it all levels up to this one North Star metric for the company or two in that case. And I think that's just so important and when you're talking to people at your company with your colleagues, it's not just what it does. It's like, "This product will automate people's money movement so they don't have to move their money and it happens automatically." And that's cool, but it's equally as important to remind everyone, "And then they don't have to worry about their money every week and then they don't have to worry that their contributions might leave them without enough money in their checking account to pay their rent."

(00:17:22):
There's these two components of it which are, what does it do, but what's the feeling you want someone to have? And that gets into product vision versus just the product feature set. And whenever we've written product visions statements about things we're building, it's like, "Imagine a world where someone can feel this way about their money." And it's like, "And then this thing will do that." That's the product strategy. It's how you execute on it. And so Reforge has this awesome product strategy kind of product vision roadmap that levels them all up, which I really like as a another resource.

Lenny (00:17:54):
The Reforge. I just recorded another podcast this morning actually, and what you just said reminded me of it, where a lot of people focus too much on features and not enough on benefits. And the stuff you're talking about is just like, "Think about what are the benefits of the person." Versus, "Here's feature one, feature two, feature three."

Chris Hutchins (00:18:10):
The last little skill, and I know you, you've talked about this, but I think it's something that I was fortunate enough to not care about. Which I think is, when you focus too much at a company about like, "Ooh, I want the promotion" you get caught up in this world where you're like, "If I want the promotion, I need to do what my boss wants." And I had this fortunate benefit of... Like my last job, I was the CEO. I didn't care about my title, I didn't care about leveling up. I came in and I was like, "I want to continue trying to execute on this vision of this thing that I wanted to do." What that actually meant was my only metric I cared about was impact and trying to build a product that would work. And I think in any job in any company, it turns out you think that doing what your boss wants is actually what's going to get you promoted.

(00:18:55):
But the people that I've had work for me or I've worked alongside that seem to always be the outperformers, are always the people that are just solely focused on having the most impact on the company. I think the thing I learned, which I thanks to Andy Rachleff for teaching me this is when you push so hard for your ideas and you have really strong beliefs, you have to also make sure you state your intent. Because sometimes people think you're acting out of self-interest. I'd be like, "Oh, we should delete this feature and build this crazy thing. It's going to be amazing." And people are like, "Oh, Chris just thinks his idea is better than everyone."

(00:19:27):
And so he taught me, he's like, "It would go a long way before you said that, you said, "Hey guys, I've got some crazy ideas, but before I say them, I just want you to know that all I care about is that the company is successful. And I think this idea will make the company successful. And that's why I'm so excited about it. I don't need to own it. I don't care who owns it, I'm just really excited about it."" And when you state your intent, you give people a little bit of ease in thinking you know what it might be. And even though I'm sure half the people listening work at a company where their culture is like assume best intent is one of the pillars, it's still our nature to assume that if someone's shooting down an idea we have that maybe it's out of their own self-interest.

(00:20:03):
And I've learned that when you have crazy ideas and when you're pushing back against a lot of people, if you can make sure you constantly remind them why you're doing it and what you care about, it goes a lot further than if you just kind of come in there with sharp elbows and try to push for crazy things.

Lenny (00:20:19):
Reminds me, I think Andy is the person who on a podcast once said that every year he picks like a, "We're going to bet the company on this idea." Kind of project, is that?

Chris Hutchins (00:20:28):
I would say we've done that a few times. I think the thing that I always told people that I wanted to work on is like, "I want to work on a project that if successful makes everything we do as a company today feel like it's not that important because we did something that was 10 times bigger than everything we're doing today. And what we're doing now is just 10% of the company." Those are the kind of crazy ideas I like to work on. They're very hard sometimes you're like, "Ooh, I've got one." And then it just doesn't work. Sometimes you do one and it takes a turn. But I think that when companies find those things, they're so powerful. But if you don't have the buy-in for management that that's your goal... Andy, he always talks about slugging average, not batting average. He's like, "I don't care if you hit the ball every time. If one in 10 times you hit a home run that's better than someone who hits it every three out of 10 times but gets out a lot."

(00:21:15):
He thought about that and the balance. He's written a lot internally about the balance between working on iterative improvements to current features and then taking big bets and trying to find the balance amongst it all. But I think he does believe there is always exploration necessary for taking big bets and trying to take swings that could have outsized impact. You got to balance it because you're often wrong. And I think that's something that I was like, "That's the thing I want to work on." As someone who is kind of running a company, when you get to go to a big company and you're like, "Now I can solely focus just on this big product bet. I don't have to worry about hiring and recruiting and all these other things." So that was fun.

Lenny (00:21:52):
Speaking of being solely focused on something, let's talk about the podcast. So this is kind of the new thing that you're going to be focused on full-time. You just left Wealthfront and you launched the podcast maybe a year and a half ago, correct me if I'm wrong, by a year and a half ago. The podcast is Top 30, top 40 business podcast. It's probably gone a lot of higher at some points. And so there's a bunch of questions I want to ask about just how you launched this thing and built this thing. But broadly, what did I miss about the [inaudible 00:22:18] framing of the podcast?

Chris Hutchins (00:22:18):
Oh, yeah. That's it. It's about 18 months old. Been doing, gosh, probably about almost 100 episodes, not quite there. Weekly show and I went on parental leave part of the last 18 months and I tried to balance family and just grinding on this and it's been a passion project on the side and I'm very excited to see all the different kind of legs and tentacles that the brand and the content can have.

Lenny (00:22:45):
What kind of benefits and good things have come out of having a podcast and launching a podcast or running a podcast?

Chris Hutchins (00:22:51):
I think we all run into people and you're like, "Gosh, this person's really smart. I wish that I could just pick their brain for an hour." And sometimes you could just email them, be like, "Hey, could we schedule some time in a month and we could just chat?" But that sometimes just feels like a weird thing to ask. The podcast gives you this great platform, you're like, "Well, I have a podcast. And so I would love to invite you on and help you amplify your message and spend an hour trying to understand everything about topic X, Y, Z." And sometimes it's really nerdy and nuanced and sometimes it's broad, but being able to have a reason. I think one of my first episodes was with a guy named Morgan Housel who wrote a book called Psychology of Money. I read the book, I was like, "This is a great book. I have so many questions."

(00:23:32):
But like what I'm I going to od? Randomly email this person I don't know and say, "Hey, I loved your book. Can I just ask you questions for 45 minutes?" I would never do that. But I randomly emailed him and said, "Hey, we've never met. But I have a podcast." I don't even think it had launched, "It's launching next week, but I'm really excited about it. Could I pick your brain?" And he was like, "Sure." So I would say the biggest thing is it just gives you a platform to explore your curiosities on things provided that you can really focus the thing that you talk about on one vertical, niche, something so that people learn what it's about. Because the hardest part about podcast growth is there's like four million podcasts and you've got to find a way to stand out in a sea of many podcasts.

Lenny (00:24:12):
Let's actually talk about that. I was going to ask you about that. There's like four million you said, that seems right. It's probably a four million launched to date. Also, if you're someone that's thinking about, "Should I do a podcast? Should I not do a podcast?" Do you have any advice for just signs that this might be a worthwhile endeavor with your time versus signs you probably should not do this, do not even-

Chris Hutchins (00:24:34):
I'll give you two perspectives. So one is, yes, there are four million podcasts. However, there are only about 150,000 podcasts that have had 10 episodes and have published in the last 10 days. So the easiest way to be in that top, I don't know, 5% ish. I don't know what the math there is, about %3, 4%, is to just stick to it. If you just do an episode a week, for 10 weeks, you're now in the top 4% of all podcasts that anyone has created. Now, that doesn't mean you're in the top 4% of the 150 active podcasts. So what I would say to that is... I mean, maybe you have a massive platform already, in which case just go start the podcast. But if you don't already have a massive platform, it is unlikely statistically, that this thing is going to work. So absolutely, do not start the podcast if you wouldn't do it for free, making no amount of money in perpetuity or as long as you want to experiment with.

(00:25:31):
That's one thing I'll throw out there is you are most likely going to start a podcast and it will not take off and be wildly successful. However, I've met plenty of people who have hundreds of listeners and hundreds of episodes and they stuck at it because they truly loved the thing. If you don't know if you love the thing, it's very easy, which is what I did to say, "I'm going to have one season of eight episodes." And I committed to record eight interviews and put eight interviews out in the world. That was it all I committed to myself. And I said, "If that doesn't work, then I will be fine and say, "Here is season one and there's just not a season two." And I would be okay with it." So you can commit to see if you like it before you do it, but chances are, and you might have found something similar when you started creating content, it's like for the first six, nine months, there's no revenue coming in.

(00:26:23):
It's a lot more work than it seems. Everyone I know that has no podcast and goes to having a podcast, they're like, "Oh my gosh, I thought this was just once, one hour a week, I just talked to somebody." It's like, "Now, I have to prepare for it. I got to write up show notes, I got to make sure it's edited properly, I got to recruit people. Turns out you reach out to 10 people, two reply, one is willing to schedule this week." There's just a lot that goes into it. So I'd say only do it if you're excited to do it, even if five people are on the other end.

Lenny (00:26:49):
Talking about the time investment, how long does it take you per episode, hours-wise? And then how long did it take you to kind of prep launch?

Chris Hutchins (00:26:59):
And this has evolved a bit as the podcast has generated enough revenue to hire other people. But in general, I would probably spend, depending on how well I knew the topic or the person, anywhere from two to 10 hours preparing for an interview. If someone wrote a book at the beginning I was like, I got to read the whole book, I got to take notes. Then I was like, "Well, if I read the whole book and take notes, then I kind of know everything. So I'm going to read a few chapters." I wanted to listen to everyone on different interviews. Some people are really hard, some people have only talked about one topic and you want to get them on another topic. I interviewed Carrie Walsh Jennings, who's a three time gold medalist at the Olympics for beach volleyball. And I listened to every interview she'd ever done because only 3% of each interview was about not volleyball stuff.

(00:27:45):
And I was like, "Well, I don't want to talk about volleyball, I want to talk about performance and how you can train." She won a gold medal while she was pregnant. This is a serious level of physical and mental preparedness that I wanted to dig into. So that's one big piece of it. After it's done, then it really depends on the style of show. If you have this NPR style editing where it's very narrative driven, it could take you a long time to go through the editing. For me with interview style, I think it takes me about an hour to go back and listen to it at a little, speed up pace. And then go in and be like, "Ah, this thing wasn't worth keeping in. Or I mean, we had to repeat something and let's cut that out, or this person stumbled on their words."

(00:28:27):
Fortunately there's some amazing software. Now I use a piece of software called Descript, which basically imports all the audio, transcribes it to, let's call it like 95% accuracy. And then you can edit the podcast like you would edit a Google Doc. It's crazy. You're just like, "Oh, let's delete all the ums, control F, um. Ignore all ums." And then you listen through it and you're like, "Oh, that um, was really necessary, let's put it back in." And little edits like that. But that tool makes the editing process really easy. From the get-go, I had an audio engineer who would actually mix and master and add in the music and that kind of stuff.

(00:29:02):
So I would say each guest is probably at least 10 hours plus probably two or three hours of coordination and outreach to three or four people that you reach out to in order to get the one. Now I've since, hired someone who helps do a little bit of research. So they might go listen to two or three episodes, read a couple chapters of book and put up some notes with links to those various places. So I can then take that and take my time from 10 hours to three hours.

Lenny (00:29:31):
I'll share my experience briefly. It's a little different, which is really interesting to hear your experience. So I launched the complete opposite of your advice, which is I just launched big with like, "I will do this forever. This is my new thing. I have 40 guests lined up, here's who they're going to be." And I think it's partly because I already went through that initial period of uncertainty, whether I can keep this up with a newsletter, which you said eight to nine months. Which is exactly how long it took me to do the newsletter every week to get to a point where I'm like, "Yes, I can keep this up for years. Let's start adding a paid plan." So I think I was just more confident that I can keep at it.

(00:30:06):
And then I actually planned to monetize from the beginning. I think partly again, because I had the newsletter already. And I will say, so I don't edit that myself. I have a production group that is a game changer. So you can save a lot of time and I don't know if you've gone to a producer or anything, but I feel like most people eventually do.

Chris Hutchins (00:30:25):
I've now switched to someone who went back, listened to the first 20 or 30 episodes and said, "Oh, I get what you like to cut out of a conversation." And I'll end and say, "Hey, take that 90-minute conversation. And I think there's probably 20 minutes to cut out." And they do a very good job of getting pretty close.

Lenny (00:30:42):
Awesome.

Chris Hutchins (00:30:42):
To the point that some episodes I'm just like, I don't even look at it.

Lenny (00:30:45):
Yeah.

Chris Hutchins (00:30:45):
It's just recorded and done.

Lenny (00:30:46):
Yeah.

Chris Hutchins (00:30:47):
When it comes to launch, I would say one of my suggestions is to get a few things in the bag. Line up... You don't want to launch and then be scrambling. So I tend to think launching with two or three episodes, either all at once or in a week is a really valuable strategy. You talked about in the intro, you're like, "Sometimes it's been a higher ranked, but top 30." I think I've been top 100 in the business category all the way to top five in the business category, maybe top 10 and just all the way in between.

(00:31:18):
And the reason for that is that the ranking charts are all driven by different variables than you would imagine. They're driven a lot by momentum of new subscribers, at least on the Apple charts than actual downloads. So I have a friend who launched a podcast and had a huge following on social media and so out the gate was able to garner a ridiculous number of new subscribers to the point that she was the number two podcast overall, all podcasts in the world.

Lenny (00:31:45):
Holy shit.

Chris Hutchins (00:31:45):
It is crazy for a week or two, a woman named Erika Colberg, she has a podcast called Erika Talk.

Lenny (00:31:51):
Oh, yeah.

Chris Hutchins (00:31:53):
But it's not number two anymore because it's so driven on the momentum of how often you can get new subscribers. She's still in the top 100 of business podcasts, but to get to the number two spot overall, it's all about number of new followers per hour. And if you can get a ton of traffic early on, you can drive that. And I will say the value of you doing that is now you've got this screenshot of like, "Look, I was top 10." And by the way, she did the same thing I did. The moment I was top 10, the second I was in top 10, I immediately took all those guests that were on my dream list and I was like, "Hey, I've got a top 10 podcast. Go look at it right now and see that it's in the top 10." So you can always say that forever after it happens once, you can always use those things. So capitalize on that.

(00:32:39):
So you had the newsletter before. I had a newsletter I'd written on casually for various things throughout my life and for my last startup. And so I kind of put it all together to try to carry a big launch so that we really spike the rankings, maybe qualify for Apple does this new and noteworthy thing. And so there's a lot of stuff you can do to build momentum at launch, but at the end of the day, all the momentum in the world doesn't matter if your content's not good. So I try to say content for me is product market fit for building software. It's like you need to have a good podcast. And so if you launch big, one of the downsides is you're like, you don't really get that moment of tweaking and testing and seeing how it is. And I will say, I did five episodes in the fifth one. I was like, "This is number one." The first one I recorded came out, I don't know, fifth. But the fifth one I recorded came out first because I just knew it was episode one.

(00:33:32):
And the guest that I had on, and we talked about travel hacks, a guy named Leigh Rowan, he's come on twice. It was just like this awesome energy episode about everything you want to know about travel hacks, allthehacks.com/one. So save yourself the need to scroll through the whole list. But if your content isn't a unique perspective, you don't have a unique way of saying it. It's going to be really hard to stand out in the sea of podcasts. So I always say, be you, be authentic. Try to be someone's favorite. Don't try to be everyone's okay podcast. I remember Tim Ferris was saying... I got a chance to go on Tim Ferris's show and interview him about podcasting. And he's like, "Look, I did an episode about how to..." I think it was like how to make violins or something. And he's like, "I was so fascinated about this. 80% of people were like, what is this episode? But 20% of people thought it was one of the best episodes I'd done that year."

(00:34:24):
And I think half of his top 10 episodes of all time are people you wouldn't recognize. So I would focus on what gets you excited, not focus on what you think will move the metrics. Because every time I have a guest where I'm like, "I really think this person's going to move the metrics." It doesn't. And then I interview someone who no one has ever heard of, and I get these emails like, "Wow, that was such a good episode. Can't be. Oh man, I'm so glad you did that one." I was like, "You don't even know this person is."

Lenny (00:34:50):
Very similar experience in many ways across a lot of the things that you said. Something that you did mention that you shared previously with me is, and this is advice that I've thought about a lot, is you should be somebody's favorite podcast. That's like a sign that you're doing something right. Can you expand on that?

Chris Hutchins (00:35:08):
There's this whole idea of your build your 1000 true fans. And I think anytime you're creating something in the world, you want people to be your advocates for it because those are the people that are going to share it. Those are the people that are going to write the reviews, those are the people that are going to send you the ideas. Those are the people that are ultimately, when you make a call-out on a podcast like, "Hey, I'm looking for someone to help build this company or this enterprise." That are going to reach out and want to work for you. I find it so valuable to build that relationship with people. And it's even more valuable with podcasting because podcasting is such an intimate medium. You're in someone's ear and they're actively listening to you while they're going about their life. They're going on a walk, they're [inaudible 00:35:52], but you're right there.

(00:35:53):
And I get so many emails, they're like, "Ah, I feel like I'm just sitting on the couch with you while you're talking to me." And you create this really close relationship and the more you can create for those people and be their favorite time of the day, their favorite thing. Someone once told me, "Make sure you're consistent with the time you release because you'll get people that are like, "It's Wednesday morning, where's my episode? This is how I... It's become a ritual in my life."" And so, I don't know. I just think it's so valuable to build that early kind of excited user base and those 1000 true fans that I always try to put something out that's someone's favorite.

(00:36:30):
And I actually surveyed the audience about 50 episodes in and ask, "Which was your favorite episode?" And every episode except one was someone's favorite. There's one episode that, no one's favorite. So I'm still waiting. Maybe next time I survey someone will be like, "No. No, that one was my favorite." But every other episode of 50 episodes was someone's favorite. And it was like the coolest feeling knowing that every episode was someone's favorite.

Lenny (00:36:57):
That's exactly what happens with my newsletter. I get a reply with every newsletter and someone's like, "This is my favorite one yet." Okay, somebody really likes this one. It's so interesting.

Chris Hutchins (00:37:06):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:37:09):
Are you hiring or on the flip side, are you looking for a new opportunity? Well, either way, check out lennysjob.com/talent. If you're a hiring manager, you can sign up and get access to hundreds of hand curated people who are open to new opportunities. Thousands of people apply to join this collective, and I personally review and accept just about 10% of them. You won't find a better place to hire product managers and growth leaders. Join almost a hundred other companies who are actively hiring through collective. And if you're looking around for a new opportunity actively or passively join the collective, it's free. You can be anonymous and you can even hide yourself from specific companies. You can also leave anytime and you'll only hear from companies that you want to hear from. Check out lennysjobs.com/talent. How did you pick your topic for your podcast? And then did you have just advice for folks for how to pick the topic for their podcast?

Chris Hutchins (00:38:07):
This is an interesting one. So my podcast actually started as a parenting podcast from the perspective of dads. And I was doing all this research. I built this probably 75-page Notion doc all about parenting. It was like I had a kanban board for all the things I needed to do in each trimester of the pregnancy. And then the fourth trimester after the baby was born, I had all these checklists. I had a stroller spreadsheet that had, at least, let's call it 15, 20 different features that you could filter on. Dimensions, cubic volume of when you sum up the dimension, everything. It was crazy. And I was like, "I'm so obsessed with this." And I was like, "Nobody's really taking this kind of crazy optimized approach to processing parental information except a few people." Emily Oster, by the way, if anyone out there wrote a few books, I really loved her pragmatic science approach. But I just didn't see a lot of this and I especially didn't see as much content coming from dads.

(00:39:07):
And I was like, "I'm so excited." And then we had our daughter and for some reason I was like, "I love her. But the topic of parenting and optimizing every aspect of it just wasn't what it was before we had the child as after." I was like, "Wow. But I bought this microphone and I figured out how to use all the editing software and I had never even recorded an episode." And it just ended up that I was like, "That topic just wasn't right for me." And I went on another friend of mine's podcast guy named Kevin Rose, who was a co-founder of a company we started, he started Digg back in the day. And in the middle of it we'd been talking about this, I've been brainstorming ideas, and in the middle of his podcast he's like, "Hey, tell us about your new podcast."

(00:39:50):
And then I was like, "Kevin, I haven't nailed down what it is." And he's like, "Yeah, it's fine. Why don't you just record a response to that question and email it to me before this episode goes live and then you could just tell everyone what your podcast is about." And then I was like, "Okay, I'll think about it." And the next day he was like, "Dude, I need this by Friday." I was like, "Oh, man. So I have two days to figure out what my podcast is." And I talked to a lot of people and they're like, "What do you love, what do you love talking about?" I was like, "Gosh." What question someone said is, when you're at a dinner table, what's the thing that you talk about where you notice that everyone at the table is leaning in and trying to listen and pick your brain on and maybe sends you a text after?

(00:40:27):
And I was like, "It's probably all the hacks I have for traveling for free, for getting upgrades, for saving money, for shopping online, for optimizing my health or anything, house hacking, saving money on my rent." And every time I bring those up, people are like, "I like saving money. I want to travel for free." And they're leaning in, they're like, "Which credit card do I get? Is this one bad? What about this one?" And I couldn't come up with a name. I had hundreds of names. It was like life upgraded, optimized your life. But every time I described what it was, I just said, "It's life upgraded. I'll teach you all the hacks to do this." And then someone, I can't even remember who was like, "What about just All the Hacks?" And then I looked and I was like, "Is allthehacks.com available?"

(00:41:08):
I was like, "What? It's available." It's like... Get the domain. And then I very quickly recorded a response to Kevin's question, which was like, "Yes, I'm launching a podcast called All the Hacks, here's what it is." And I had to go create a trailer and upload it all in three days. And I think I was fortunate that I just had the time pressure that I had a thing to get out. So I'd say one, what do you love talking about at the dinner table? What gets you excited? What do people reach out to you for expertise on? What do you spend your time going down deep rabbit holes on the internet on? Because all of those things are going to be part of your life as a creator. And then two, if there's any way you can force yourself to just have to make a decision because I get stuck in this analysis paralysis, that's great.

(00:41:51):
So find some friend of yours that's like, "I'm tweeting about your podcast on Friday, or I'm going to include you in my newsletter next month." And give yourself an artificial deadline or even a real deadline to just put a stake in the ground. And you could change the name, you could pivot the topic, you could pivot the style of content. All those things can happen after, but just get started because you'll get to learn whether you like doing it, how it feels. And you could always... This is another fun hack. You could create a podcast and make a private feed and people can add a private feed to their podcast app. So if you want to get some feedback, you can just send people a URL and say, "Hey, paste this URL and the Apple Podcast player and listen to a couple episodes and let me know what you think." Before you make that plunge to send it to the whole world.

Lenny (00:42:34):
Awesome. I actually heard that interview with Kevin Rose back in the day, and I checked out the podcast, I think I actually subscribed and it felt very natural. So nice job.

Chris Hutchins (00:42:43):
Yeah. Little did you know that it was inserted in post production, recorded on a separate system. Yeah.

Lenny (00:42:49):
So people listening to this made feel like, "Hey, I don't have Kevin Rose announcing my podcast. How do I get started? How do I get my initial traction in my podcast?" Do you have any advice there for people that are just launching things they could do to get their initial set of subscribers and get the word out and get some kind of traction without a friend with a huge platform?

Chris Hutchins (00:43:08):
Yes. I interviewed a guy named Nick Gray, and it was a fun conversation because he wrote a book called The 2-Hour Cocktail Party, and it was all about how to build relationships by throwing the best cocktail parties. And it was very tactical guide, but one of the things he does is he has a friend's newsletter. And he basically created a newsletter and every time he meets someone that is a friend of his, he sends him a note, says, "Can I add you to my friend's newsletter?" People say, yes. And he just shares, "Here's some cool articles I'm reading. Here's a cool thing I'm doing in my life. Here's a picture." It's instead of waiting till the holidays to send your holiday card to everyone that's like, "Here's what happened this year. Or maybe now we've..." That's what my grandparents did. Now it's just like, "Here's a photo of the family."

(00:43:45):
He just sends it out. I don't even know what the cadence is. It's just like every now and then I get an email and it's like, "Oh, this what Nick's up to, this is pretty cool." Anyone can subscribe to it. And he shares all these great things. He's like, "Ah, I was thinking about a virtual assistant. Here's 75 things that I dreamed up that I could send to a virtual assistant." I was like, "That's really cool." "Here's how I tweak my Calendly. And I sent the Calendly to you. It's like I added a few little things in it that..." He had suggestions to just make it a little more friendly, make it a little more comfortable. The one I loved was like, "If I'm not arrived within two minutes of the start time, here is my cell phone number. I just want to make sure I'm prompt. And people know that."

(00:44:19):
And so, one thing is, before you even get started, find a way to just build an audience of your closest friends, family, colleagues, and throw stuff out in the world. You don't have to do it weekly or monthly. You could just send it out every quarter, every six months, it doesn't matter. But start to build something. So I started with a new, I think it was on MailChimp, called Life Updates. And I think I sent five of these out 10 years ago, and I hadn't really sent one out in seven years, but I still had this email newsletter with 1100 people on it that I just collected from life. And so that was one thing. Look, you can always go out and try to find other creative ways to partner with people. So you have a newsletter, but you don't have a podcast.

(00:45:03):
Could you use your newsletter to promote something? Could you find someone who has a platform that you could trade your services for promotional things? Yeah, I can think of any couple examples where there's been something where I've been really excited use and I'm like, "Hey, could I talk to my audience about this thing? And then you could let me use this?" So if there's anything, whether it's consulting services or anything, you could maybe trade those services for other people with an audience to share and promote you. I think that happens more often than not. But again, it all matters if you have good content. So I'd say the first thing, the most important thing to grow a piece of content is just have it be good. And it's hard to know what's good. Put it out in the world, see if people like it. Maybe get your reps in before you even try some of these growth things.

(00:45:46):
I think I was fortunate to have done some public speaking before, so I felt a little more comfortable. But if you... You mentioned MrBeast earlier, he's very public about the fact, if you go back 10 years and look at his YouTube videos, they were not exciting like they are now. And it took him a long time. And I think that's the reality with content is, for almost every person that you see out there and you're like, "Wow, they have this huge audience. It's so awesome." You go back 10 years and you're like, "Oh, well their first episode wasn't that awesome. It was actually kind of crazy. Or it wasn't that interesting. And they got better over time. They learned what their audience liked, they built a following." So those things are all there. Find communities. If you're talking about a very specific thing, I never forgot Gary Vaynerchuk's lesson, gosh, he probably told me this 13 years ago.

(00:46:32):
He was like, "When he was starting Wine Library." Which most people don't maybe even know that that's what he was originally known for. He wanted to build this business and so he went on Twitter and he looked for every single person that asked a question about wine and he at replied them back. And so a tactic that I think could work really well is, for me, I'm like, "I love travel. I love points and miles." I can just search Twitter and find every person on Twitter, every person on Reddit, every person on a forum, whatever that's asking a question about the thing my podcast answers, and go in and try to be a value add to them. I guarantee that if you have a podcast and your favorite thing is quilting and in your bio on Twitter, maybe Twitter's not the right platform, but let's just go with the analogy, right?

(00:47:14):
Your bio says , "Top quilting podcast." And you go find everyone that's asking questions about quilting and answer their questions with strong, good answers. They're going to look at your bio and be like, "Oh my gosh, this person knows their stuff about this topic. Let's go see what they do." And you have these advocates they share in their communities and it grows over time. I'll come back to one more tactic, which I didn't do, but there's no built-in distribution engine in podcasting. TikTok, you make a TikTok video, TikTok sends it to like a hundred people and if no one likes it dies. But if like a few people like it, they send it to more people and more people. And YouTube does the same thing. Instagram Reels does the same thing. Podcasting doesn't have that, and so it's just a slow growth effort and you just have to be okay with that.

(00:47:59):
But what I didn't do early on, which you can do is you can make clips of your podcast and you could put those clips on these channels that do have that built in distribution. And if those clips do take off, they could build a massive audience. And so there's a guy, Danny Miranda, he has a podcast and he launched, didn't have a huge following, but he created clips of every single episode, lots of clips. He didn't know what was the most interesting piece of content, so he made a clip for everything. He built millions and millions of views on TikTok and Instagram, just by creating content from his podcast that drove downloads over to his podcast. Helped him build his audience, and he built an audience on social faster than I have a and bigger than I currently have out of just being all in on distributing his content on platforms that had growth engines built into it.

Lenny (00:48:48):
The last point is interesting because what I've been hearing, and I've actually experienced it, so I have TikTok clips, I have YouTube videos and YouTube shorts, and I find they drive followers within the platform and downloads and views, but I haven't seen any actual impact on the podcast. And maybe people can measure it or maybe they can tell something's happening, but from what I hear and what I've seen, I don't know if it actually drives a lot of downloads, but it's still really useful, still useful to have an awesome TikTok account and an awesome YouTube account.

Chris Hutchins (00:49:16):
He said, "Look..." I don't know if it drives downloads, but it drives brand awareness for me.

Lenny (00:49:20):
Yeah.

Chris Hutchins (00:49:20):
And he's had multiple guests be like, "Oh yeah, I'd love to go on your show." One of the clips he made, he made a clip talking about Ray Dalio. And Ray Dalio was like reposting his clip. And so he was getting a lot of engagement with people that would be very difficult to reach out to saying, "I have this many downloads." But because he was getting thousands or even millions of views across a platform, it gave him the credibility to do a lot of things that he might not have been able to do now. Then he's gone and translated that into, "Well, let's go bring some of these people with really, really wide distribution of their podcast onto my show and let's do an interview with them." Then for the most part, people are like, "Oh, let's distribute that content to my audience that you had me on."

(00:50:03):
One thing he did that was so good is he did all of his videos in person, so he would fly to someone record in person, and the quality of the video for an in-person video was just so much better than you get doing a remote thing. It's a lot harder. It's a lot more work and it doesn't even impact the audio, but he would make the best quality clips, and Erika Colberg does the same thing. And she would deliver them and he would deliver them to the guests, and now the guest starts using those clips because he spent so much time trying to come up with the best clips, the highest quality, best produced that made his guests look amazing. And then those guests were much more likely to share those in their audiences and all of a sudden you've got a lot of momentum.

(00:50:44):
Does that translate to downloads? I'll give you a little shout-out, Danny has a paid newsletter on Substack where he actually breaks down all his downloads and all his tactics on how this is all working for him. And it's fascinating, it's called In The DM, because he did a lot of his early on recruiting with guests in DMS on social media. But it's to be seen, how much of an impact it can have on your podcast, but it certainly builds other things that are, I'd say like indirect... There's no direct attribution, but that doesn't mean that things aren't overall going up. And then the last one is finding other podcasts that you can go on as an expert in some area. So hopefully, you're starting a podcast because you believe something is exciting in the world, you love it, you have a passion about it, you're an expert in it.

(00:51:32):
Take that thing and go present yourself to other podcasts. And they all have listeners that are listening to podcasts, so it's the best medium. Because yes, someone who likes short form, 60-second videos is maybe not the best target demo to listen to a one-hour audio only thing, those two are very different behaviors. But if you can find something you're really good at and present a value add to people to come on their show, then that could help you build your audience while adding value to their audience. And I think as someone who gets a lot of pitches from people to come on their podcast, I will only caveat it with, do the work to make sure you're really presenting a compelling pitch. You're going to get a lot of nos, that's just how it works. I've pitched myself to go on lots of shows and sometimes I get nos also.

(00:52:19):
Many times I get nos, but I never send an email that's like someone would read it and be like, "This person obviously, doesn't know what they're talking about." But I get so many, they're like, "Oh, I'd love to have my client come on your podcast. They love talking about building a business." And I was like, "Well, I don't really interview people about that." If someone came to me and was like, "Here is a tactic to improve your life that I think your audience would benefit from and here's why my expertise makes me the best person to talk about it." I'd be much more open to it because they actually understood what my show is about.

Lenny (00:52:51):
Yeah, I get it. At least, one email a day with one of these pitches and I know exactly what you mean. I generally, don't reply because it's just not even worth trying to convince them they're not a fit.

Chris Hutchins (00:53:00):
Yes.

Lenny (00:53:01):
Shifting gears a little bit, I want to talk about your stack, your podcasting stack. What do you use on the software? What do you use the hardware? Mic, headphones. What do you recommend?

Chris Hutchins (00:53:11):
On a mic? I started out with the ATR2100X, I think it is a great entry level mic. It's under a $100. You can use old analog XLR cables if you want, but it's also USB. That mic got me through 50 episodes. I have since upgraded to a Shure SM7B, which is the XLR compatriot to, I think you have a Shure MB7.

Lenny (00:53:36):
Yeah, I have the USB version if that's what-

Chris Hutchins (00:53:38):
Yeah, exactly. And those are two great kind of upgrade mics that I think... I like the sound quality a little better, but every time I'm traveling and I'm not sure if something's going to come up, if I can make a recording and if I have to record the intro, do a remote interview, I still carry the ATR2100X, because I just think it's an easy thing to have and it works really well. I record everything on Riverside. I put everything into Descript. I plug my XLR mic into a Focusrite Scarlett 2i2, which is like a audio interface. I would say I've gone a little bit overboard with video, so we were talking right before this started. I have a Sony a7C, which is like a mirrorless, full frame camera behind a $60 Amazon teleprompter so that I can make direct eye contact with the camera while an iPad that's... I don't know, it's like 10-year-old iPad sits under it and projects as a second screen for my computer, using this-

Lenny (00:54:36):
[inaudible 00:54:36] If you're not watching this YouTube, you got to check out the YouTube video at least for five seconds to see Chris just staring at you. I've never seen this on a podcast video before.

Chris Hutchins (00:54:43):
Yeah,

Lenny (00:54:44):
It's the future.

Chris Hutchins (00:54:45):
So I have that set up using a iPad, running an app called Duet Display. I don't do the editing. I've worked with one editor that uses Audition and one that uses Pro Tools. I don't have a strong opinion there. Oh, my favorite of all, my friend of mine, Brendan Mulligan, started this company called Podpage. And so for people who don't know a lot about how podcasting works, there's a hosting platform, I use Simple Cast. I liked that they were one of the only hosting platforms that has a really affordable self-serve option, but also has a really great pro, all the features that you would want in the future for monetization, everything so that you wouldn't have to switch. Not to say that you know couldn't switch easily, it's pretty easy to switch. How it works is you upload an MP3 file, you write out all your show notes, the title of the episode, everything, and they create an RSS feed for you.

(00:55:36):
You could literally just create an RSS feed, right? That's all it really is, and you could host everything on your own on AWS or something, but they make it really easy for not that much money. And then you go distribute that RSS feed to all of these different players, so the Apple Podcast app, Spotify, et cetera. And one of the things that's amazing is this site Podpage, you submit the RSS feed to this website and they go in and say, "Oh, here's the description of the podcast. Here's each episode. Here's the cover art you submitted for that episode. Here's the title, here's the show notes." And they just auto-generate a website for you. And then they give you the tools like a WordPress style set of tools to go and change the header, change the descriptions. They're like, "You could go in and tweak things." But every night on Wednesday, or I guess Wednesday morning at 2:00 AM my podcast goes live. And at 2:05 Podpage has already noticed, the RSS feed is up-to-date and that site is posted. I don't have to do anything.

(00:56:30):
They even monitor for the slug, like the URL slug I put in as a checkout. This podcast at this URL and podcast page says, "Oh, that's the URL you want them to check out. We're going to inherit that and put it in so you don't even have to give us any information. And we'll just know the URL that you want to set this episode up on." I think that is a super simple way to build a podcasting website. The only other thing, we didn't talk at all about analytics at all, but I use Chartable for analytics. And podcast analytics are a little crazy because you don't have a lot to go on. But Chartable is a really cool analytics platform that becomes really interesting when you start to cross promo with other shows or run ads for other shows or do anything like that because they basically can track IP address of downloads.

(00:57:22):
And I say track, I don't know who's listening to what from where in any kind of very specific way. But what I do know is if I'm doing a cross promo with another show where I'm saying, "Hey, check out a podcast I love." And they're saying, "Check out a podcast I love." It actually says, "Oh, how many of the people that downloaded this episode actually went and listened to this other episode?" So you can get direct attribution of podcast listeners going from one podcast to another. So that is a really important tool in my kind of running a podcast toolkit, but it doesn't matter as much until you start focusing on growth and doing promotions and stuff like that.

Lenny (00:57:58):
Awesome. I host on Substack as maybe one difference. I use Podpage for my site, my producer/editor people actually use Descript/Descript also. That's kind of what they use for editing professionally, so it's good for amateur hour and good for professionals as well. I use Chartable, something's up with my Chartable, I think I've told you, or it doesn't count my Spotify downloads. It's kind of a pain in the butt, but it's still-

Chris Hutchins (00:58:21):
Which is funny by the way, because for anyone listening doesn't know, Spotify actually owns Chartable. So the one platform your Chartable doesn't get good download data from, is the one that it is owned by.

Lenny (00:58:33):
Yep. I do not understand what is going on. I've talked to them and they don't know what the fix is. It doesn't matter anyway. I get enough analytics other places. There's one other site I'd recommend called Podstatus that just gives you quick access to where you're on the charts every day, gives you these cool line charts. Which Chartable sort of does, but it's a lot simpler on Podstatus. But otherwise-

Chris Hutchins (00:58:53):
Awesome.

Lenny (00:58:53):
All the same stuff. One other question real quick. Say someone launches their podcast, what would be a good download goal to aim for, when you're getting started that's like, "Maybe this is working." Do you have a sense of a threshold try to hit?

Chris Hutchins (00:59:08):
I wouldn't think of a threshold to hit because you could launch with a huge audience and have a terrible podcast and you might hit 10,000 downloads and it would be crazy, right? You would feel really good. So I would care more about the direction than about the number because even the Apple charts, they're more momentum driven. You could have one download, but the next week you have a lot more and a lot more and a lot more. You would actually rise in the charts faster than someone whose podcast is kind of stagnant doing X number of downloads. If you have 3000 downloads an episode or something like that, you're in the top 1% or something. So you know, don't have to get to crazy numbers to be in the top of the charts.

Lenny (00:59:08):
Yeah, I heard-

Chris Hutchins (00:59:08):
I would say-

Lenny (00:59:54):
I heard a similar number, 3000.

Chris Hutchins (00:59:55):
The top podcasts are doing millions in episode, but that's like top 10, top 20, top 30. The next tranche of the top 50 are doing probably hundreds of thousands of downloads. But outside of the top two, 300, it's in the 10,000s of downloads per episode. And this is a little bit variable if you have a daily show or a weekly show or something. But I would say if you cross 10,000 downloads an episode, you are now taken seriously by a lot of people. So I had conversations early on with networks like iHeartMedia and different podcast networks that wanted to bring in the show and would do all that, and that all started at 10 to 15, maybe 20,000 downloads an episode. But by no means would I expect anyone to get there right away. Even I didn't get there right away. It took time even with a few friends to make announcements and stuff, it took time.

(01:00:50):
So forget how many downloads you get on your first three episodes because you're probably going to tell everyone in the world and you're going to use all your social capital to boost those. And then look at how many downloads you get on your fourth and fifth and sixth and does it go up? Does it stay stagnant? Apple and Spotify actually give you really cool data about how long people are listening. Do they drop off halfway through? You could start to be like, "Oh, do people stay for the whole episode?" I will say I haven't found a good site for benchmarks, but it's like the average podcast I think probably has less than 50% of listeners by the end. So don't be turned off when you say, "Wow, only 40% of people made it to the end." That's not horrible. I think my best episode, it might be like 65 or 70% of people made it all the way to the end. It's not 99.

Lenny (01:01:37):
What I like about those charts is you can see what percentage of people skip the ads and then just keep continuing. It's like a bump-

Chris Hutchins (01:01:42):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:01:42):
The mid-rolls and the-

Chris Hutchins (01:01:44):
[inaudible 01:01:44] And it's not as high as I thought.

Lenny (01:01:46):
10, 20% depending on-

Chris Hutchins (01:01:47):
Maybe 15%. It depends.

Lenny (01:01:48):
Yeah. Not bad at all.

Chris Hutchins (01:01:51):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:01:51):
Any last words of wisdom on the world of podcasting? Starting a podcast? Continuing a podcast?

Chris Hutchins (01:01:57):
Yeah, I've got three things for you. One, this is a little bit of a financial outlay, but I think it's really interesting. There's this podcast app called Overcast, and it's not the biggest in the world, but you can run ads in it. And the thing I like is that the ads are much more reasonably priced than a lot of other places and they're very dynamic. So I would encourage anyone listening to watch it for a few weeks if you have a podcast and you want to experiment, because the same ad could be $200 one week and $700 the next week depending on how much demand there is for that category. So you can wait and hold out. But what I like is they take your art from your podcast and then you can rewrite your description and they tell you how many people saw the ad, how many people tapped on it, and how many people subscribed to the podcast after seeing the ad.

(01:02:43):
And technically they could also listen to the trailer, they could listen to an episode. And they even give you benchmarks of what to expect. So for a few hundred dollars, you could go in and run an ad for your podcast. Now, I would say in all of the experiments I've done with them, I've probably garnered... I'm looking at some numbers, like hundreds of subscribers, not thousands. And I've probably spent maybe a $1,000. The average cost to acquire a podcast listener, if you're doing paid marketing is about anywhere from three to $10 depending on the appeal of your show, what kind of audience? I'm sure it could go way over that for a business show. And by business I mean, B2B focused kind of show. So, let's call it $5. So it's not going to be the best way to grow your audience. At some point, if you're at enough scale that you have ads in your show and how much a customer's worth, maybe it makes sense to pay $5 because your LTV of a podcast listener is $7. But getting it started, that's not you.

(01:03:39):
What you can do is say, "Okay, what was my click-through rate on the ad?" Which will tell you if someone doesn't click, it's either not a good description or it's not a good set of content, or your cover art's not good. So you can think about, "Okay, I actually need to figure out the podcast before I even have content." And you could run this ad with a trailer before you even record anything. And then it's like, "Okay, well people tapped on it, how many of them subscribed?" And I like to use this as a way to say, "Okay, well the benchmark said I was going to get about 50 subscriptions for this ad that was going to get a thousand taps and I got seven." So these aren't people who weren't interested. These are people who read the description, were like, this is interesting, and they didn't subscribe.

(01:04:20):
That means my content probably sucks. That means someone listened to a trailer or an episode or something more than the description in the image and decided, "This is not for me." Maybe they looked at your episodes, I don't know. But if they don't tap on it, if you're supposed to get a 2% click-through rate and you get 0.5, then it's actually the topic or the way I describe it or the cover sucks. And so I like that as a way to, for a few hundred dollars, get a good test. I've even thought of running an AB test of the same podcast with two different descriptions. I wish you could do it with two different cover arts. So I don't know, that's like a cheap way to do a little bit of testing. One other thing that I'll share is I just try to share the podcast everywhere.

(01:05:05):
So you've probably noticed that in all of my emails at the bottom, it's like, "Oh, great, talk to you Chris." And then it says, "Hey, want to upgrade your life, money or travel? Check out my podcast and newsletter." I'm taking every opportunity I can to let anyone know about it because you never know it'll happen. And my favorite example, especially, when it's written that it doesn't come across a big bulky signature was we bought some floor mats and one of them didn't fit. And I was going back and forth with the customer service person and they actually replied and they were like, "Oh, thanks for sending me that podcast. I really appreciate it." They thought I was just randomly telling them, "Hey, if you want to upgrade your life, check this out." They didn't know it was my signature. So I got a new listener from customer service from a floor mat company. Which by the way, here's one hack that I also learned from the floor mat company.

(01:05:52):
Come to my show for hacks, but if you're ever trying to get a deal on something, that floor mat company, I just pulled up the live chat and just asked. And I said, "Hey, I'm looking at these floor mats, think you could give me a discount. It's a little expensive." And it was like, "Yeah, refresh your cart. It'll be 15% off." So, this episode's not about all the hacks, but there's one cool one.

Lenny (01:06:11):
We need more hacks. Wait, I think we'll get to that at the end. Keep going.

Chris Hutchins (01:06:14):
And then the last is, I think it's fun, that podcast you can experiment. I started out doing guests and then I did some Q&A episodes from questions listeners asked me, and then I recently did some solo episodes. I was really interested in the idea of all the ways you can rent and swap and exchange your home to stay in vacation homes around the world. So I just researched it for, I don't know, two or three days and just did a 45-minute episode of me talking. There was no guest, there were no questions, it was just me talking. And that works. I'm going to start another series of episodes where instead of interviewing people about an expertise topic, I'm going to interview people who are really dialed into a country. So I've got a guy who's written a handful of the Lonely Planet guidebook for Japan and is in Japan right now for three weeks getting dialed in, what are the latest, coolest stuff.

(01:07:03):
He's going to come back and we're just going to record an episode about everything you need to know about going to Japan. And I'm going to add on about 15 minutes I think at the end without him, where I just talk about all the tricks for using your points, your miles, deals and discounts. Like there's this new airline in LA that's super cheap to fly to Japan, but it comes with some caveats. So it'll be like two thirds guide to going to Japan, one third guide to getting there for cheap. And there aren't a lot of businesses or ideas where you could just have all of these things that you can experiment with.

Lenny (01:07:35):
And then you could do them so fast. Yeah,

Chris Hutchins (01:07:35):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:07:35):
I love that.

Chris Hutchins (01:07:37):
If I interview you, which I'm doing right after this, so anyone listening to this that wants to hear a little of Lenny's story, come check out All the Hacks. And for 20 minutes we talk about some topic that's a little off topic. I've sometimes just taken that it's submitted it as a bonus episode on Friday. 15, 20 minutes, it's not my regular show, but there's so many ways you can experiment and find out what you like. And then you might say, "Wow, you know what? I really like doing the solo things." Or maybe you have a co-host on for a week and you're like, "Ah, that's so much better."

(01:08:07):
So I just love that it gives you a good opportunity to experiment with stuff, find the thing you love, because I think my big takeaway is once you find the thing you really love to talk about, all of that, it just makes everything so much easier because it's natural and you would do it for free. And the harsh reality of this whole game is like there's probably going to be a number of months or years you have to do it for free before it takes off. So if you don't love it, that's going to be a painful few years.

Lenny (01:08:31):
To build on that, I find the same thing with a newsletter, same with a podcast. The last thing you want to do is create a job for yourself that you hate. And so picking a topic that is just not interesting to you, picking a medium that is painful to you, there's no reason to do that. You may become a TikTok star and you hit a viral video, but then you have to make viral videos for the rest of your life. That's no fun. You have to think about, "Do I want to do this for years and years and years." And you can stop, but then becomes hard if it becomes a really good source of income. So that's something to think about, just don't create a job for yourself that you just don't want.

Chris Hutchins (01:08:31):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:09:07):
With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I don't know if you knew this was coming. So it'll be extra special, real quick, easy, whatever comes to mind, let me know, and then we'll see how it all goes. Does that sound good?

Chris Hutchins (01:09:18):
That sounds good.

Lenny (01:09:19):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people recently or in life in general?

Chris Hutchins (01:09:26):
Two, I love. Actually, this could be three, Happy Money is a fantastic book. All about ways that you can spend your money to optimize for happiness. It's like a collection of a ton of research about the science of happier spending, so that's one. Vagabonding by Rolf Potts, who I had the pleasure... The last two I've had the pleasure of interviewing recently. It's like a guide to long-term travel, but it's just kind of a different perspective on travel. I would say if you're at the point in your life where you now have kids, it's probably going to be hard to live up to that. But I have gifted that book to so many people who are like, "Oh, I think I should take a trip for six months." I'm like, "Go read this book." My wife and I travel around the World for seven months, and that book was instrumental to us taking it and how we lived on that.

(01:10:09):
And then the last is called Die with Zero by Bill Perkins. And that book probably had the biggest impact. I haven't gifted it to anyone. I've recommended it heavily the last week because it had a huge impact on me. And the fundamental premise of the book is that, this isn't very lightning round response, but instead of optimizing for money, which is so tied up in American culture of how do I make more, how do I get promoted? How do I earn more money, how do I save more money? We should really be optimizing for the net fulfillment in life, and we shouldn't be trying to save all of this money. We should actually be trying to allocate it over our lives in the most optimal way to increase experiences, increase fulfillment, increase happiness. And sometimes that means saving less when you're younger and you're more able to do things like backpack around the world for seven months or go bungee jumping. And when you build those experiences early on, the memories of those experience pay dividends, the rest of your life.

Lenny (01:11:04):
Good choices. What's a favorite other podcast, other than your podcast and my podcast?

Chris Hutchins (01:11:10):
I love Animal Spirits. If you're into markets, life and investing. And they always have good recommendations at the end also on podcasts, TV shows, books, movies, that kind of stuff. So that's one I really like.

Lenny (01:11:23):
What's a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Chris Hutchins (01:11:28):
A show that I love, which I think is kind of like a version of a show called Silicon Valley, but not, it's called Mythic Quests on Apple TV. And I haven't heard enough people talking about this that I felt like maybe it's a hidden gem. Maybe I'm amongst company of watching this show, but I think it's a funny show. It's lighthearted, it makes me happy, and hopefully at least a few people haven't checked it out. But it's like a startup life show, but just dragged out to the extreme like Silicon Valley was.

Lenny (01:11:55):
What's a favorite interview question that you like to ask on your podcast?

Chris Hutchins (01:12:00):
I like to try to ask people about their favorite misconceptions in a space. Yeah, I like to kick things off usually with, "What's a thing that you kind of have a contrarian take on or you think most people get wrong about the thing that best?"

Lenny (01:12:13):
Awesome. Final question. What are your three favorite money hacks that listeners can take action on soon?

Chris Hutchins (01:12:23):
Okay. One that has paid dividends and literally, I've had people on a podcast telling them, write back to me, guests that are like, "I just saved money." So go to your state's unclaimed money website. Every state has one, and you can go put in your name, state or city, you don't even have to give your address. And you can find whether there are people that owe you money. And oftentimes they're businesses like you moved and Comcast couldn't figure out how to get you the final part of your prepaid month. And I had someone message me the other day and they're like, "I just listened to you talk about unclaimed money on a podcast, and I just found $136. I've never gotten paid to listen to a podcast." People have saved hundreds, some people, thousands. I always say, if you're going to dinner party, you now know someone's address.

(01:13:07):
You probably know their name instead of bringing a bottle of wine or in addition, just check if they have unclaimed money. I brought over to a bottle of wine to someone's house and said, "Also, by the way, did you know that this pharmaceutical company owes you $200?" And I showed him how to go claim it and boom, free money. What a great conversation for the dinner table. So that's one great one I love. Another great one, you can't use it right now unless you have a trip planned. But anytime you're booking a hotel book directly with the hotel and email the hotel in advance that, "Hey, we booked. We're really excited to stay with you." If you're celebrating something, let them know. And if you can't get the email address, just call the front desk, ask for an email address, follow up a couple days before you get there, let them know you're coming.

(01:13:51):
And I would say, you've got a 50% chance of getting an upgrade, getting a bottle of wine, getting some comped something, getting a better view. One person wrote into me letting me know that the hotel had their initials embroidered on their pillow, which I thought was kind of a crazy thing to have happen. It's never happened to me. Personally, I'd rather have the bottle of wine, but I'll take that for what it is. And for people who like the points game, I'll share something. Just give you a little tease of how I love finding all the points and miles optimizations. If you have a credit card that pays multiple points, three, four, or five x points on things like a grocery store or an office supply store, anything like that, drug stores, that's great. You probably don't have a card that pays any multiple of points on home improvements or Home Depot, Lowes.

(01:14:41):
So what I like to do to make sure I get the most points I can, instead of going to Home Depot and paying with a card that's going to give me one point per dollar at Home Depot. I have a four x grocery card. I like to go to Safeway and I just buy Home Depot gift cards. I get my four x points on the gift cards, then I go buy stuff at Home Depot knowing that I got four x points. But you also have some cards that give you three or four x points, if you go to CVS or other pharmacies or drug stores, you can do it there. You can do it at Office Supply stores if you want to take it to the next extreme. If you have an Amazon card, you could buy Amazon gift cards and get your five x or 5% back on the Amazon Prime card.

(01:15:20):
So I'm a little crazy like that. My favorite is if you're trying to buy something at a store, always shop online for coupons. If you Google like Lowes, Home Depot, Crate & Barrel coupons, there's all these websites. My favorite one is Save n, the letter, deals.com. You could buy Home Depot and Crate & Barrel coupons online for a couple bucks, save 15%. So stack up and then the cashback portals. I'm going to buy something, I'm like, "How do I get the cashback portal? How do I get the most points per dollar on my card? And how do I get a discount maybe from asking in the live chat or going in and buying a coupon." So I go a little crazy on that stuff, but I love saving money and just feeling like I got a good deal.

Lenny (01:16:03):
Amazing. What an action packed episode we had. We got money hacks, we got big bets, we got podcasting, we got Self-Driving Money. What a conversation. Chris, this was amazing. Two last questions. How do folks find you online, where do they find your podcast? And then how can folks be useful to you?

Chris Hutchins (01:16:24):
All the Hacks wherever fine podcasts are produced for your ears search or go to allthehacks.com or check out the newsletter, just allthehacks.com/email, or you can find it on the website. That's it. How can you be helpful to me? Check out the show. Let me know what you think. Let me know what you like. Let me know what topics you want me to focus on optimizing in the future. I've mentioned I'm always trying to make stuff that someone's favorite, so if there are things you want to hear me go deep on, let me know. I'm just chris@allthehacks.com and I try to respond to everyone in some reasonable amount of time. And if I haven't responded in a couple weeks, nudge me and remind me. But I'd love to hear from you. I'd love to produce more content for you, and I'm excited that we have this conversation, and I'm excited to record one with you right after this.

Lenny (01:17:06):
Oh my God, here we go. Chris, thank you for being here.

Chris Hutchins (01:17:10):
Yeah, thanks for having me.

Lenny (01:17:12):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
Most adults in the corporate environment are really just babies in disguise.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:00:04):
All humans need the same things, whether we're one or five or 45 or 85. When you look at bad behavior, the actual problem is someone doesn't have the skill they need to manage something happening internally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:16):
Love your advice. It works not just for kids, it works for adults.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:00:18):
Our whole parenting philosophy is resilience over happiness. When we're thinking about a resilient work culture, we want people who can say, "This is hard and I can do hard things."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:28):
You teach kids are good inside, no matter their behavior, is that useful in work?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:00:32):
The idea of being good inside inherently requires us to separate behavior and identity. We infer a lot from people's behavior. Someone's late to work a lot, "Oh, that person's lazy." The quickest way to have an unproductive conversation is to lose sight of the fact that someone's good inside.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:49):
I definitely wanted to ask you about this idea of boundaries.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:00:51):
Boundaries are what you tell someone else you will do, and it requires the other person to do nothing. Making a request, that's not a boundary.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:59):
Is there a corollary to adult work environments in potty learning?

(00:01:05):
Today, my guest is Dr. Becky Kennedy, a clinical psychologist, author, and CEO of one of the most popular parenting books, podcasts, communities, and apps called "Good Inside." Why would I have a parenting expert on this podcast? Because if you think about it, many of the people that we work with in the workplace act a lot more like babies than adults. And I'm half joking, but I'm half not. Think about coworkers that got really mad when they had to share their stuff, that always need to be the center of attention, that get really upset about not getting their way, that need other people to fix things for them.

(00:01:38):
These are just a few examples, and there is a lot that we can learn about how to effectively deal with people at work from a parenting expert like Dr. Becky. I have never heard a conversation like this anywhere that bridges the gap between parenting advice and leadership advice, and you will leave this conversation both a better leader and a better parent. We talk about the power of repair, the importance of building long-term resilience versus short-term happiness. Why your goal as a leader is to become sturdy, the power of curiosity over judgment, the framework Dr. Becky calls the most generous interpretation, also a ton of really specific phrases that work really well with kids and adults who you're having a hard time with. And so much more.

(00:02:20):
I am so honored to have Dr. Becky on this podcast, and I hope you have as much fun listening to this conversation as I had recording it. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. That helps tremendously. And if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of a ton of incredible products, including a year free of Devin, Lovable, Replit, Bolt, n8n, Linear, Superhuman Descript, Wispr Flow, Gamma, Perplexity, Warp, Granola, Magic Patterns, [inaudible 00:02:46], ChatPRD, D-Mob and PostHog and Stripe Atlas.

(00:02:49):
Head on over to Lennysnewsletter.com and click product pass. With that, I bring you Dr. Becky after a short word from our sponsors. This episode is brought to you by Merge. Product leaders hate building integrations. They're messy. They're slow to build. They're a huge drain on your roadmap, and they're definitely not why you got into product in the first place. Lucky for you, Merge is obsessed with integrations. With a single API, B2B SaaS companies embed Merge into their product and ship 220 plus customer-facing integrations in weeks, not quarters. Think of Merge like Plaid, but for everything B2B SaaS.

(00:03:25):
Companies like Mistral AI, Ramp, and Drata use Merge to connect their customers as accounting, HR, ticketing, CRM, and file storage systems to power everything from automatic onboarding to AI-ready data pipelines. Even better, Merge now supports the secure deployment of connectors to AI agents with a new product so that you can safely power AI workflows with real customer data. If your product needs customer data from dozens of systems, Merge is the fastest, safest way to get it. Book and attend a meeting at merge.dev/lenny, and they'll send you a $50 Amazon gift card. That's merge.dev/lenny.

(00:04:03):
Who says hiring has to be fair? Every founder and hiring manager I've been speaking with these days is feeling the same pressure. Hire the best people as fast as possible. But recruiting is time-consuming. Alignment is hard and competition for great talent keeps getting tighter. That's why teams like ElevenLabs, Brex, Replit, deal, and 5,000 other organizations use Metaview, the AI company giving high performance teams a real, unfair advantage in hiring. They give you a suite of AI agents that behave like recruiting coworkers.

(00:04:36):
They find candidates for you based on your exact criteria, take interview notes automatically, gather insights across your hiring process and help you identify the best candidates in your pipeline. AI handles the recruiting toil and gives you a real source of truth. That means hours saved for hire and a team focused on what matters most, winning the right candidates. Don't let your competitors out hire you. Metaview customers close roles 30% faster. Try Metaview today for free and get an extra month of sourcing at metaview.ai/lenny. That's Metaview.ai/lenny.

(00:05:18):
Dr. Becky, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:05:23):
I am truly very excited to be here. I'm an avid listener of your podcast and all of your content, so I'm honored to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:29):
I can say exactly the same thing. I'm even more excited. First of all, just what is Dr. Becky doing on this podcast? Let's help people understand what's going on here. I have an explanation, but I want to ask you first, actually. What's the idea here?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:05:44):
I think Good Inside, which is kind of I guess the company and the method around all the things I've thought about is known for helping parents with parenting struggles and different things that are going on with our kids at various ages. But at the end of the day, it's a set of core principles that help us better understand human beings, ourself, the core relationships we're in, why we do the things we do and why we act the way we do in certain systems. And the system I tend to focus on the most is the family system.

(00:06:12):
But the workplace is another system, a marriage is a system, sibling relationships are a system, extended family over the holidays, that's a system. And once you start to think through a lens of understanding how we operate in the system, any good principle can then be applied to any system. And I'm very oriented around efficiency also. So to me, what Good Inside really gives people is a way to think about themselves and the way to think about leadership.

(00:06:40):
And whether we're talking about leadership in parenting or leadership in the workplace, it's actually the exact same principles that can be applied. And the good news for that is whether you're a parent, you're a leader at work, you're both, learning one system and applying it to multiple areas becomes a very efficient way to think about showing up in our relationships in a way that feels better to everyone.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:02):
Awesome. Okay. I love that explanation. I have another lens that's-

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:07:06):
Oh, okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:07):
... maybe funny, maybe too real. So I have a former podcast guest, Shreyas Doshi. He's one of my favorite product thinkers. He's been on the podcast a couple times. He's got this brand that most adults in the corporate environment are really just babies in disguise. They look like adults, they act like adults, but they're really babies. For example, they want to always be the center of attention. They don't want to share stuff they've accumulated. They want to keep their resources, their budget, their people. They get irrationally upset about things not going their way.

(00:07:39):
Even when it's just a terrible idea, they're just like, "Nah, that was my idea. I wanted this thing to happen." There's also just power struggles and, "No, no, I want this to happen because it's what I want." And they often just need people to fix things for them. For example, today my toddler, he just grabbed this Yoto player that we have and he threw it across the room. He's like, " Pick it up." So with that, I think understanding how babies think and toddlers think and operate is helpful in the corporate environment where we think we're working adults, but a lot of times they're more like babies. How does that resonate?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:08:15):
I guess my most generous interpretation of what you just said is slightly different but similar, which is that all humans need the same things. Whether we're one or five or 45 or 85, we tend to need the same things. When the needs are not being met, we all tend to express ourselves in kind of ineffective, less than ideal ways. And so maybe that's my interpretation of agreeing with what you're saying.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:39):
Awesome. Okay. Okay. So let's get into the first topic lesson. Let's talk about the power of repair, one of your more important and impactful lessons that you teach parents. Explain the toddler, kids version of this and how this is useful in raising kids and then just how this might translate into a corporate environment.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:08:57):
Yeah. I think repair is kind of the number one relationship strategy we have. And the thing that keeps us from repairing, which really is the idea of going back to a person after a moment we didn't feel proud of, taking responsibility for our part, maybe acknowledging the impact it had on them and talking about what you would do differently the next time, is actually this very false idea that there's a goal to be perfect. Right? And in our family, we say something, we actually now say it at work, "Perfect is creepy."

(00:09:27):
I just think it encapsulates... You don't even want to be perfect. It's actually very creepy. Only non-humans can ever be perfect. And what defines kind of the human condition is that we want to do well and we mess up over and over again. And one of the things I remember learning in clinical psych grad school was that the thing that really differentiated secure attachment, which is the nature of a relationship you really want to have with your kid is the presence of repair.

(00:09:56):
And I remember the professor continuing to talk and I was kind of stopped in my tracks thinking, "What? Oh, so secure attachment isn't defined by getting it right all the time? Secure attachment is just defined by, we're all going to mess up, but secure attachment has an adult who's willing to repair?" That felt very hopeful to me because it felt like something I could realistically get good at. And over and over, whether it's with your kid, when you say to them, "Hey, sorry I yelled." Some version of, "I had a stressful day at work. That wasn't your fault and I'm working on staying calmer even when I'm upset."

(00:10:32):
Or we say to someone, I don't know, on our team, "Hey, earlier in the meeting, I totally cut you off. I used a really harsh tone. Honestly, I did disagree with what you're saying, but it's no excuse for me to talk to you the way I did. Stuff was going on before the meeting. I'm sorry. I'm going to work on that." There's just nothing to reestablish trust and connection like repair. And when trust and connection are reestablished, then whether it's your kid or someone at work, they cooperate better, you don't get into conversations that are kind of run on conversations that are really an act of defensiveness and you can just get a lot more done.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:05):
There's kind of an associated concept you talk about, which is around connecting before correcting, which reminds me of radical candor a little bit of just this idea of challenge directly but care deeply. Talk a bit about this concept of connecting before correcting.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:11:19):
Yeah. Well, I'll use kind of... let's take it out of parenting and work because I think it really shows the importance of connecting in all of our lives. So all of us say about our kids, "My kid doesn't listen. My kid doesn't listen to me." Right? But if you picture me on the couch and let's say my... I have three kids, they're all sleeping now and I'm finally settling in for now the two minutes I have before I pass out because I'm tired. And let's say my husband comes out and just says, "Becky, we have to do our taxes."

(00:11:45):
And you're watching the scene and you see me say, "Whoa, I just sat down to read a book." And he goes, "You don't listen to me. You have a listening problem and if you don't do the taxes with me right now, I'm taking away your dessert for a week." Okay? Lenny, I'm pretty sure no one would tell me I have a listening problem. They probably say, I have a husband problem if that happened. Right? They'd be like, "Wow. You're..."

(00:12:08):
But we do that to our kids and we do that at work all the time. Now, let's say the same situation happened and he said, "Whoa, I realize didn't tell you this. We have to get our taxes done tonight. You look like you're just settling in to that book. Oh, can we get on top of this together? I know we're on the same team. Can we figure this out?" The chances that I will do taxes just skyrocketed. Right? Why? Because he sees me in my reality as a full human being, not just as an object in his world to get something done.

(00:12:43):
He kind of joins my world where I'm embedded in my own priorities and by doing that forms a bridge, that's what connection is. So I can kind of walk back over to his world with him to do something that's a priority in his world. So connection, it first all just feels good anyway, but it's not such a kind of soft topic. Connection is what forms a bridge between two people so they can act together in the same interest. And so whether you're thinking about your kid not listening or thinking about things at work, coming back to connection is really the foundation for both cooperation and at work, even productivity.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:21):
I love the way you phrased it at the beginning, that the way you just said it, I'm like, "Oh wow, I get why someone would start." To listen to help people actually do this in day-to-day, what's the way to approach the way you phrase beginning that connection conversation?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:13:38):
The truth is the first step is a mindset. And I know that sounds annoying because it's like, "Just tell me what to do." And anyone who knows me knows, I love telling people script ideas, but we feel people's intention, not just their intervention. So the same intervention will be felt completely different based on our mindset. So if I'm going into a conversation with you, Lenny, and let's say, I don't know, I want you to do something for me. I'd like you to come water my non-existent plants. Okay? And I'm like, I'm going to connect to Lenny first. First I'm going to say, "Oh, how's it going? Tell me this thing about your life."

(00:14:10):
And you just know that is in and of itself a transaction to get you to do the thing I want you to do. Not only is it not going to quote "Work," it's going to feel like dirty to you. You're going to feel it and it's going to feel off. So the mindset we need to be in, which is so hard, and I talk a good game, but it's hard for me too. Okay? Is trying to get into a kind of without an agenda mindset, even if it's for 30 seconds with someone. Being present with someone without an agenda is increasingly hard to do, but that is what connection is about.

(00:14:43):
No one wants something of me. They just kind of see me or they're recognizing something I'm doing or they kind of plop down on the couch next to me. And so what could that look like with your kid? It's often very, very simple things. Okay? And it's going to feel really small, especially anyone who works a lot where we get so addicted to accomplishing and dopamine. It's sitting next to your kid and putting your hand on their back, literally, for longer than feels natural. It's saying to your kid, "I'm happy to see you."

(00:15:14):
And that's it. Such a nice thing to say when your kid comes home from school or you come home for work or first thing in the morning. It's watching your kid play and describing what they're doing instead of peppering them with questions, "Oh, you're making a tall tower." Versus, "Oh my goodness, is that a fire station? Oh my goodness, we can make the best fire station in the world." And I hear myself say that because I can say that, but it's not connection actually.

(00:15:36):
At work, it's probably saying, "Hey, tell me a little bit about your long weekend." And not kind of counting down the seconds for them to finish so you can tell them what to start on this week, but kind of giving yourself permission to say, "Can I actually just kind of drop down into that moment?" Right? And so I think it's the mindset and then it's actually something that doesn't have an agenda, that's just about seeing someone, noticing someone in a really, really small way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:04):
I love this idea of just the mindset. And that's such a powerful reframe of this is don't think about what are the correct words to say. It's just actually just feel, "Okay, I just want to connect with you first for 30 seconds."

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:16:15):
Yeah. And I want to reveal something about myself. Right? So one of the things I think about is that efficiency and relationship building are often in opposition. We're doing one or the other. And one of the things I've learned the very, very hard way about myself, especially since I've been working, the way I've been working the last couple of years, is my efficiency is kind of reinforced at work. Right? And a lot of us who can be very efficient and get things done, we can have a little morality about it. We listen to someone's story, we're like, "Come on, get to the point."

(00:16:50):
When that person in our life is like, "The whole point is that I want to tell you the whole story." And I think if anyone's listening and thinking, "Yeah, I'm kind of an efficiency oriented person, dropping into relationship mode takes real intention." And it's hard, especially if a big part of your life, the efficiency is reinforced. So if it feels awkward and slow. And I always call it with my kids, my best time just feels low stim. It just feels so low stim. I'm like, "Is this right? Am I doing this right?" That's probably a sign I am because not much is happening and I'm not being efficient with my time. I'm just in kind of relationship building mode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:30):
What I think about as you're talking about this is the best people I've worked with that are most effective at work are the people that are really good at this, that you feel like really listen, really care, just aren't rushed. And so I could totally see the power here.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:17:44):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:46):
So one of the core principles you teach, the name of your book and the name of your product and community and everything you built is "Good Inside." I'm curious if that's a useful lens in the work environment too. You teach kids are good inside, no matter their behavior, they may be having a hard time, but they're still good inside. Is that useful in work at all? Are people always still good inside? I imagine not always.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:18:08):
I think it's a very useful framework. And I'll say why, but I want to separate things that we often confuse. No part of me if my kid is, when they were younger hitting, would I be like, "My kid is good inside, so who cares that they hit?" Or, "This employee's good inside, so it doesn't matter that they're not getting their PRDs in on time," whatever it is. No. And I think that's actually the other thing that's core to Good Inside is the idea of being good inside inherently requires us to separate behavior and identity.

(00:18:38):
Most difficult times we have personally or interpersonally come because we've collapsed behavior and identity. And it's easy to do because we infer a lot from people's behavior for our own. Right? So someone's late to work a lot, "Oh, that person's lazy." Right? Seeing that person as good inside starts with this sentence, "This is a good person who is late." Right? Or, "I have a good kid who's hitting." And I do this thing with my hands because it actually helps my brain and body see the difference.

(00:19:09):
One hand is identity, the other hand is behavior and literally just separating them forces you to distinguish who someone is good inside from their behavior. And ironically, that's what allows you to effectively change and improve their behavior. Because we all know what it's like to feel defensive. Do you know why we're defensive? Because we think someone else, instead of talking about our behavior, is talking about our identity. And then we can't even talk about our behavior anymore and being late because we feel like they're accusing us of being a bad person or being lazy or not caring about the other people in the meeting.

(00:19:42):
Now we can't even talk about the reason for my lateness because my whole identity feels wrapped up in it. So the quickest way to have an unproductive conversation is to lose sight of the fact that someone's good inside. If I'm talking about someone at work, let's say again, who's always late, here's like a quote "good inside," infused conversation. I would start by saying, "First of all, I want to say we're on the same team." If that's the only thing people take from this, that is the most amazing way to have a more productive conversation with anyone.

(00:20:10):
"I want to say we're on the same team. I know you're a good person. You probably don't need me to tell you that we need to start meetings on time. We both know that. It's also been happening consistently, which lets me know something is going on that I want to get to the bottom of with you. Because we need you to be there at 9:00 AM to start this important leadership meeting. So tell me what's been going on. Is there something at work that feels bad that makes you not want to come in? Is there something going on at home? Is this, I don't know, a hard time managing your time, whatever it is, let's get to the bottom of it together so we can figure it out." So that to me is that lens.

(00:20:44):
And it's honestly, Lenny, it's the same thing we do, I don't know, and like a good sports coach. I don't know someone, I don't know, who's a good even professional sports coach who's like, "You missed all the layups today. What's wrong with you? And here's what I'm taking away." It's like, "Whoa, you're a good player. Something's going on. Let's get in the gym tomorrow. Let's figure it out. I believe in you. I am putting you on the bench now because it's not really working out, but we're going to get to the bottom of this together." That comes from seeing the good inside someone.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:11):
Just hearing you say these things is always like, I could see exactly why this works. So a takeaway here is just kind of start with admitting to them and showing them you know they are smart, they know what is the right thing to do, they just maybe aren't doing it.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:21:25):
Yeah. And because now we can take that off the table. And if someone's thinking, "But I don't think that of the person," then it's actually just a very different conversation, but we put that in a different category. But if you start talking about someone's behavior right away and they think, which we all tend to think, "You're actually saying I'm not a smart person."

(00:21:44):
You're not even talking about the behavior anymore. Now their language seems like it's talking about the behavior, but all you're doing is you're having a debate you don't even realize you're having, which is whether they're a good, moral, worthy person. That's not an effective work conversation.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:00):
So just kind of laying out that you know they are good, they're smart, they know the right thing to do, but here's something that isn't going the way that it should?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:22:08):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:09):
This connects to something else that you teach, which is the MGI, the most generous interpretation. Talk about that and how that might relate to work.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:22:17):
Yeah. I've realized I have an allergy to ideas that don't have action. I've realized this actually at work with and just with psychology too. So this whole idea, people are good inside, how can you separate behavior from identity as a framework to then go into a conversation, all of it just feels too theoretical for me. And so I like to think like, what is one tool I can use to action on that idea?

(00:22:41):
And it started, I think through parenting. I'd finished day with my kids. I was going to bed when my kids are [inaudible 00:22:48]. I was like, "Wow, that day was just disaster." And then I would hear myself start talking about my kid in a way where I always loved my kid, but I didn't realize till later, even through the language, I stopped liking my kid. I was just.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:23:00):
Even through the language, I stopped liking my kid. I was just listening to your Peter Dang episode, which was a lot about language and how language then impacts thoughts. And I think, a lot as a parent, but it's true as a leader, the story you tell yourself as a kid at night, kind of becomes the parent you are the next morning. Probably same truth. The story you tell yourself by your organization at night, becomes the leader you are the next morning. And I realized I was using what I later called this least generous interpretation. I think we all do that naturally, at least I do. Like, I see my kid not listening and laughing if I'm trying to discipline. And my first thought is, I think my kid's a sociopath. I don't know how I get there. My kid's two years old, but it happens so fast. Okay?

(00:23:43):
And I realized at night, the only way to shift this and get into a good inside mindset, was just to say to myself, what's the most generous interpretation of why I would say to my kids some version of, stop jumping on the couch, it's dangerous, you're near the glass table, and he'd look at me and jump doubly hard on the couch. My least generous interpretation was that he's sociopath. I already covered that one. My most generous interpretation, there's not one right answer. It might be, this is a kid who's really oriented around wanting to feel in control. And when that feels threatened, he doubles down. He is 0% people pleasing, this third child of mine, zero. So the whole, I'm disappointed with you, it's not going to work with a kid like that.

(00:24:28):
And when I started using an MGI, a couple things happened. I realized I liked my kid again. And I think we don't talk about that enough as parents, that that's the thing that keeps us up at night. It's not their behavior. It's that we slowly stop liking them based on how we're describing them. And then I realized we were on the same team. And then I came up with a whole different range of interventions because I used a most generous interpretation. I think the same thing is true at work. Someone, I don't know, is belaboring their point in a meeting, when everyone else has gone on. And maybe the least generous interpretation, maybe is what I was reacting to in your initial question is, oh, they're being a baby or everyone just is vain.

(00:25:10):
My most generous interpretation, I don't know, could be a variety of things. Did they not feel heard the first time? Still doesn't make them going on forever, acceptable. But if that's true, I might say to them in private, Hey, something happens in meetings where I wonder if you don't always feel heard. And then you keep talking and then honestly, the rest of the room gets annoyed, which makes us tune you out more, which probably makes you belabor your point more. We're in a bad cycle. Can we work together on changing this? And now all of a sudden, instead of everyone complaining about that person or whatever it is, and nothing changing, which is just horrible for culture and productivity, we have one conversation through an MGI lens and things start moving forward in a more productive way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:48):
It's interesting how much of this comes back to just kind of assuming they're smart and are trying to do their best job and are good inside and translating to, okay, in spite of that, here's something that is still going wrong, let's try to figure out... There's kind of this idea of curiosity over judgment, trying to figure out what's missing.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:26:06):
And I mean, that's exactly it. Those are two things also that I think are in opposition. You inherently cannot be judgmental when you're curious. And when you're judgmental about something, you're inherently not curious about it. And I think it's assuming... I say assume, good inside or assume MGI, other people say assume positive intent. Whatever language hits your heart, I think is the language that's... Everyone's different. MGI makes sense for me, but if there's someone else that has a different phrase, someone should use that one. And then, I think also assuming, this person would want to work through this with me. And I think Lenny, that's one of the things that we also miss a ton in our kids. The kids who hit, no matter what they say, they really don't like feeling out of control. The kid who's lying to your face, they don't want to lie to your face. They don't want to behave this way either, again, which doesn't make the behavior okay, but it makes us soften a tiny bit and realize we're on the same team. And I think actually we all want the same outcome.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:08):
Wait, say more about that, because that doesn't feel, as a parent, that my kid doesn't want to... When he's throwing a thing across the way or just resisting going in the car. I want to hear more about what's going on there.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:27:20):
Yeah. I mean, first of all, I'll start with the baseline, right? That as a clinical psychologist, I was initially trained in this very reward, punishment, timeout, sticker chart, mode. And to be honest, I loved it, because I have a very healthy left brain and our left brains love logic and we love linearity. And as soon as you're a parent, you're like, there's no linearity or logic really, but our brain wants that to be a system. And it's kind of a system of punish the bad and you have less of the bad and reward the good. And no one really says, Well, how are we raising a human? Those are just behaviors, but our brain loves it. And that's what I started teaching to parents, I did, in my private practice, because it felt clean. But it was at complete odds with everything I knew was helping all the adults in my practice change their lives.

(00:28:11):
And that's actually what gave me insight into starting Good Inside. It's like, there's no way that what helps the 35-year-old rewire their brain and change for the better, is that theoretical opposition with what a two-year-old and five-year-old needs to become resilient and confident. That just doesn't make sense. And I think we have these ideas about kids. Even something I hear a lot, you're making a bad choice, to kids. You're a good person, you're making a bad choice. This is not about forgiving bad behavior, I'm pretty firm about that. But I just don't believe a four-year-old who's throwing is like, hold on, should I throw this at my sister? Should I or should I not? I will choose as not... I mean, think about us. When we act out, I don't think most of us are in a decision making place. We escalate and here's one of the big insights besides people are good inside, that helped me form all of my other approaches, is kids are born with all the feelings and none of the skills to manage feelings.

(00:29:12):
Bad behavior at any age can basically be reduced to feelings that overpower skills. And yes, behavior is a problem, but behavior isn't the core problem. It's a manifestation of the problem. The actual problem is someone doesn't have the skill they need to manage something happening internally. And if they had that skill and could access it, the behavior would change. But that would be kind of the outcome, not the place of actual intervention. And so, when a kid hits, they look also and kids will say things like, "I don't care what you say." They're out of control. Maybe they're in a situation where, I don't know, they could be tired, but also they're angry that a sibling has a toy and they don't have skills to manage anger, they're jealous that someone is playing with something and they can't manage the jealousy. And when you look at bad behavior through the lens of feelings that overpower skills, you start to think like a coach.

(00:30:09):
It always has struck me with kids, that we don't punish them into learning how to swim, which I know sounds funny. But if you paid for swim lessons and the person said, You know what? I'm just not going to put up with this. It's this inappropriate behavior. By the way, your kid has to learn to swim if they're going to function in life. So, send them to their room and tell them to come back when they learn how to swim. It's absurd, it's obviously laughable.

(00:30:34):
I think swimming is very important, but an even more important life skill is learning how to manage your emotions. It is. And nobody learns new skills by being sent to their room, nobody learns new skills by adding shame. All that does is increase the gap between feelings and skills. It's just totally counterproductive. The answer is, we have to set boundaries. We have to be the people setting boundaries around out of control behavior. But then we actually have to teach our kids the skills they were missing, which levels up the skills. And that's how not only you change behavior short term, but you actually change behavior massively long term.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:08):
I'm actually in the middle of starting potty training with our kid and I'm taking this little online course and they call it potty learning, not potty training, for exactly that reason. You're not training them to do a thing. They don't know how to do it, so you just teach them, like you're teaching them the alphabet, just teach them all little steps and what they need to learn.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:31:24):
You're not doing our potty learning course? Lenny, I'm going to talk to you after.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:30):
Oh, I didn't know you had one. Okay.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:31:31):
Our marketing message isn't getting out there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:33):
I'm switching immediately. Well, how do people find it? Goodinside.com?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:31:39):
It's actually one of the things I feel very strongly about putting out for free. Because, I think potty stuff is one of the early lessons around body autonomy and skills. And the quickest way we kind of mess it up as parents is kind of trying to take over the process. And it could be so stressful. And I actually told my team while ago is, I just think this should be a service. So, if you Google Good Inside potty, you can have it for zero dollars.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:05):
Oh, it's actually free already.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:32:07):
Yes, it's free.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:08):
I'm switching immediately.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:32:09):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:09):
Is there a corollary to adult work environments in potty learning?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:32:15):
Yeah. There is, there always is.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:15):
Do tell.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:32:17):
Well, okay. So, let's think about what the potty stuff is about for kids. When our kids are younger, they control two things in their entire life. What goes into their body and what comes out of their body? That's all. No, obviously, hopefully we let them pick their clothes here and there, but thematically... By the way, and they shouldn't be in charge of a ton more categories because they're two, right? But it's why those two areas can become so heated for families because we get so stressed. And when kids, especially if you don't have a people pleaser, okay? When kids even smell, my parent is stepping into one of the only two domains that are mine, holy moly, will they do nutty things to push you back. And so, what's the general lesson, the human lesson is, what is it like for someone to have not that many areas of life that they're in control of?

(00:33:10):
Number one, just think about that. Think about the first 10 minutes of your kids' day. We wake them up. We tell them what the weather is. We tell them, No, you can't wear that. We tell them what's for breakfast. We tell them their shirt's on the wrong way. If my husband woke me up that way, I would be in a bad mood the rest of the day. Okay? And I'd probably be looking for a million different areas to just grasp control of as a way of screaming to the world like, I am my own person. Right? And so, if we think about that in the workplace, well, first of all, temperamentally, there are a subset of people, I call these the resilient rebels. They present as strong-willed, defiant kids, whose... I think we all walk around with the core fear that we end up acting out. Their core fear is the loss of control. They are very, very attuned to people kind of stepping into their domain, and if they smell it, they resist.

(00:34:01):
Well, we have those as adults too. It's tricky to collaborate with them. And again, we need to have an expectation, but we might see that as, why do I ask someone to switch a meeting time? And it feels like I took a knife to their heart, the way they react, right? Well, that theme might be coming up and maybe we can go one level deeper and say, Is this someone who in general... I'm making this up, but, oh, someone got promoted before they did on their team, they just had a change in manager, they just had their vacation denied, whatever it was. Oh, is that actually what we're talking about? And it's manifesting as this difficulty changing meaning time, but actually there's other themes of control and independence at play.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:42):
As maybe a lesson here is, clarifying, here's what you own on this team, on this project, here's things that you're going to drive, here's where I'm going to be really involved. Is that maybe a takeaway?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:34:53):
I think that is definitely a takeaway. I also just love naming your intention, that's always really helpful. Hey, I want to look over this project together, because I want to get ahead of some things and I think that's actually going to help you do the most independent work. That's why I want to go through it in such detail. When you name the intention very, very clearly for someone, they're much more likely to interpret your behavior through the intention you just named, because your intention isn't to control them or make them feel small. But if that's also something they have a predilection for, it's even more important for those people to do the naming of the intention up front.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:30):
And there's also just a whole micromanaging, I don't know, element to this. So, this is why people in part hate micromanagement. Like, I want to be in control of something, why get out of this?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:35:39):
Yeah, which is a dance. Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:41):
Yeah. Okay. Something else that you teach, that I find really helpful, is this idea of sturdy, becoming a sturdy parent, learning to be sturdy. That feels very related to being a good leader, just like learning how to deal with challenges. Talk about that from the kids' context and then how it might be useful in work.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:35:59):
Yeah, I think that's the essence of what Good Inside does. We help parents become sturdy leaders, so they can raise sturdy, confident kids. And when I started this, I'd use that word a lot. People would say to me, I've never heard anyone use that word. I know what it means. But I think about language too, and I like language that helps me conjure up an image or a feeling. It takes it out of my brain and I think the word sturdy, if you picture someone in your life, even if you haven't thought about them, who's the sturdy person I know? I bet you can kind of locate them, you see them, and there's a feeling you have around them. And I think the best leaders we have are sturdy. And so, I'll start it with a metaphor, because I actually think that brings it to life. And I think this is as true in parenting and in the workplace.

(00:36:42):
So, picture being a passenger on a flight. It's really turbulent and you start screaming and everyone starts screaming, okay? So, everyone's panicked in the flight and then you hear the announcement from the pilot and I think there's three types of announcements you can have. The third one's going to be the sturdy one, the first two, not as much. So the first one is some version of, What are you freaking out about? Stop screaming. You're making this flight awful for everyone and you're distracting me and stop making a big deal out of nothing. And that's kind of when we say those words to a kid, Stop freaking out. You're ruining this for everyone. But the truth is, if you think about yourself on a flight and the pilot says that, you don't feel calmer.

(00:37:23):
Number one, you're worried they don't notice the turbulence. Number two, you're a little disturbed that it just takes your screaming to make the pilot kind of lose it at you, right? And that actually makes you feel less safe. And so, that's like in a meeting where people, I don't know, voice something that doesn't feel good and the leader essentially is like, Stop complaining. That's not sturdy.

(00:37:46):
The second version is also not sturdy. And I think we've a little bit, at least in parenting, over corrected to this, which is a pilot saying like, I hear you screaming. You know what? I'm opening the cockpit door. Does anyone want to fly the plane because your screaming is make me anxious and I'm not really sure what to do. Maybe one of you want to do it. I think that's a massive overcorrection I've seen in parenting and I just want to make it very clear that is not what we do at Good Inside, which is kind of, my kid is upset and instead of just caring about their feelings, now their feelings dictate my decisions.

(00:38:16):
That's terrifying for someone on a flight. If that's me, I'm not even scared of the turbulence anymore. I'm scared that this person is my supposed leader. That's also in a meeting when you complain about things and a leader might say, Oh, okay, you know what? Okay, we'll just get consensus on this. When it's a decision, that's a leadership decision, not a consensus decision, which some decisions are, but some decisions aren't because you are the only one who has certain information.

(00:38:41):
Now, to me is the third announcement that I want to hear, when it's really turbulent, is something like this. I hear everyone screaming back there, that makes sense. And you haven't been in as many flights, you're right, it's very bumpy. And I know what I'm doing. This turbulence, though it scares you, it doesn't scare me. I'm actually going to get off this loudspeaker right now to go back to do my job. I'll see you when we land in Los Angeles.

(00:39:07):
Now, even if the turbulence is the same, all of a sudden I feel this deep breath, because my worry is contained. This sturdy leader is able to see my emotional experience as real for me and not be overwhelmed by it themself. Those are the two distinct aspects of being a sturdy leader. I can see someone else's experience as real for them, but I can still hold onto my experience and so I'm not overwhelmed by someone else. So to a kid, it might be saying, look, let's say TV time is over, and my kid does not [inaudible 00:39:42] in my house, when I say TV time is over, I'm turning off the TV. When my kids were younger, they didn't say, You're right, mom, that's a great decision. No. They freaked out because they wanted to watch another one.

(00:39:53):
So, a sturdy leader would say in that position, I'm turning the TV off, that's my decision. I get that you're upset, I don't really like to end TV time either. I also know we'll get through it. Do your thing and then we'll transition to brushing teeth and then I kind of wait it out. Or in the workplace, someone's complaining about, I don't know, making this up, but maybe it's some policy change, vacation change, number of days in the office, where you say, look, I want to share something that I know some people are going to have a reaction to, here's the new policy. People stop [inaudible 00:40:25], complaining. Look, I get it, this is a big change and you're right. This does make things hard in a certain way, and I totally see that, and the way you're feeling makes sense. And here's some version of why we're doing it and I know we're going to get through it and I have faith in us to weather this turbulence.

(00:40:43):
And I think, in every situation, kids, workplace, in laws, whatever it is, that sturdy leadership always feels good.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:54):
This is a really good segue to something I definitely wanted to ask you about, which is this idea of boundaries, of how to set boundaries well and how that relates to long-term resilience, versus just this idea of short-term happiness. I was just yesterday watching your advice on how to set boundaries with my kid, because I struggle with it sometimes and I'm just like, What am I doing wrong? And it was extremely helpful. I started using your advice and I'm like, Wow, he's doing exactly what I wanted to do. So, there's a lot of power here. So, talk about just from your advice to parents around boundaries and this idea of long-term resilience and then how that might translate.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:41:24):
Yeah. And so, I think related to being a sturdy leader, to make it more concrete, there's two jobs we have as a parent. I think they're the same two jobs we have as any sturdy leader in any environment. And that's setting boundaries, which are limits we set, certain decisions we make. Boundaries often relate to your position of authority, where you have some long-term goal in mind that someone else in the system just isn't as aware of, or a two-year-old isn't as capable of holding onto, which is why you're in the position of making a decision. So, that's the boundaries. And the other side is, validating kids' or someone else's experience, while not being taken over by it. And I think we've moved so far in this direction of validating kids' experience, and I'll go on record and saying, validating kids' feelings is an incomplete parenting approach. That is half of our job, but it doesn't work if we're not doing the other half, which is setting boundaries, which is the skill I feel best about teaching people, because I think it's what we're often lacking.

(00:42:21):
So, my definition of boundaries, I do like because it's immediately usable and testable. Boundaries are what you tell someone else you will do, and it requires the other person to do nothing. Too often I hear people say, My kid doesn't respect my boundaries. My colleague doesn't respect my boundaries. And with all due respect, I often think, I think you have an incorrect definition of boundaries. I think you're probably making a request, which by the way, we do a lot. There's nothing wrong with requests, but it's not a boundary. Because if you're setting what you call a boundary and you're really making a request, you're giving all of your power away to the other person, because you're saying the success of this important moment depends on my two-year-old. What? I'm not going to give my power to my two-year-old. And I always tell parents, I would bet on you any day over your kid, and it's not because I don't like your kid. I do like your kid. I just believe in you more.

(00:43:18):
And so a good example of this, let's say, is, I have a kid, like I was describing before, who's not a people pleaser. And so, I live in New York City, we live in a building with a lot of elevator buttons, where this kid, when he was younger, if he was left to his own devices, which had happened, he would press every elevator button, every one. And with my other kids, one of them especially, I probably would've been able to make a request like, Hey, when we go on the elevator later, it's really important not to press all the buttons. Other people wait for this elevator, it's rude, whatever it is. That's not a boundary. Because I could say, Did I tell my kid what I will do? No. Does it require my kid to do nothing? No.

(00:43:56):
A boundary, would be saying, when we go into the elevator, I'm going to stand between you and the button, sweetie, because I'm not going to let you press the buttons, because other people are waiting. And if you have a kid like my kid, they're going to lunge for it anyway. And then I would block my kid, because I'm ready and I've done a workout, my muscles are ready. I'm not going to let you do that. Now, my kid might get upset, which allows me to do the other part of my jobs. Oh, I know you wish you could press those buttons or maybe just look kindly toward him and not say anything, but I'm going to still hold my boundary.

(00:44:25):
And in this example, I think one of the places we get into trouble as a parent, is we say, Don't press the buttons. If you press the buttons, no dessert tonight, or whatever, we threaten. But all of that is a way of completely undermining our authority, because I'm giving all of my power to my kid. I'm letting myself get frustrated. Now, I'm taking away dessert, and the honest truth, if we want to be honest about it, is at night, I'm going to give my kids sorbet anyway and then make up something how sorbet isn't dessert, because it has fruit, all because I just didn't set a boundary in the first place. And I think over and over, in parenting, maybe at work too, we're asking our kid to do our job for us, because we just don't want to deal with the emotional fallout, but that's what I call job confusion and makes everyone frustrated.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:16):
Your marketing website sets the tone for your brand and is the one touchpoint that every single one of your customer sees. In today's age, if you're still having a hard time making small changes and simple updates to it, you are doing something wrong. That is why so many companies from early stage startups to Fortune 500s, including companies like SpaceX, DoorDash, Zapier, Perplexity, and ElevenLabs turn to Framer, the website builder that turns your .com, from a formality into a tool for growth. Framer works like your team's favorite design tool and comes with real-time collaboration, a robust CMS with everything you need for great SEO and advanced analytics that includes integrated A/B testing. Changes to your Framer site go live to the web in seconds, with a single click and without any help from engineering. Whether you want to launch a new site, test a few...

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:00):
And without any help from engineering, whether you want to launch a new site, test a few landing pages, or migrate your full .com, Framer has programs for startups, scale-ups, and large enterprises to make going from idea to live site as easy and fast as possible. Learn how to turn your website into a growth engine from a Framer expert, or just get started building for free today at framer.com/lenny. And if you're a Lenny's Product Pass subscriber, you get an entire year of Framer Pro for free. Check it out at framer.com/lenny. Rules and restrictions may apply.

(00:46:35):
Let me actually ask you a parenting question while we're on this topic as I'm trying to learn this boundaries thing better. What's the correct way to, if they're not going to the car, and I'm like, "Okay. I'm going to carry you to the car if you don't do this." I'm still requesting them to go there. Is there a way to phrase that where they don't need to do anything?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:46:55):
Well, boundaries are something I will do when they require my kid to do nothing, we want to try. Look, we have to get in the car and whatever I try. I try a game, I try a song. And then again, the intention matters. The reason I'm going to carry my kid to the car is actually, I don't want to let myself then be late and then yell at my kid and be frustrated.

(00:47:15):
I'm doing it because I like my kid, and I'm on the same team as them. So then I might say, "Look. It looks like it's hard for you to get to the car. I don't really want to do this, but I don't know. I'm going to turn around, I'm going to take a deep breath. And if by the time I turn around, you're still here, I'm going to pick you up. I'm going to carry you to the car. And even if you're crying and kicking and screaming, I'm still going to do that, sweetie. I know sometimes it's hard to leave the house. We do have to leave. Here comes my deep breath."

(00:47:39):
Now, what's really important, I don't want to understate, is I think somewhere in us we think, "I'm going to do that, and then I'm going to be rewarded by my kid for my good parenting. I'm going to turn around and you're going to be like, 'I'm ready now, Dad.'" That might happen in some households, but it actually won't reliably happen until you've actually set boundaries over and over, where it's not about taking advantage of you. They're just trying to learn the rules of the game. And so then I would pick up my kid.

(00:48:09):
And by the way, depending on your kid's temperament, two out of the three of my kids would scream and cry. And then we tell ourselves, "Oh, I'm not a good parent. I messed that up." No. Again, a pilot is going to make a decision in certain key moments, not based on consensus. Let's say I'm flying to LA, and it's really turbulent, and the pilot says they have to make an emergency landing, and everyone's complaining, and they're like, "What? It can't be that big of a deal. I don't know if that's a light. I have a big meeting in LA." Can you imagine if the pilot was like, "Oh, Becky and Lenny are really upset about this. You know what, guys? Forget it. Forget it. Forget the emergency landing." What?

(00:48:48):
Even if we were upset, we feel deeply, deeply safe that our leader is doing something they believe is right with the information they have available. So even if I'm complaining when I get off the plane in Kansas, wherever I'm landing midway, I also in the back of my head am so grateful. And so I just want parents to know, when you set a true boundary, especially if it's new, your kid will tantrum and protest. But if you actually see that as a sign that you're successfully setting a boundary, instead of as a sign you did something wrong, your relationship with a tantrum changes. You're almost oddly sickly grateful for a sign that you set a boundary. And you're like, "Oh, this is actually..." I always say to myself, "This is going according to plan." And it makes the moment so much easier.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:33):
This advice you give about being the leader is really important, and I could see how it connects deeply, too, in the work environment. I'm curious just if there's more advice there. So the idea that I've been hearing is just, people want you to be their leader, both as a kid and in the work environment. They don't want you to be like, "Okay, what does everyone think? Let's vote." Talk about just the insight there.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:49:51):
Yeah. First of all, I think a lot of things, two things are true. There's definitely a time for consensus. There's a time for getting 100%. That's a really important part of leadership, too. But inherently, you're in a position of leadership because you have experience other people don't have, you have insight, you have judgment. You might just very literally have access to company information and data that other people don't have.

(00:50:17):
You're not all working from the same set of information. So, there's definitely a time for consensus building, but at least in parenting, I think we've over corrected. I need to collect more data from the working world if we've over corrected. I think it feels really good for people to hear some version of, "I took in everything you said, your voices matter, and I want to share a decision I've made with all the information I have. It might not make sense to all of you at the time. You can come talk to me separately. And I have conviction that this is the next thing we're going to experiment with," whatever the decision is."

(00:50:57):
I said this word earlier, and it's another word I say that maybe other people don't say. I'm always drawn to people I can locate. That's the word. I can locate you. I know what you feel. I know your POV. I personally love people I can locate even if I really disagree with them more than being around people who seem to mirror what I'm saying. I've actually learned a lot in a working environment that's what I need because I have a lot of strong ideas. So I love people who push back and have a POV.

(00:51:26):
And I think especially at work when there's so much going on, it could be so stressful, having a leader you can locate, which means I have a POV to be able to say, "This might not be what you want. I believe this is the best decision, and I believe we're a strong enough team to work toward that." I think that's very, very holding, not all the time, but in more situations than we might realize.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:47):
So the advice here is, even if it may not feel like your kid wants you to just tell them what to do or your team wants to have opinions and have a big say, in reality, the human brain seeks somebody to lead them.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:52:01):
I think that's exactly right. And I think we can all think back on our life. And again, you rarely say thank you to these people, but if you think back on really hard moments, or I don't know, if I was out of control at some party, and I don't know, I was being mean to people, I was saying awful things. Who knows? Maybe someone's drunk. An act of love in that moment would be, at least if it was me and my husband, picking me up and carrying me out, kind of like, "I'm not going to let you self-destruct." And if I was like, "No, I'm fine," I might even look back later and think, "Why did you let me make that decision?"

(00:52:42):
I'll share a story, because some of this comes from it. I think about this teenager I was working with in private practice and she came to me, I'm just doing a first session, "Okay, tell me what to bring you here." She's like, "Well, you can see on my arms, I'm cutting." I was like, "Okay, keep going." And I was like, "Well, how long have you been doing that? " She goes, "Two years." And I said, "You just said I'm the first therapist you've ever seen. So what's gone on in the last two years?" She was so snarky. And she goes, "Oh, wow. My parents tried me to send me to a therapist two years ago, but I said to them, "Oh, so you think I'm the messed up one in the family, and you can send me. I'm just going to lie the whole time and waste your money."

(00:53:18):
My heart always races when I think about this moment. It's so visceral still. And something in me, I don't know, I was on my game that day. I was like, "Becky, just be quiet. Don't say anything."

(00:53:26):
And I don't know, 10, 15 seconds later, everything changed for her. She looked down, and then she looked up, and she just goes, "Can you believe they let me make that decision?" She felt so betrayed and so not taken care of. And it just made me realize, at our worst moments, first of all, at our worst moments we speak, I think, our fears, not our wishes, Number One. And at our worst moments, we're not a good place to make good decisions for ourselves. And we don't want to be punished, but sometimes it is an act of love. And I tell this to people very explicitly when they're like, "I know my teenager needs to go to therapy, but they're refusing." And I'll give them an exact script, "Here's what you're going to say." And it's some version of, "Look, I am going to drive you every Thursday to therapy. Whatever you do in the room, whether you lie, whether you're silent, that's not on me. But my Number One job is making decisions that I think are good for you even if you're not happy. That's how much I care about you. And this is one of those times."

(00:54:36):
Every parent who told me they'd done that, their kids on some level, they're like, "I needed that." And I think the equivalent in the workplace is, there are moments when things are really turbulent, when people are, they're saying different things because they're anxious, and they're looking for a leader to kind of say, "Hey, I've heard this all. Here's what I'm doing." You might even say, "I'm not going to lie to you. Do I have complete conviction that this is right? No. But I've put it all together, and this is what we're going with, and I feel good about this direction. We'll reassess in a month. Let's go do this, team." And I think everyone is waiting in certain moments for someone to show up that way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:12):
That was an awesome story. It makes me think about it, just people, they will take what they can get, and they'll be wondering like, "Hey, wow, I'm getting away with all this." When will they realize that someone working at a company where they're not working that hard, "I'll just get away with this as long as I can until they tell me that I can't."

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:55:30):
Yeah.

(00:55:30):
And I just saw the show on Broadway called Punch. It's this really interesting story about this guy, true story that it's based on, where essentially he ended up punching someone at a bar, the guy falls and dies, but he ends up getting to know that person's parents after incarceration. And one of the things that comes up, because I think we tell ourselves, people will take advantage, they'll take all the space you give them. I do tend to think about it in a more of an MGI way, where what happened in this show is, these parents, this guy killed their son. And the question they come to him with, because they end up meeting is, "Well, tell us what you're going to do with your life here. What are you going to do with your life now?" And he ends up saying, nobody had ever asked me that question. Nobody had believed in me. Nobody had ever believed I could do anything useful. Changed the course of his life. It's a crazy story.

(00:56:29):
But I think about at work when someone, yeah, whatever it is we think they're getting away with, or kids, sometimes I think kids are asking, "Is there an adult here? Is there an adult here who will help me, who sees that this is my form of acting out and being out of control? And will somebody help me?"

(00:56:45):
And you know why kids act out more? It's not because they're taking advantage of you. It's because they feel that much more dysregulated because they don't feel like there's an adult in the room who's willing to put a container on their shell-less egg to help them come back together and move forward in a better direction.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:06):
I think about just people that don't have parents that are there and always seek someone as their partner that's more, I don't know, that gives them that later.

(00:57:13):
This connects really well with this idea of building resilience long-term versus short-term. And I think about in the work environment, doing the hard thing, you will be better off versus just letting things progress because it's hard for them to do. You think people will not want to hear bad news. Talk about just that kind of lesson and how that might translate.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (00:57:30):
One of the chapters in my book and something that guides our whole parenting philosophy is just codified as resilience over happiness. And I don't know if you hear this, Lenny, but I used to hear this all the time and I couldn't let myself let this small talk moment go. "Don't you just want your kid to be happy? You just want your kid to be happy, right?" And I'd always ruin a perfectly harmless comment. I was like, "No.

(00:57:53):
And then again, we think in extremes, "Oh, you want your kid to be unhappy?" "No, I definitely don't want my kid to be unhappy." But I think if we zoom out, especially in childhood that I think I can make a parallel to work, too, optimizing for happiness in childhood is the quickest way to build anxiety and fragility in adulthood. Hard stop.

(00:58:13):
Because in a kid's early years, what they're really learning is, "What range of experiences am I able to cope with? In how many different situations can I find my capability? Can I feel like I can get something done? Can I get through something? Or do I believe that the only way to feel like myself is to bring every form of discomfort to a zero and only find happiness?" The irony is, in adulthood, the thing that clouds out happiness often is our inability to manage disappointment, jealousy. Those things will always overpower happiness. And so happiness actually comes in adulthood from our ability to manage the widest range of difficult situations. That's what resilience is. It's our ability to handle the widest range of experiences. I'm not talking about toxic, but just disappointment, jealousy, anger, feeling less than. These are just human experiences we have. And unintentionally, something's happened over the generations where we're optimizing for kids' happiness. Our kids will say something like, "I'm the only one in my class who can't read," and we hop in with, "Oh, that's not true," or, "But you're so good at soccer, but you play chess, but you're doing this," as if I can't even tolerate my kids' upset feelings.

(00:59:34):
And I tell parents all the time, our kids can only learn to tolerate the feelings we tolerate in them. Nothing scarier to a kid that when they're upset, if I can't tolerate their upset feelings, that makes them doubly upset because it's like, "Oh, I guess this is unmanageable," which leads to adulthood where anything but comfortable and happy and doing a perfect job is actually experienced in your body is even worse, because you spent that many years thinking those feelings were wrong.

(01:00:02):
So what that means is, when our kids are young and they go through hard experiences, those are our best opportunities to wire them for resilience and ironically for happiness later on. Because if I can support my kid, I'm not going to say, "Uh, no big deal," but there's a lot between no big deal and let me call the school to make this all better for you. There's a whole world. That's the world I think we try to live in and good inside where I can help my kids see they're capable of dealing with this. That's going to help them so much more over the years.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:35):
How do you think that translates to work? The way I think about it is just like, it's okay to upset people. You're better off. I think it was Kim Scott from Radical Candor had this great story where she had someone she was working with, he was doing a bad job. She didn't want to upset him. She didn't give him any feedback. Nine months later, he just didn't get any better, so she had to fire him. And he's like, "Why didn't you tell me that I wasn't doing what you wanted me to do? You could have told me somewhere along the way." And to us, it feels like, "I don't want to hurt your feelings." But then it ends up hurting their feelings a lot worse. It's a lot worse for them.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:01:11):
I think there's so many parallels.

(01:01:13):
One of the reasons I love talking about childhood is because that's when our brain is wiring. It's when we form the blueprint, or my friend Maile calls it the factory settings, for the rest of our kids' lives. That's the ultimate, is to wire them with the default that works for them. But actually you can think about work relationships the same way, where of course people come, their brain's already wired, they're older, or somewhat.

(01:01:37):
But if you think about it as a building, your first number of months with someone is, you're building the foundation for the whole building, which is the relationship you're going to have. And the earlier you're just optimizing for comfort and happiness, the more fragile your building's going to be. And you're right. Then you get to six months and you're like, "Oh, this person isn't doing so well. I'm going to give them feedback." But in their mind, they're thinking, "I've never gotten a piece of constructively critical feedback since I've been here. So I thought the nature of my relationship in this workplace was one of butterflies and rainbows all the time."

(01:02:09):
That doesn't mean Day One I think you should sit someone down and say like, "Here's everything you're doing wrong." They're like, "I just started my job." There's obviously reasonableness. But yes, when we're thinking about a resilient work culture, we want people who can say, "This is hard and I can do hard things," not, "This is hard, so someone must be at fault and it should be easier." And I don't know anyone who would argue for the second culture. So I think we should ask ourselves, "Well, what am I doing in the nature of my conversations with people that help me build toward that? I'll make it really concrete, because I think so much of dealing with anxiety and struggle, not all of it, but I like a good formula, is this combination of, "I believe you and I believe in you."

(01:02:54):
I think one of the ways we've majorly misunderstood anxiety, whether at any age, is we're doing the I believe you part, but we've forgotten the I believe in you part, and they're both, again, really necessary together, which might sound like this. "Look, I believe you. This is a hard project. You're totally right. And you've never done something like this before. It makes sense," that's such a good phrase, "It makes sense you're nervous about it." Or something I say to my kids that I should say more at work. "I'd be nervous if you weren't nervous. You have a big task. I'd be nervous if you weren't nervous. Of course you're nervous. That makes total sense. I'd feel the same way. And the reason we think you can take on this project is because we know you can figure this out. By the way, I'm here to answer questions and help you along the way, but I just want to make sure you hear that from me. Yes, this is hard and I also know you can work through this. And the way you're going to feel at the end, you're going to feel so proud of yourself. And I don't want to take away the project from you, because I kind of think I'm taking away that feeling. And that's going to be the feeling that propels you to do all the other amazing things you want to do here. And let's work toward that." And that's actually, Lenny, something I used to say to my kids when they were your kids' age. I just distinctly remember this time one of my kids was whining about this puzzle, and he's like, "Do it for me. Finish it for me. You have to do it." And of course, the easiest thing to shut down the tantrum is like, "Fine, here's how you do it." But it was the day I had a little more bandwidth. And I heard myself sing something that, I don't know, it felt like healing to me, too. Honestly, I said, "Look, you're right, this is a hard puzzle. It makes sense you're frustrated. All of us feel frustrated when we want to do something and haven't figured it out yet. You're feeling this moment right. Take a break, take a breath, but I want to tell you why I'm not going to do this for you. There's no better feeling in the world than watching yourself work on something and make progress on something and maybe even complete something that you originally didn't think you could do. There's literally no better feeling than that, and I will not take that feeling away from you."

(01:04:59):
And I think in the workplace, and definitely in parenting, we should be mindful of how often we take feelings of capability away from our kid. And I take that very seriously, because I feel very passionate about building a world where kids become adults who feel capable. And I think we can do that in these small moments more often.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:20):
As you share these stories and examples, I'm just like, "I wish I had Dr Becky in my ear constantly giving me advice as I'm doing this stuff." And we'll talk about how people sort of can get that. But I'm actually really happy you talked about this I believe you Lesson. I was going to bring it up. That was right next on my notes.

(01:05:35):
Because I've used it with my wife, actually, and it is so good and so effective. And this is why I love your advice is that it works not just for kids, it works for adults. Just like, "I believe you. I believe you feel this, even though I don't know why and I wouldn't feel that way, but just I believe you." I like this, this makes sense piece. I haven't thought about that. And then the I believe in you, that's interesting because I did talk about, the way I remember phrasing this, this was a moment I really remember just like, "You're smart, you'll figure this out." And then she just went back to me and she's like, "Wait. What did you just do there?" That felt really good.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:06:09):
Well, if you think about, and I'm very visual, so if you think about someone struggling, picture them in a hole, not an abyss, just like a little hole, okay? And we're a relational species, at least we'll see what happens with AI, but for now we're a relational species, okay? And so when we're really struggling, inherently, the reason why we're struggling is we're in a hole and we can't see the way out of it. If we were in a hole and could see the way out, we wouldn't struggle. So the only reason something feels so hard is because you're in a hole without visibility. So what do you need as a relational species? You need someone you trust to have one foot in the hole with you. You do. That's the I believe you part. So it might be saying to your kid, and those words are so powerful. I think deep down, Lenny, that's literally what we're all looking for as humans is just to be believed. "I believe you. You really don't want to go to soccer practice. You're no longer starting on the team. The first soccer practice after you lose your starting spot sucks, totally sucks. I believe you."

(01:07:06):
But if you think about them in that hole, they need you to have one foot out of the hole. They need one foot in, but they need one foot out. Because if we can't see a more capable version of our kid than they can access in that moment, we've collapsed into the hole with them. And so the I believe you is, I believe in you would be, "Look, you're going to go to practice today. You are. I'll just be honest. It's not going to be fun. You're not going to want to be there the whole time. You're going to feel embarrassed. You're going to hate watching them run plays with you on the sideline, and you're going to come home having survived. I'm going to be there for a hug. I'm going to let you know I'm proud of you. Maybe I'm proudest of you that moment even more than when you scored the goal last game, because that's the hard stuff that's going to help you in life and we're going to get through it together."

(01:07:49):
And so I think for anyone listening, I find what's really powerful with anything is thinking, what end of the spectrum am I on? Because it always gives me insight into where I can grow. Is the I believe you part easier for me or is the I believe in you part easier for me? And there's no morality. Just knowing where you are is helpful. Do I like to say to people, "Come on, it's no big deal. You can do it." Okay, that's the I believe in you. Ooh, I wonder if I'd be more effective if I focus on the first, I believe you. Or do I lead as a parent, as a leader with, I believe you, but ooh, do I sometimes go into the hole with someone? Oh, okay. It's the other part I'm going to play around with. And I think that gives us all something to action on.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:29):
This is such good advice. I got tingles as you were describing what you were telling your kid.

(01:08:34):
If there's anything you take away from this conversation, this is useful with kids, with partners, I think in work too, just this idea of I believe you and that makes sense. And then somehow making it clear that I believe in you.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:08:49):
Yes. See a more capable version of them than they can see in the moment. Doing those two things at once, it's magic. I talk a good game. It's hard for me too. Again, these things are hard in practice, but at least, and I know you're like this too, it's helpful to have a framework to come back to.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:02):
And just these words are s-

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:09:00):
You're like this too. It's helpful to have a framework to come back to.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:02):
Just these words are so... And you don't have to say them exactly, but these specific ways of phrasing is actually really great. Okay. Let's come back to how people can get your advice constantly. So a lot of people see your advice on TikTok and Instagram, just kind of on Twitter and all these places, just like, "Oh, there's Dr. Becky giving me some awesome advice." Not a lot of people know you have an epic business and product and community. Talk about that, just what you've built there, what it is, what people should know.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:09:28):
So what started as an... I put up my first Instagram post on, I think it was February 28th, 2020. So it was two weeks before New York City at least shut down, probably a lot of places in the US. And I didn't have some premonition about COVID. The timing was just kind of nutty. And I even put up that post without any business in mind. I felt so compelled by these ideas around what we've been talking about and how different they are from what we've been handed down to us as truth that the only way I can describe it is, this sounds like awful and visceral, but it felt like I was vomiting them out and I just needed somewhere to put them. And so when I look back, I was like, "Why did I do that?" I don't know. It was more like relief than intentional goal setting.

(01:10:12):
And then New York City shut down. And then what happened was things just took fire. And what was really powerful and I just kind of watched happen and tried to respond to was the community that formed around it, what people wanted. I started doing these live workshops just because I had so much more to say than I could put into a carousel post. And the way people were connecting live, it still happens now in the live events. I think certain ideas I have or stories I tell can be really impactful to people, but if I had to choose between that versus what happens in our community, I would bet on the community every time. It's just amazing because I think these ideas tap into some value system or healing inside of ourselves and safe communities form around value systems. And so what ended up happening from there is people were just telling us.

(01:10:59):
They actually kind of incepted this idea like, "Dr. Becky, I feel like you're doing parent school." And I was like, "What?" And they're like, "I go to school for everything that I've ever cared about." And I always joke that a friend said, "Do you know how much money I spent on gardening school? I like my flowers, but I care about my children more, but I've spent more time and I've invested more in my tiny little garden or my cooking or my hobby." Certainly I've spent more learning about Greek history, which for most of us, no shade to Greece, doesn't actually impact our life that much anymore than I have in parenting. And I realized, and this is what this whole, our business is around, is I really feel like parenting is the last area in life that we glorify instinct alone, where we say, especially to women, this whole idea of maternal instinct, I don't know, this is probably a little controversial, I was like, "Wow, what a way to gaslight parents."

(01:11:54):
Not to say there aren't some moments that are instinctual, but if I'm parenting by instinct, do you want to know what I'm going to do when my kid has a tantrum or when my kids lies in my face? It's not going to be pretty. I don't know if any of us feel like that's a good option.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:09):
I believe you. No, you would not do that.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:12:09):
Yeah. Right. And instinct, by the way, what's instinct? It's everything we've learned until that point. And what feels naturally in parenting is simply how we were parented. That's all that's going to be natural. And so I really, like I started to get very angry with my community where like, why isn't there a better way? And by the way, with modern technology, shouldn't this be easy on your phone? Shouldn't you get access, not to make a moment perfect, but we all spiral after a hard moment. It's not the spiral that makes us have a bad week. It's the way we extend the spiral from how we talk about ourselves and the bad patterns. That last weeks. These are the things that add up to our and our kids' mental health. And I did, I started to get angry thinking there should just be a better option for parents to learn without shame, without the expectation of perfection, to have something in their pocket, to combine it with modern technology, now AI, so many different things, and to preserve the human interactive element.

(01:13:02):
So yeah, so that's what Good Inside is. My co-founder and I are both psychologists. We've known each other forever, and we have a whole team where, yes, there's the podcast and Instagram. And I always consider those flags, like a strategy and a tip we hear, they're like flags. They're like things we try, but most of our struggle in parenting is we don't have a framework and an actual approach, which is the ground we would plant a flag into, which is why parenting feels like whack-a-mole where we're just trying things, right? Even though we would never do that at work. We don't even do that with gardening or tennis.

(01:13:37):
And so Good Inside and our app to me is the most modern, alive, personalized, technologically informed way of feeling like I have something in my pocket and someone and a community too in my pocket that can just close the gap between how I kind of want to show up and how I do show up. None of us close the gap completely, but I do believe we deserve access to tools that can help us do that. And that's what Good Inside as a business is built around.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:07):
Just to give you a more chance to plug what this is, exactly, what do people get when they say download the app, sign up for the community?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:14:13):
What you get is, first of all, you get to just tell us what's going on with you, and we get to be the holder of that story and make sure we hit on the important themes. I really do believe, I know kind of, not formula that makes it too specific and perfect, but we need to learn how to set boundaries. We need to learn how to stay connected to our kid without martyring ourselves. By the way, I also think the thing that you get in the app, which we have to learn better communication if we're in a partnership because that gets tricky. We have to learn how to repair. We have to understand why we get so activated in our nervous system, and we have to do it in a way that we could do, I don't know, five minutes here or there in the go. So that's exactly what we're set up to do.

(01:14:52):
If you can give us five minutes, we will give you something that's not just a tip, that is something... I always combine two things, understanding and action, right? Insight and something that you can actually do today, because I think that's how we can take a deep breath, understanding gives us clarity, and action gives us capability, and that's what we give parents. So you get that, we'll drip it to you, you tell us what's going on. We also have an incredible AI chatbot experience that also beyond helping you in the moment can help you say like, "Hey, this kind of thing that seems different, they're all kind of the same. Here's the common theme. Here's what we suggest for you to kind of get ahead of things." And then there are so many live events. I believe deeply that parenting is something where we have to connect to people.

(01:15:37):
So I do, I don't know, usually two or three live events in a month. We have coaches we've trained, so we've manualized the Good Inside approach. We have coaches who do support sessions. If you have a deeply feeling kid, you can come to as many of those in a month as you want. And there's always a parent to kind of connect. And so I would say you get answers to your questions, you get deeper dives if that's for you and you have the time and you love to learn. And then you also have a very, very active, expert driven, but also just parent community for the live connected help that I think we all need.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:08):
Amazing. I'm a happy member. I was actually just chatting with your AI chatbot at Dr. Gigi is-

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:16:13):
Yes. Gigi, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:15):
Gigi. So good.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:16:15):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:17):
Okay. And where do people find this? Goodinside.com?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:16:17):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:17):
Is that right?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:16:17):
So easy.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:19):
Okay. So easy.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:16:20):
We try to make it easy. Goodinside.com.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:23):
Okay. I have another question, I'm going to ask about this experience, but before that, I'm going to take you to a couple of recurring corners on this podcast. The first is AI corner. I'm curious if there's some way you found AI useful in your work and your life.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:16:36):
So yes. So it actually connects to what I was saying before, how I've learned about myself. I'm kind of allergic to ideas without action. And people would always say to me, "Dr. Becky, one of the reasons I love your parenting guidance is you both help me understand a situation more deeply than I find elsewhere, but you also help me translate it into this absurdly practical thing I can say or do." And it's interesting because what I've learned is I'm so glad that's helpful for people. That actually is just the way I think. And I'm seeing that as I run my company also. And AI helps me close that gap. So let's say we're talking about the product and we're talking about a new onboarding flow and I have an idea. I currently was playing around with Figma Make and I was like, oh my goodness, I can vomit my ideas.

(01:17:28):
And I have so many ideas, not just about like, this is how I want to make someone feel. And I don't want it to sound like this. I want it to sound like this. I have so many ideas around my intention and the impact and I don't like to have an idea that I can't fully see out. So I want to see the UX design or I want to see the whole email flow. And my team knows me well enough to know that's just how I think so they can get a totally new abandoned cart flow from me and they might be like, "Becky, we don't like this. We wish you just told us the idea before you built this out." I don't do that for them. And I'm like, "If you want to trash the whole thing, I don't care. I'm not attached to it." But AI has allowed me to take an idea and turn it into something I can visualize and that's more real in such a rapid way. And I'm so excited about that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:10):
That is super cool. It feels like this is what these apps are so useful for. People that are not designers, product managers, engineers, trying stuff out, prototyping, thinking through and real designs, not just sketches. Well, Figma Make, that's cool. Proud podcast sponsor. Is that the one-

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:18:11):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:27):
You find most useful?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:18:29):
It's funny. I'm just laughing because Andrew Hogan who does insights at Figma, he's been a big Good Inside member. He's always talking about it. And I said to him, "If it would help at all, I want to make a video for just your team to tell them how obsessed I am with Figma Make in case that..." And he's like, "Go ahead." So if this fails, I'm going to become an affiliate or something for that. But that is the one I'm playing around with. I'm also playing around Replit. My team is just showing me that one and Lovable. So I love playing around with any of those new tools. And then yeah, whether it's Claude or ChatGPT, I find the way I can work rapidly to get my ideas into a place. And I show my team how I use it. And I really do think that people who get the most out of prompting, like there is, like a vomiting aspect.

(01:19:20):
Tell me all your thoughts. And I think a lot of people, especially women, we've been conditioned to put everything into this neat, organized package before we present it to the world in general. And I find prompting is best when we do complete opposite, right, and get it all out there and then you can refine. And that's one of the things I do with my team a lot. I'm like, I want to show you. Just be in the room and I'll show you how I work through this with, let's say it's a ChatGPT. And I think that's one of the ways I'm also helping my team get a lot more from AI, is showing them that kind of way of using it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:53):
How big is your team, by the way? What's like the Dr. Becky operation? What does that look like?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:19:56):
65.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:57):
65 people. That's incredible.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:20:00):
Yeah. Well, and we're profitable.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:02):
And profitable.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:20:02):
So proud of that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:02):
Have you raised money-

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:20:02):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:03):
Or is it bootstrapped?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:20:05):
We did raise money a couple years ago. We felt like, again, we have a very, very big vision for what we want to accomplish. I feel like at our core, it's a set of ideas and stories and a way of making people feel that happens to be represented as the biggest part of our business now in a digital product. But there's just so many other things in a Disney type ecosystem that I think can come out out of IP and story and feeling and connection. And there's a lot of really other exciting things, 2026 and 2027 that will further build that ecosystem. And I feel like as a team are set up to do that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:37):
Oh, man. We need to do a whole episode on just the whole operation. But-

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:20:40):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:40):
I guess just to cover the empire, there's the book, there's the podcast, there's the app, there's the community.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:20:47):
So yes, and my second children's book will come out next year. So I feel like that's our first entry into kind of more physical product. And my second children's book is about deeply feeling kids. Those kids are kind of my passion project within the passion project that is Good Inside. I think they're the most misunderstood kids in the world. They're labeled dramatic, oppositional. A lot of parents even tell me professionals tell them the issue is they don't punish them enough or they're not consistent. Those kids don't fear a loss of control. Their core fear is being too much and they can act that out and unfortunately get it confirmed by the world. And so my second children's book will be about deeply feeling kids and gives parents something. If our app is like the companion for the parent, I feel like the connection moment and for a kid to see themselves in this book is the purpose of that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:29):
Is that something people can pre-order yet or not yet?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:21:30):
Yes, they can pre-order. It's out-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:32):
Okay.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:21:33):
February 2026 and pre-orders, thank you. Yes, help so much. And I'll be doing a little tour around it as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:40):
And what's it called for people to look it up on Amazon or wherever they want to buy the book?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:21:40):
It's called Leave Me Alone!: A Good Inside Story About Deeply Feeling Kids. And if you have one, these kids, the reason the title I think will resonate and honestly, a lot of people say, "Ooh, that gives me a lot of insight in my partner, someone at work." Is around their fear of being too much, they tend to have big explosive feelings and push the people away they care about the most in the exact moments they actually need them, thereby confirming their fears. See, I really am too much, which exacerbates the cycle until they know how to change it. So leave me alone is something a deeply feeling kid will often scream in their room when they're completely out of control and that's actually in some ways their deepest fear, not their wish. And so the title plays to that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:20):
How cool. Okay. We'll definitely link to that in the show notes.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:22:23):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:23):
You can look it up on your favorite bookseller. Dr. Becky, how fun was this? What a unique conversation. We touched topics on every level of humanity, I think. Before we get to our very exciting lightning round, is there anything else that you wanted to share? Anything else that you want to double down on?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:22:43):
Kind of I think before we started recording, I was saying how excited I am. I really mean it. You're like a major celebrity to me and my whole team knows it, that of all of the podcasts I've been on, they're like, "You must be nervous for Lenny." I was like, "I am." What I said to you is that I love your podcast because I just learn so much. Right. As a psychologist, CEO, obviously there's a lot for me to learn and I've learned so much from you and I really am addicted to learning. And the reason that's coming up for me now is I think about all the people who listen to your show who I think they're like that too. They're forever learners. They love to learn. It's why they love your podcast because you get so concrete and you follow the thread down the rabbit hole and it helps us feel more capable at work.

(01:23:28):
And one of the things I've found interesting is so many people who have that forever learner growth mindset, whatever you want to call it at work, we forget to access it with our kids. We say things like, "It is the way it is." I feel like people who listen to your podcast probably don't say that at work. That's why they're listening to their podcast. Maybe it doesn't have to be the way it is. Or, "Oh, I didn't know that before, but now I do. So I can try something new." And again, I'm never going to be perfect. Perfect is creepy, but I can grow. I'm more addicted to growing and learning than being right. And I think, I guess I would just ask anyone listening, especially as a parent, to say, "What if I just took that mentality home?" Like, okay, yelled at my kid.

(01:24:06):
I didn't mess them up forever. Do I know how to repair? By the way, did I have a parent who actually repaired with me? Because if I didn't, no wonder it feels awkward. I'm kind of the first person in my whole lineage to give a true apology to my three-year-old. Of course, that's going to feel hard. Or, yeah, I don't understand tantrums or I don't really understand why my good kid is lying to me, but maybe I could learn. I learn things at work all the time and I give myself credit. And what if I took that way of being and just applied it to this other area? I'd both, I think, be more compassionate with myself, but I probably also feel better over time about how I was showing up. And I just think we forget to apply that because again, parenting has been told as something that should just feel natural when it doesn't, right? So if we think of it as a set of skills, it's actually very hopeful. Oh, I learn skills from Lenny all the time. I can do that in parenting too.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:59):
That's such a beautiful message. What I feel is anytime I watch one of your clips and then do that thing and then it works, it's like, oh, that expands your mind. Oh wow, there's so much more I could learn. I should go deeper on what the hell I'm doing. I don't know what I'm doing. So that is a really important message of like you can learn this skill. It's not something anyone just knows how to do.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:25:19):
Yeah. And I like giving people very concrete things. So a question recently that I've asked my kids that have led to amazing moments just as a, is some version of, "If I could do one thing different this week to be a better parent to you, what would it be?" I guess it's kind of like a 360 degree-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:37):
Yeah. That's [inaudible 01:25:38].

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:25:38):
Review. Right. And-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:39):
Give me a raise.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:25:40):
Sometimes your kid says the hurtful things. "You can not be on your phone as much," which just get ready for it and just get ready to receive. "Okay. Thank you for telling me that." And I think the thing that stops us is we think our kid is going to say "stupid things." "You could let me watch TV." The truth is no matter what your kid says, it's a window into their world. And again, you can be the pilot who listens but doesn't open the cockpit door. "Oh, what would it be like to watch all the TV you want? Oh, your friends watch more. I'm so glad you told me that. Oh, does that mean I can watch TV? Sweetie, that's not going to be one of the things I budge on, but maybe here's something we could do instead." But just asking your kid that question and not expecting a profound answer.

(01:26:16):
It makes me think if anyone thought, "What if my manager asked me that question? Wouldn't I immediately just feel better about my manager anyway just from the asking of the question?" And I think it's just something so actionable that every time I do it with my kids, I notice their behavior's kind of better for the rest of the week just from that. And I want to give something high impact to anybody who's made it this far in the episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:36):
I love that that's like the reverse of this approach to this episode is like from the work environment, what can you bring to your kids? And it's like, do a little 360, ask for what feedback can you give me in my performance review as a parent this week.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:26:48):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:48):
So good. Okay. With that, Dr. Becky, we reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got five questions for you. Are you ready?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:26:56):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:57):
Here we go. What are two or three books that you find yourself recommending most to other people?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:27:03):
I love The Power of Moments. I love Messy Middle and I got a lot from Creativity, Inc as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:11):
Is there a recent movie or TV show you have really enjoyed?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:27:14):
I really liked Secrets We Keep, which was actually recommended to me by our product leader on Netflix. And I really loved KPop Demon Hunters so much. I wrote a whole guide on it because I think it's just such an opener for really good, deep connected moments with our kids. And so those two come to mind.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:33):
Is there a product you recently discovered that you really like? Could be an app, could be clothing, could be a gadget.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:27:39):
I started doing Liberty Puzzles. Do you know it? So some people-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:39):
No.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:27:42):
Have heard of Stave. They're like these, but this is Liberty. They're thick wooden puzzles where they're kind of hand cut pieces. You never know what's an edge. Sometimes the colors that connect are kind of the end of one color and start of another, so they're tricky. But having this out at night, number one, I find puzzling is something where you have to monotask. You truly cannot multitask. And I find it so hard for me to monotask these days, even though it gives me such grounded energy. So that allows that. And it's something, yes, with my kids, but oddly enough, me and my husband will find ourselves doing it together at night versus being on the couch, doing work. And I feel like we're in the same world working on something together. And it's been really fun for that as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:25):
My kid has been really into puzzles recently. We have this menorah puzzle that we got and he's just every bedtime, he wants to do it four times, finishes it, again. He speaks Spanish because his grandma speaks Spanish to him, so he's like mas, una mas.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:28:38):
Oh, I love it. Love puzzles.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:40):
And I love that he's just like, "Break it apart. Okay, let's start from the beginning."

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:28:43):
Amazing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:44):
Yeah. Puzzles. How fun. Okay. Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you find useful in work or in life?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:28:52):
This feels hard because it is hard, not because I'm doing something wrong. I just think this is so true in parenting at work. It's so interesting how often something is hard and we tell ourselves the story that we're stupid or we're not good at it. And there's something so simple about reminding myself, no, this feels hard because it is hard. I'm feeling this moment right. It's just hard. And I find that I always feel my feet on the ground again when I tell myself that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:15):
Great segue to our final question. So you're building a product, building a company. As a non-product person, what's something that surprised you about the experience of building a product and building a company?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:29:28):
It's funny. I'm hesitating only because I'm thinking of something and I'll say it, but I'm like, why did that surprise me? It should be so obvious. But I guess it's true that a company is just people. And before I started this company, I was in private practice, seeing people for therapy. And I feel like those skills are remarkably useful as the leader of a company where there's so many things I can't do. You're not going to ask me to financially model or data analytics, but I feel like there's really strong people who can do that. But I believe that understanding people or just having the skill of attempting to understand people is a surprisingly, but I guess also retrospectively obvious, really good leadership skill.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:12):
Dr. Becky, this was incredible. It's such an honor to have you on. I just see you everywhere all the time, have learned so much from you. And what a treat to have you in this podcast. I have people are like, "What the hell is going on here?" I learned a ton myself and I know people will too. Two final questions. Where can folks find you, Good Inside, your book, anything else you want to share? And then just how can listeners be useful to you?

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:30:33):
Oh yeah, just goodinside.com. You can find our product there. You can find all the books that I've written there. You can find our yeah, newsletter if you're just curious to start there. All of it's at goodinside.com. I really do love feedback. So if you're there, if you're thinking, "Hey, I'm in your app and I wish you did this." I mean, your listeners are such a treasure trove of brilliant product, marketing, just thoughts that I can never have myself. And we're really trying to build something that makes a parent always exhale and feel a little more capable and parents have the best information of how to do that. So being willing to share feedback and ideas. Anyone can reach out to me on DM or you could email office@goodinside.com, but that's a way to help. I love learning from other people.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:26):
Awesome. Dr. Becky, thank you so much for being here.

Dr. Becky Kennedy (01:31:29):
Thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:30):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny (00:00:03):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast. I'm Lenny and my goal here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. Normally, I interview world class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard won experiences building and growing today's most successful companies. But today is going to be a very different and unique episode. I launched this podcast about six months ago. We've done exactly 50 episodes at this point. We've also done over 2 million downloads since we launched. The podcast is a top 10 technology podcast across Apple and Spotify globally. And I believe there's about 40 to 50,000 subscribers or followers of the podcast across Apple and Spotify, which is all very exciting and kind of blows my mind.

Lenny (00:00:47):
So what I decided to do with this final episode of the year is to look back at the 10 most popular episodes that we've done so far. So what I'm going to do is count down from the 10th most popular episode to number one and play a clip or two from that episode that I found to be most interesting or that's been the most popular. I've never done this sort of episode before. We'll see how it goes. I think it's going to be really interesting. If it's not, we will never do it again. And if it is, awesome. Either way, enjoy. We're going to get right into it after a short word from our sponsors.

 Adam Grant (00:01:19):
Have you ever wondered what makes great minds tick? I'm Adam Grant and on my new podcast, Rethinking, I'm trying to find the answers. Every week I interview some of my favorite thinkers to learn how we can bring out the best in ourselves and others. I talk to defying rock climbers, Oscar-winning filmmakers, creators like Lin-Manuel Miranda, entrepreneurs like Mark Cuban and thought leaders like Brene Brown. Find Rethinking on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, Amazon Music, or wherever you listen.

Lenny (00:01:51):
This episode is brought to you by Notion. If you haven't heard of Notion, where have you been? I use Notion to coordinate this very podcast. Including my content calendar, my sponsors, and prepping guests for launch of each episode. Notion is an all-in-one team collaboration tool that combines note-taking, document sharing, wikis, project management, and much more into one space that's simple, powerful and beautifully designed. And not only does it allow you to be more efficient in your work life, but you can easily transition to using it in your personal life, which is another feature that truly sets Notion apart. The other day I started a home project and immediately opened up Notion to help me organize it all. Learn more and get started for free at Notion.com/Lennyspod. Take the first step towards an organized happy team today, again at notion.com/Lennyspod.

Lenny (00:02:47):
Welcome back and let's kick off this countdown with the 10th most popular episode of the year, and that is with April Dunford. April is the author of obviously awesome. She, in my opinion, is the smartest person in the world on positioning and how to figure out positioning for your product. And here's April describing the five steps to figure out your product's positioning.

Lenny (00:03:06):
Say that you're a PM or founder that's ready to start figuring out their positioning for their product. What's the first thing that you do?

April Dunford (00:03:15):
I actually think the first step in a good positioning exercise is to really understand what do we have to position against? So put another way, it's like saying, what do I have to beat in order to win a deal? So in positioning work we call this competitive alternatives. Now, how people mess up this first step is, I say competitive alternatives and they think competition. So things that look exactly like me. But in B2B we kind of have two sets of competitors. We have status quo, which is whatever the company is doing to attempt to solve the problem right now, even if it's crappy and not great. And then there's, if the company does decide they're going to buy something different, they usually make a short list. So, it's whoever else lands on the short list. I need to be able to put a stake in the ground and say, I got to beat all that in order to win a deal.

April Dunford (00:04:10):
Now most folks will discount the status quo, but they shouldn't because in B2B we lose about 40% of our deals to, "No decision," which actually means we lost to the spreadsheet, we lost to pen and paper, we lost to interns. And if we're not positioning well against that, we're never going to get the customer to come off of that. So I got to win against status quo, but I also have to win, most of the time, if it's B2B, you don't just buy the first thing you come across, you make a short list of alternatives and I got to win against those as well.

April Dunford (00:04:44):
So step number one, what am I positioning against? Once I have that stake in the ground, then I can start thinking about what makes us different. So the easiest way to do this is, okay, this is what I have to position against, what have I got capabilities wise that the alternatives don't have? So feature function or even capabilities of the company, which could be pricing or professional services around other things that you've got, but also capabilities of the product. What have I got that the alternatives don't have? And I can make a giant list of these things. And then I can translate that stuff into value by going down the list and saying, okay, we have this great feature, so what? Why does a customer care about it? What is the value that feature enables?

April Dunford (00:05:31):
When I do that mapping over to value, what generally happens is I end up with two or three value buckets or value themes. And quite often those value buckets or value themes are different than what I would've gotten if I got all the smart people in my company together and said, hey, why does everybody love our stuff? When I do it this way I'm ensured that those value themes are differentiated and not just things that are generally valuable, but any alternative could get it done so why are we even talking about it? So in my mind, that's kind of how we do it.

April Dunford (00:06:07):
Once I've got differentiated value, then I can start thinking about, well look, I could sell this product to any company that has this problem, but not everybody cares about this value the same way. And so what are the characteristics of a target account that make them really, really care a lot about that value? If I do some deep thinking about that, that's going to be my definition of a really best fit customer.

April Dunford (00:06:31):
And then the last piece of positioning of course is market category. And so again, a lot of people will just start with market category and then try to back up, which I think is crazy 'cause then we don't have any way to judge the goodness of a market category. But if I've got, look, this is the value only I can deliver, these are the kind of people that really care a lot about that value. If I start thinking about positioning is like the context I position my product in, then the best market category is the context I position my product in such that this value is kind of obvious to these people. This is my long-winded way of doing it, but this is the only way I know how to get positioning done.

Lenny (00:07:17):
Next up is Crystal Widjaja, who is a longtime chief product officer at Gojek. She's currently chief product officer at Kumu, and she's one of the smartest growth minds that you probably have not heard of. Here is Crystal talking about why most analytics efforts fail at companies.

Lenny (00:07:32):
I want to shift a little bit to post that you wrote that maybe he's winning more popular posts, you wrote on the Reforge blog called, Why Most Analytics Efforts Fail. I'd love to hear your broad overview of why do most analytics efforts fail and then how do teams avoid this, maybe what are two to three things they can do?

Crystal Widjaja (00:07:51):
Yeah, I'm actually pretty surprised at how much noise that has generated because I guess it came from a place of frustration where I kept telling people like, you are doing this wrong, here's how you should probably be doing it. But I think it resonated a lot with Foltz because they recognize all of those symptoms but they weren't sure why it was happening. So to say, oh, this is the thing, instrumentation is what's wrong. I think it's a very actionable thing. It's probably one of the most solvable problems out there. It just takes some time and mental model shifts to do it well.

Crystal Widjaja (00:08:27):
So a lot of people look at tracking data as how do I track my OKR? How do I know if I'm going up or down? But they don't use it to track or identify insights. So I will use the example of using Twitter for, "News" when in reality they're actually using Twitter for entertainment. Do not treat metric gathering as entertainment. It's not there for you to be like, oh, that's interesting, how novel, and then not act on it. So real news is information that changes what you do in the real world. And if you don't change what you're doing, what you are doing is just getting entertainment. So let's use that as a premise.

Crystal Widjaja (00:09:13):
The next step in instrumentation is to look at the fact that measurements do not equate to insights. A measurement would be an observation, it's a data point in your database. So the example being power users do four times more bookings is an observed fact because your transactional database obviously says that that is the case. But it's not an insight because it doesn't have context, it doesn't give you information that lets you act on it and better understand the problem.

Crystal Widjaja (00:09:45):
So another example would be if I see my girlfriend hanging out with a guy, I don't know. That is an observed fact that you see in the real world. You're a hypothesis could be that your girlfriend is cheating on you, but the insight, the actual fact might be that she's not cheating on you, it's her cousin. And now your insight is I am paranoid and I need to change my behavior to be less crazy. So, the insight will provide value when you have this why answered. Why is this person doing this thing? Here's why. And then you are going to act differently.

Crystal Widjaja (00:10:25):
So for our purposes, if we look at a Goodfood user will transact and is more likely to use a voucher. That's a fact, that's an observation. But it's not an insight. An insight would be something like Goodfood users who are power users are more likely to use a free shipping discount on a high GMV basket versus non-power users. And that actually tells you how to change your marketing approach. It tells you in what circumstances does someone do this When it's a high GMV basket, give power users the ability to get a free discount, but do not do this for non-powered users because they won't convert any better than they normally would. So that helps you change your marketing spend, it helps you understand the decision points of power users versus non-power users. The insight is instrumenting properties into an event so that you can segment who is doing what behavior and make some hypotheses on that observation, test that hypothesis and then you get some causal representation of whether or not that hypothesis was right.

Lenny (00:11:43):
The eighth most popular episode of the year is our very first episode with Julie Zhou. Julie was a longtime design leader at Facebook. She's now the founder of a company called Sundial. She also wrote the bestseller, the Making of a Manager and her newsletter, The Looking Glass, was a huge inspiration to me that helped me start my newsletter. Here is Julie sharing her advice on getting over imposter syndrome.

Lenny (00:12:06):
Going back to your time at Facebook, you've made it sound like you just kind of like, ah, I joined as a designer, figured out design became a manager, and then somehow you became VP of design and it sounded too easy. That's an insane trajectory for someone to follow. Do you have any thoughts or advice on what contributed to your success rising through the ranks that quickly for folks that are just early in their career maybe?

Julie Zhou (00:12:30):
Absolutely. And I want to make it really clear, I would say that the first seven or eight years that I was at Facebook every single week I felt like an imposter. I had no idea really what I was doing. The constant refrain in my head is like, well, do you really deserve to be here? Do you really know what's happening? You're not really prepared for this job. You've never done this before. What do you have to be put in this situation and get to do what you do? And that was really a constant refrain in my head.

Julie Zhou (00:13:02):
But looking back, I think it probably took me about seven or eight years until I became a little bit more comfortable with that. After seven or eight years I could look back, I could see all of the things that I got to work on, I could see all the ways that I had grown and learned in that experience. And something clicked for me where I realized it's kind of two sides of the same coin. Being in an uncomfortable situation, being in a position where you feel like, hey, do I really know how to do this, I'm not prepared for it, kind of coincides with the fastest and most intense periods of growth in one's career. I started to realize, well maybe it's not so much of a bad thing. Maybe if I constantly putting myself in this situation where I haven't seen this problem before, that's also what's going to push me to grow and learn.

Julie Zhou (00:13:53):
So yes, you asked for specific advice, I think there's two things. The first is, well, I was lucky I was in the right place at the right time. I was at a company that was scaling. And when you're at a company that grows, there's always a lot more opportunity to then be able to try something new, to raise their hand, to volunteer for things to be just thrown into because somebody has to do it because it's a growing company and there aren't a lot of other people. So the first piece of advice I would have would be like if you want those types of opportunities, sometimes you just have to be at a smaller place and you have to be at a place that is going through that rate of growth.

Julie Zhou (00:14:30):
The second thing is embrace the fact that it's okay to be in a position where maybe you don't know what to do, you haven't been trained for. It does coincide with that intense learning. Maybe approach it with that sense of curiosity and that sense of, yes, it's hard, yes, I might be an imposter and I might feel that way for a while, but this is also what's going to help me get there. It's going to be what forces me to do the work and in that process learn and become better.

Lenny (00:15:02):
It's amazing to hear that you had imposter syndrome for such a long period of time and you basically ran design for the Facebook app, right?

Julie Zhou (00:15:11):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:15:11):
It's kind of an empowering, inspiring insight that someone that at your level went through that for so long and made it through that. Do you have any other advice or thoughts on just for folks that are going through that? Because I have that to you for a number of years, just like, what the hell am I doing here? People are going to see I don't really know what I'm doing and it's all going to crumble as soon as I make my next mistake. Do you have any other advice there for folks going through that themselves?

Julie Zhou (00:15:34):
I think that so much of just exactly what you said, Lenny, I think so much of it that helped me was realizing that everyone feels this way to some extent. And that's also why I always want to talk about that. Because I feel like sometimes you can see from the outside you're like, oh, this person has this title, they have this position, they have these responsibilities. Clearly they've made it, they know what they're doing. But that's never the case.

Julie Zhou (00:15:58):
I mean, logically, let's think about it. If you're going to do anything new for the first time, how are you ever going to feel totally comfortable, totally prepared? Every time there's something new that you hadn't encountered before it's always going to be a little bit rough, you're never going to feel like perfectly at ease. It's only upon doing something multiple times that you start to see the patterns, you start to realize, okay, it's going to be all right. Even now, the people that I talk to, the people I really look up to, the people who I think are role models and mentors for me, I mean they regularly also share with me that it's the same. They still encounter things that are unprecedented. If we work in tech, I mean the rate of change, the rate of the industry and companies and these new experiences that we have, that never goes away. That's just par for the course. So I think that feeling always exists.

Julie Zhou (00:16:55):
What I have learned is that there are better tools in your toolkit for dealing with it. One of them is of course me just reminding myself that if I feel uncomfortable, okay, other people feel that way too. Everyone does. It's totally natural. But then to also find other pieces in that toolkit. One is I am much better at asking for help now than I was earlier in my career. I used to actually just try and hold it all in. I was like, hey, I better fake it till I make it. If everyone thinks that maybe I'm coming to the table like I know it then I can fool them.

Julie Zhou (00:17:30):
Now I realize I was preventing myself from being able to get that support and that empathy and that camaraderie and that advice that would've helped me actually grow faster and maybe with a little bit less pain in the process. So one of the things I've learned is it's okay to ask for help. It's okay to reach out to people who both may be going through the same things you're going or maybe are a step or two ahead of you in the journey, who have actually gone through that and have lived to tell the tale and can tell you it's going to be okay. Because often that's just what you need, you just need people to tell you it's going to be fine. You're fine. You're good. You've got this. That's so meaningful whenever we sometimes feel down about ourselves. So that's another, I would say tool in the toolkit, asking for help, finding groups of support.

Julie Zhou (00:18:19):
And then I think the third is it's also okay to just be vulnerable and just talk to people about. I found that some of the most meaningful conversations I had, whether with people at managers or whether with my own reports is when we can be much more open about what it is that we find hard, what are we struggling with? And in that way you actually form deeper connections and people are more able to help out. We can spread the load a little bit. We can put our heads together and brainstorm a better way to solve the problem. And I find that too, even as the head of a department or a founder, it's not going to solve everything myself. I'm never going to have all the answers. Sometimes by just sharing what the problem is by sharing the load, we're all going to collectively come up with a better solution.

Lenny (00:19:14):
Next up is Shishir Mehrotra, CEO of Coda, former VP of product and engineering at YouTube, PM at Microsoft. And here are two my favorite clips from Shishir. One where he shares his favorite interview question using a technique called Eigenquestions and his PHSE career growth framework.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:19:32):
I have an interview question I ask, it's a very simple question and it's a coded Eigenquestions test. And the question is, a group of scientists have invented a teleportation device. They've hired you, Lenny, to be they're sort of business counterpart, bring this to market, product [inaudible 00:19:50] this question actually worked well for [inaudible 00:19:52]. But say, you could be the product manager for this thing, bring it to market. What do you do? That's the whole question. Usually people will start asking a bunch of questions and say, well, tell me more about this device. What does it do? How does it work? And is it big? Is it small? Is it fast? Does it disintegrate things or not? Does it need a receiver and a sender? Is it safe?

Shishir Mehrotra (00:20:17):
I'll just let those questions come out and at some point I'll say, okay, nice job generating all the questions. Turns out these scientists, they kind of hate talking to people and they're kind of annoyed by all your questions. And so they've decided that they will answer only two of your questions and after that they expect a plan. What two questions do you ask? And interestingly, all of a sudden, like the sharp product managers, engineers, basically every role, they very quickly find what are the two, one or two eigenquestions on this topic.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:20:48):
There's no right answer, but I'll tell you one of my favorite ones is as a product manager said, okay, if I had to ask two questions, the two questions I would ask, one is it safe enough for humans or not? And that was a very crisp way to get to just safety. How reliable is it? Didn't ask how reliable it is, how many bits in the middle of this... He's like, just tell me it's safe enough for humans or not. And the second one is it more expensive CapEx or OpEx? Is it more expensive to buy them or to run them?

Shishir Mehrotra (00:21:15):
And then he took those two questions and he said, get with those two questions, I can form these quadrants. And you can say, oh, it's safe enough for humans and they're very cheap to buy, but expensive to run. Then you probably run them like human fax machines. You put them everywhere you can and you say, hey look, it's expensive to use but you'll all have the ability to teleport anywhere you want and this is how we're going to run it. But the other hand, they're very expensive to buy, but cheap to run. You probably have to place them very strategically, in which case what you probably do is replace airports. Airports are pretty strategically placed in places where people are trying to get around places. If it's not safe enough for humans, then you've got a whole different class of use cases where you go value what goods are transported in very costly ways. And people come up with, do you do the most expensive things? Is hell supporting people's replacement hearts, is that a really demanding thing? But these two questions kind of get to the heart of it.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:22:15):
The question's totally made up, no teleportation device exists, at least not yet. I find that people's ability to learn the method is significantly higher if it's low stakes. That question by the way, if you ask a kid that question, hey, teleportation device, you get to ask two questions, almost every kid will quickly get to two pretty good eigenquestions. Kids are incredibly good at simplifying these things down, it's actually a skill we remove from ourself. I'll hear candidates tell me things, I guess I would ask them what size it is and why would you ask them what size? What decision is that going to allow you to make, to know what size? And sometimes they can explain it, sometimes not and don't get hired. But then actually the thing I'd say about it is there are eigenquestions everywhere. I mean you can take any product out there, I'll do it with my kids a lot, and they'll say, I was just riding with my younger daughter and she said, how come there's three gas stations in the same corner? Why do people do that? That's a really insightful observation. What's the eigenquestion? How do you place a gas station you can almost take anything and say, what is the question that really drives this answer.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:23:27):
It stands for problem, solution, how, execution, PSHE. So here's how it works. So if you're sort of a junior product manager, what happens? You get handed a problem, you get handed a solution, you get handed the how, go talk to this person, write this document, run this meeting, so on. And all you have to do is execute, run that playbook and that's all we expect out of you. You can become a little more senior, we hand you a problem, we hand you a rough solution, you figure out the how. You figure out the how we're going to organize this? What are the milestones? How we're going to get it to market? How we're going to the meetings? What are the rituals? All those things show up in the H.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:24:05):
At some point you become a little more senior, we hand you a problem and you come back with the solutions and we judge you on the creativity and the effectiveness of the solutions. And at some point you're senior enough that you tell us the problems and you say, hey, I know you told me to go work on activation, but actually I think our issue is brand or I think our issue is quality or I think our issue is whatever it might be, and that's sort of the pinnacle of this way of thinking about it.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:24:30):
Now just back to this picture for a moment, one of the interesting things that happened was the teams went and they evaluated their teams on these two ax axis and they end up with this sort of curved line between them. It's not linear as you work your way through. And what happens is early in people's career, they mostly sit at that E point, you get handed a problem and handed a solution, handed a how, and you just execute and they gradually grow in skill. Later in people's careers, similarly, you're at that P level, just do bigger and bigger products. And it's like the job of being an entrepreneur or CEO or an owner or so on is just kind of do bigger and bigger projects.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:25:06):
But in the middle the slope changes and all of a sudden it's not really about scope, it's about PSHE. And there's a circle drawn here for what I like to call the trough of dissolution. What happens in that phase, I was talking to the calibration companies about this, the reason we call the trough of dissolution [inaudible 00:25:22] is for the employee, for the person, this is a confusing time. Everything about leading up to this moment from high school and college has been about scope. And at this point you're all of a sudden told, we're not judging you on scope anymore, we're judging you on this PSHE thing. That's very confusing.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:25:39):
To the calibrator, to the manager, it's also very confusing because all of a sudden the way I put it is the difference between a level three and a level seven may not be scoped. They may do the exact same job, it's how they do the job that matters and here's some language for how they do the job. So PSHE became a very sticky way of thinking about it. It turns out that this way of evaluating people is actually not that specific to product management. It's really easy to see why you do the exact same thing for engineers and designers and so on. But to pick one that may not be as obvious, I'll pick salespeople. A very common thing people do with salespeople is they evaluate them based on quota attainment. It's like the easiest thing to do is take the salespeople and rank them by who hit their quota and who didn't.

Shishir Mehrotra (00:26:21):
You go ask the sales team, who's the best salesperson and what you'll realize, and they'll say, quota statement is just a signal for how good you negotiate your quota and pick the right territory. And they say, really, you want to know who's a best salesperson. They say, well, so and so, I mean she can sell anything and she can be in the region that's growing or the region that's shrinking or the new product or the old product. If you think about that terminology, it's very similar to PSHE thinking. This is the person who can come into a new space, identify the right problems and solve them. That's what makes a really great salesperson. So it could become my framework for evaluating talent in sort of all sorts of ways. You might recognize a pattern of being a great P thinker, it's very correlated with being good with eigenquestions. Can you spot the right problems is very similar to can you spot the right questions? Can you decide what's important?

Lenny (00:27:10):
Our sixth most popular episode is with Kristen Berman, founder of Irrational Labs on using behavioral science to improve your product. Here is Kristen describing the three Bs of behavioral change.

Kristen Berman (00:27:22):
There are so many mistakes that humans make and we can call them biases, heuristics, our team uses psychologies. What are the psychologies that drive us? And so to tackle this, our team basically has created a model of behavior change we call the three Bs. And this summarizes the most important psychologies that drive user that are important to the product managers and the marketers. We've used this at Google, Microsoft, LinkedIn, so all the companies that we work with and they now use it.

Kristen Berman (00:27:51):
So the first B of three Bs framework, first B is actually not a psychology, but it is the most important part of behavior change and it should kind of be obvious. If you think about behavior change, behavioral economics, it is behavior. In order to change behavior, you have to pick a behavior that you want to change. So companies are really good at outcomes, but just not as sharp at picking the behavior.

Kristen Berman (00:28:14):
And when I say behavior, I mean action. The thing that you want someone to do, by the way, the only wrong answer here is log in. So it's really, it's not about logging in, it's about what you do after you log in. And when we're consulting teams would be like, we need to get uncomfortably specific. We say just really specific in the behavior. So example, if I'm Peloton PM and I'm working on the app, I would say something like within 7 days of somebody starting the app they do 2, 10 minute workouts with two different instructors. Now obviously that is wildly specific and you'd probably be very happy if they did one workout with one instructor, but the reality is if you don't define that behavior, you're going to change, you can't actually define the psychologies that affects someone's decision making when doing that behavior. So that's a first B.

Kristen Berman (00:29:02):
Second B, again, is probably pretty obvious and is very critical, it's just barriers. So we need to reduce the barriers to doing the behavior. And there are two types of barriers we look at. One is logistical, so this is just the stuff in our way could be entering a credit card, could be any form field. And then the second is cognitive. So the cognitive barriers get in our way as well. These are things like uncertainty aversion, this is optimism bias, information aversion. Status quo, big one. It's just you do the same thing today that you did yesterday, your job-

Lenny (00:29:38):
Can you talk about those three you just threw out there, just briefly? I'm curious about the specific biases while were there.

Kristen Berman (00:29:43):
Yeah, so uncertainty aversion, when something is uncertain or we're not... So I'll give you an example. If you're Lift, there's logistical friction, which is wait time. But then there's also this uncertainty of is it going to come on time? When is it going to come? And with this uncertainty, you're probably going to look for other options. You're going to open up Uber and say like maybe it'll come faster. And so when there is uncertainty in our life, we either look for other options or we just don't make a decision at all. This is by the way, very big in healthcare where when you're very uncertain about something, you may not even go to the doctor or you may just make the wrong decision.

Kristen Berman (00:30:24):
Same with status quo effect. Where we kind of underlying status quo effect is this idea that we always take the path, not always but majority of... You don't really say always when you're talking about human behavior. Human behavior is very complex. But more often than not, we take the path of least resistant. So we do the thing that's easiest and typically the thing that's easiest, it's the thing that we've done yesterday and the day before. So when you're asking someone to do something different, which is what most product, especially startups, are trying to do, you actually have to increase their motivation or make it easier, reduce the barriers to get them to do that. And so status quo effect, it's a big, big one that folks are fighting.

Lenny (00:31:03):
Awesome, thanks for sharing this.

Kristen Berman (00:31:05):
The third B is benefits. So this is where you want to increase the not just benefits, but the immediate benefits of doing something. So we are all present bias, which means we prioritize our present self over our future self. So there are plenty of reasons that somebody, your customer, your user should take an action, but you actually have to give them a reason to take an action today. So as an example, if you're Asana and you're trying to get someone to log a task, the right thing for them to do is log the task because it's going to get their project done on time. You're going to have a collaborative and communicative team that you're going to want to be on. But one of the real reasons we may log a task is because of completion bias, we want to see the checkbox. We may log it because of social desirability bias, where other people see that we're getting our work done, there's a notification that goes to my teammate when I complete something. So these are the immediate benefits that we have to build into products and features to drive use.

Lenny (00:32:06):
Awesome. I definitely have completion bias, I left checking those freaking check boxes.

Lenny (00:32:12):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate growth. If your business stores any data in the cloud, then you've likely been asked or going to be asked about your SOC 2 compliance. SOC 2 is a way to prove your company's taking proper security measures to protect customer data and builds trust with customers and partners, especially those with serious security requirements. Also, if you want to sell to the enterprise, proving security is essential. SOC 2 can either open the door for bigger and better deals or it can put your business on hold. If you don't have a SOC 2, there's a good chance you won't even get a seat at the table.

Lenny (00:32:51):
Beginning a SOC 2 report can be a huge burden, especially for startups. It's time consuming, tedious and expensive. Enter Vanta. Over 3000 fast growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2. Vanta can get you ready for security audits in weeks instead of months, less than a third of the time that it usually takes. For a limited time Lenny's Podcast listeners, get $1,000 off Vanta. Just go to vanta.com/Lenny, that's V-A-N-T-A.com/Lenny to learn more and to claim your discount. Get started today.

Lenny (00:33:29):
The fifth most popular episode of the year is with the great Elena Verna on B2B growth. Elena is currently head of growth at Amplitude. Prior to that, she was CMO at Miro, she was senior vice president of growth at SurveyMonkey and she might be the smartest person in the world on B2B growth. Just putting that out there. Here are two clips from Elena. The first on why retention is so important to your product and why it's so important to get right. And the second on what to put into your freemium product versus your paid product.

Elena Verna (00:34:00):
I think every single company has to first focus on being product led and retention, period. The only way that you will ever have any chance of acquisition being product led is if you nail your product led retention. Let me break it down. Retention falls into two main KPIs, which is activation and then engagement. If your product is not able to activate and more importantly engage via habitual loops and be in the habit forming zone, then you'll have no chance to hooking an acquisition engine into your product. Because acquisition and product led means users and buy it or users refer or users create content that attracts other users.

Elena Verna (00:34:41):
Well, if your users are not habitually using your product, there's less and less opportunities for you to actually create any sort of product led acquisition. So never start with product led acquisition. You first always have to start with product led retention, activation, and engagement. Then you can choose, is your product has a relationship of one to many? If it has a collaboration at its core, say Slack or Miro or even the Amplitude. Or does it have more of a single mode relationship? So let's say Snowflake, there is not one to many relationships there between users. Well, if you have one to many relationships, product led is a fantastic way for you to prototype that model. If you don't have them, then it becomes increasingly hard. Most of the B2B products don't have that one to many relationship, so it's very difficult to stand up product led acquisition. So you rely on marketing led and sales led and that's fantastic, those are fantastic growth models as well.

Elena Verna (00:35:39):
The only other question becomes in the self-serve monetization, that's product led. Otherwise you go in the sales led and you chase after those large contract values. And you can still be product led and monetization with sales team via product led sales or you can just be self-serve if you have a specific segment that is valuable for. But the question there is your use cases and your market matureness to handle self-serve or do you need that sales touch? Every industry and every sector is going through transformation at different velocities. So even if you don't have that product like sales or self-serve in your industry now, I guarantee you it will pop up in the next 10 years. And if you are not going to introduce it, you will get disrupted by it.

Lenny (00:36:31):
For a product leader or founder who's thinking about what they should make free in their freemium model, do you have kind of a mental model of how you think about here's what you should make free? Or, is that too big of a question for a quick answer?

Elena Verna (00:36:44):
So I mean you first have to align on what your strategic value of free is. I do have a general framework of saying freemium has to check one of these boxes. Does it help my indirect monetization? So some sort of virality or network effects. If it does, I'm probably going to make it free. Does it suffice for every single user regardless of their complexity? If it does, then it's probably commoditization of the feature anyways and I should make it free. Does it help my aha moment? If it does, then I definitely want to have a POC as part of my free and I'm going to put it in the free offering. Does it create habit loops for me? So let's say notifications or some sort of channel communication. If it does, then I'm probably going to put it for free. So anything that actually creates friction for my growth model, I'll probably gate it in the paid. Anything that promotes my growth model, I will put it into free. Now it is very heavily dependent on your actual monetization strategies. So it's a little bit of over encompassing statement, but at the end of the day, I'm thinking about it very much. How does free help me achieve my growth model outcomes without sacrificing monetization potential?

Lenny (00:37:57):
Our fourth most popular episode of the year. Just to put this out there, the next three have came in really close to each other so you can kind of mix and match them in order. But at this point, the fourth most popular episode of the year is with Ethan Smith, CEO of Graphite, and just general SEO guru. Here are two clips from Ethan, one on how people often under invest in SEO. And two, signs that SEO might be right for your product.

Ethan Smith (00:38:23):
I think people under resource SEO a lot of times and over resource ads. So if you're Zillow, you're going to spend tens of millions of dollars on ads, or if you're eBay, you're going to spend tens of millions of dollars on ads. Why would you not have a really great SEO team? Like the amount of traffic you get is probably equal to that. So if you're going to spend a hundred billion on ads, why would you spend $50,000 on SEO? That doesn't make sense.

Lenny (00:38:46):
What are just attributes of a product or a company that tell you that SEO could be a growth driver or a massive growth driver? Because I imagine SEO isn't useful for everybody. How do you think about that?

Ethan Smith (00:38:59):
There's two big things. The first thing is the addressable market large, SO'S the addressable market for SEO large? And for most categories it is. The second is, do you have authority, you have existing traction? If you start from zero and you have no traction. So we talk with seed stage companies and series A companies, typically they don't have a lot of authority and it's too soon. And Google doesn't want you to just be an SEO site and they want you to be a credible domain before they rank you. And if you're starting from zero, they don't have enough signals that you are.

Ethan Smith (00:39:33):
So the way that we assess that is, the first signal I'll look at is what's your traffic? What's your current traffic? And your non SEO traffic is actually an authority signal. So I'll go into SimilarWeb, I'll put the domain in, I'll look at the total traffic and I'll want to see at least I would say 1,000 visits a day roughly for non SEO at least, if you have five visits that that's very little. And then the second thing I'll look at is the number of referring domains. So I'll go into Ahrefs or Semrush and look up the total number of referring domains. I'll try to have at least 1,000 roughly referring domains. You could grow with less than that and less than 1,000 visits, but it's much harder. And the more you have, the easier it is to grow and the faster you can grow and the more you can grow.

Ethan Smith (00:40:19):
And then in terms of the addressable market, that's a little bit more complicated, but most markets are pretty large actually in SEO, but we want it to be large. So With Power is actually an interesting example. So they're a clinical trial lead gen site. They want acquire people to take clinical trials. How many people are typing online, I want to take a clinical trial? Not very many. But the number of people that could be taking clinical trials is very large. And so if we target the persona, what's the key demographic of who might be a candidate for taking clinical trial? It's very, very large. So we can then create content that targets that, like gig economy or college students or people like that. So if you think about targeting the persona, most sites have a very large addressable market.

Ethan Smith (00:41:08):
But the way that I would think about the addressable market is that which is what product am I offering? What are the use cases for that product? What is the persona? What's the size of that? And then I would assess that typically by looking at external benchmarks. So if I'm a shopping site and I haven't started yet, I can look at other shopping sites, I can see how much traffic they have. So again, I can go into SimilarWeb if I'm Wish.com and I want to see what my traffic potential is, I can put in Walmart and Wayfair, put it in SimilarWeb, look at their total traffic. SimilarWeb's free for all of this. And then I can get a sense of how big I can get.

Ethan Smith (00:41:47):
The one other thing I'll mention is that there are product competitors and audience competitors. So for something like, I'm at a WeWork right now. So for WeWork, I could look at the traffic for other rental office companies or I could look at companies that are ranking for the kinds of things that I would want to rank for. And they may not be direct product competitors. FinTech is interesting. So for Robinhood, Robinhood could look at other sites that allow you to sell stocks in crypto or they could look at Investipedia. Investipedia doesn't allow you to buy stocks, but they have a bunch of traffic. It's not a product competitor, but it's an audience competitor. And so these competitors basically can tell you what the size of that market is. So that's how I think about the addressable market. So ideally it's large, it typically is. And then the more authority I have, the more I can compete. If I'm starting from zero, it's probably too early. But once I have traction, SEO can then multiply that traction.

Lenny (00:42:41):
We are now in the top three. Who could it be? Drum roll. The third most popular episode of the year at this point, Shreyas Doshi. Shreyas was a longtime PM at Stripe, before that he was a PM at Twitter at Google and is generally just an incredibly insightful and helpful human constantly sharing his wisdom on Twitter, and now he has his own course on Maven. Here is Shreyas describing the LNO framework, which people have brought up so many times after this episode and that I've personally found incredibly useful.

Shreyas Doshi (00:43:14):
When I just joined Google as a relatively new PM, this is back in 2008, for the first three years I was overwhelmed and stressed. And that was because, one, I was a new PM in this really high performance environment. I was working on some important products and launches and I just had too much to do. And I look back at that time, and it was perhaps the most stressful time of my career. Where I would work long hours, et cetera, but even at the end of the day, I'd feel highly dissatisfied because my to-do list was endless and I wasn't able to make a dent on it. I was also a little bit of a perfectionist. So I was like, no, no, no, I need to do this well. And yeah, I was just constantly I would come home and talk to my wife and kind of basically just complain to her about how I'm not able to make progress or as much progress as I want. That was accompanied with not being able to sleep very well because I was concerned about how much output I was producing and whatnot. So again, very stressful time in my career.

Shreyas Doshi (00:44:28):
And then things changed when I discovered the ideas related to this LNO framework in a blog post. Unfortunately I can't even find that blog post somewhere, but it had some ideas that I took and then kind of created this LNO framework on myself, which is essentially that as a product manager or as anybody in a creative high impact, high leverage role, all your tasks are not created equal. There are actually three type of tasks that you end up doing in such a role.

Shreyas Doshi (00:45:04):
So there are L tasks, which are leverage tasks. And the L tasks are such that when you put in a certain amount of effort, you get 10X or 100X in return in terms of impact. So those are L tasks, leverage tasks. Then there are neutral tasks, so that's N. And those are tasks where you basically get what you put in or just a little more than that. So you put in 1X and you get 1.1X. Those are neutral tasks. And then there are overhead tasks where you get back, again in terms of impact, you get back a lot less than you actually put in. And it turns out that many people, people who are ambitious or are perfectionists like myself, they by default treat each of these types of tasks the same way and therein lies the problem. So this was the epiphany for me back at Google when I kind of discovered some of these ideas.

Shreyas Doshi (00:46:07):
What I realized that is that among the things in my to-do list, there are actually only very few L tasks. And so it made sense for me to focus a lot on those L tasks, to take on those L tasks when I was feeling most productive, most energetic during a certain time of the day. And, for the L tasks, let my inner perfectionist shine because I'm going to get so much more in return. It makes sense for me to spend that time on that PRD for instance, related to an important feature that will meaningfully impact our revenue. I'm going to spend more time on that than I ordinarily would. So now where does that more time come from? Because it cannot come from just working more hours. Well, it comes from spending less time on N tasks and O tasks. And so there are some tasks that you do, a classic example of an O task is say an expense report. It sounds silly, but I used to try to make my expense reports really good.

Lenny (00:47:16):
Wow. That's funny.

Shreyas Doshi (00:47:19):
Sometimes that made no sense. But I was like, no, no, no, I need to do that. And again, this is the silliest example, but there are many examples. And something I realized is that the same type of activity can actually be either an L task or an N task or an O task. So what's an example? So say like a classic PM activity of filing a bug report. And so many companies have these bug templates, et cetera, et cetera, like that you use to file a bug report. Well, it turns out that filing a bug report, depending on the situation, depending on what type of bug it is, can actually be an L task, high leverage task, and over there you want to file a very detailed explicit bug report. In other cases might actually be an O task, where you don't fill out the template that diligently and you don't add 15 screenshots with annotations, instead you just have one screenshot and you hit submit on the bug report. So that shift where usually for the same type of activity we provide the same type of engagement.

Shreyas Doshi (00:48:30):
Last example I'll use to illustrate this is taking notes. It turns out even taking notes, taking notes, synthesizing them, and then sharing them can actually be an L task, an N task or an O task depending on what type of notes they are. After I understood this, previously I would just send all notes like I tried to make them really good, which took a lot of time. But then I realized, well, this is a meeting where, yes, I need to send notes, but it's just standard stuff. I just need to quickly list out, all people need to really know is the three action items that came out of the meetings, who owns them. That's it. And it is not about something highly strategic or controversial. Well, in that case, I'm just going to send the notes out the moment the meeting is over, I'm just going to hit send because I've already taken the action items. I'm not going to try to make my notes look great so that others can appreciate, oh Shreyas always sends great notes.

Shreyas Doshi (00:49:29):
On the other hand, if it was a product review with the CEO about a very contentious topic that you have gone back and forth multiple times and now you made a decision about something, you want to perfect those notes before you send them out. You want to get the language right, you want to be very clear on what the decision is so there's no room for misinterpretation so you don't backtrack afterwards. Or people say, well, but I thought we said this. So that's a case where it's an L task. And yeah, I would say just spend an hour or even two hours perfecting those notes because it's an L task. So hopefully that helps illustrate some of the ideas behind the LNO framework.

Lenny (00:50:13):
Runner up for the most popular episode of the year is my conversation with Marty Cagan. Marty is the legend of legend of product managers. And I'm not surprised this episode was incredibly popular. Here are two my favorite clips for my chat with Marty. One talking about why big companies are just bad at product often. And two, the four steps to be a good product manager.

Marty Cagan (00:50:36):
Steve Jobs shared his theory from 1995 for God's sake. His argument was, as a company gets bigger, product historically became less important. The people in a company that would be celebrated were marketing people, salespeople, finance people. Because if a company stops innovating, these are the engines for growth. Sales, marketing, or not growth with finance, but cutting cost. And his argument was this happens over time. Pretty soon, these are your leaders, they're the ones that have been promoted. So then what happens? Good product people don't want to work there anymore and they leave and they go to a company that values product. I think that's a better explanation than any other that I've heard. And it was so prescient because when he said this, this had yet to even happen to so many other companies, but it still happens all the time.

Marty Cagan (00:51:47):
I hate the idea those companies that have separate product owners, because product owner is just an administrative role. Product owners almost never have the skills to be a product manager, and that's a problem. But let's just say there's a product manager and nobody's ever coached this poor person and so they really don't know much. So the first thing that product manager needs to do is get themselves prepared to contribute to their team the way they need to.

Marty Cagan (00:52:14):
In general, that means four things. First of all, they have to really get to know the users and customers. The second thing is they have to be an expert in the data. How is your product used? How is that change over time? What's the sales analytics? What's the user analytics? The third thing is, and this is usually the hardest one and it's the one that your stakeholders will judge you on, is you have to learn the different parts of the business. You have to know how it's marketed, how it's sold, how it's paid for, how it monetizes. If there are any compliance, regulatory, privacy, security issues, you need to know what those are. So that you have to convince those stakeholders that you understand what the issues are and you understand what to look for and that you convince them that if there's ever any question you will bring them a prototype that they can see and make sure it's okay. So you need that trust with the different parts of the business. The fourth area is you have to know the competitive landscape, you have to know the industry, you have to know the trends.

Marty Cagan (00:53:20):
Those are the four things you bring to the team. Realize the designer doesn't have this info, the engineers don't have this info. If the team is going to be an empowered team and they're going to come up with solutions, they need somebody on the team that brings this knowledge, and that is you as product manager. That is the single biggest area empowered teams fall down, the product manager is ill-equipped, or a nice way of saying incompetence.

Lenny (00:53:49):
And finally our number one most downloaded, most popular episode of the year, which raced to number one as soon as they came out, is with the one and only Matt Mochary. Matt is a full-time CEO coach. He's worked with CEOs of companies like OpenAI, Coinbase, Notion, Rippling, Angellist, so many other amazing folks that I could just keep listing. In this episode. There are just so many nuggets of wisdom, and I could share 100 clips from just this one episode, but I'm going to choose just two. One, the power of small teams and how small teams often get more work done. And two, advice for having hard conversations with your employees and with people in general. Enjoy.

Matt Mochary (00:54:31):
My companies have done a lot of layoffs, and here's why, the companies that I coached. Back in March of 2020, there was a chance that the world economy was imploding. Now, of course, by April and May we realized that wasn't the case, that the tech world kept going. In fact, it was even flourishing. But in March of 2020 we didn't know that. And so if you were being fiscally responsible, you needed to prepare for that eventuality, so you needed pare costs. 80% of costs in any tech company is payroll, is humans. So if you're going to pare costs, you actually have to let go of humans. So almost every one of my companies did, some on the low side of 5%, some on the high side of one company that was is a hotel company let go of 40% because that looks like their business was about to get obliterated. The results were crazy.

Matt Mochary (00:55:29):
Within 60 days of each layoff, the CEO reported back to me, it's insane, I don't know how this happened, but the company's now operating better. I'm not talking on a relative scale. I'm talking on an absolute scale. We're putting out more features, more code, our NPS is up. Whatever it is, what whatever department is performing better. And the only answer for it was we've got less people. So it's this coordination, issue is reduced with fewer people in the organization things work better. That's the big realization that most people never discover. So they hit product market fit, they get tons of money for investors, nudged higher, higher, higher, higher. But every additional human you have in your organization causes extra overhead and geometrically so, because now that you have to keep all those people informed, give them all context, make them all feel heard. Because unless they feel like they're contributing and you understand what they're saying, then they feel ignored and they feel passed over and they feel disrespected and grumpy.

Matt Mochary (00:56:36):
So there's this morale problem that exists. So there's this friction of information flow and a morale problem that grows and grows and grows. And really the only answer is, I mean, that's why people bring me in because they're growing, growing, growing, and things are breaking. So I have a system that keeps things together. But it doesn't make it like perfect, it just makes it so that the company doesn't fall apart. But really the ideal is just to keep the team super small. And that's what WhatsApp did. That's what Instagram did. That's what Linear is doing right now. That's what Notion has been doing for a while. And those to me are the real success stories.

Matt Mochary (00:57:17):
Whenever I have a difficult conversation I start it off, hey, this is going to be a difficult conversation. I want you to take a few seconds and prepare yourself. You are not going to enjoy this. What I found is that the way the amygdala gets triggered is often because of surprise. So if you give someone just a few seconds to mentally prepare, then the amygdala often doesn't get triggered nearly as hard because if they're aware that they're going to go into fear, if they're going to go into anger, they're going to go into sadness, then they can see it coming and they go, oh, that's what it is. But if they don't see it coming, just surprise and all of a sudden, it grips their whole brain and now they're in it and they don't even know they're in it. So, that's the first thing I do. This is going to be a difficult conversation. Are you ready? Person says yes. Then I share the news. I'm letting you go. Here's why, da, da, da.

Matt Mochary (00:58:14):
Then the second, I deliver the message. The third thing is now they're feeling emotions, strong ones. Even though I warned them, they're still feeling them. Now, you want them to be able to release those emotions. And so I say to them, my guess is you're feeling a lot of anger right now, fear, sadness. Is that true? And if so, would you be willing to share with me what you're feeling and what you're thinking? And sometimes they don't answer but many times they do and they share with me and they let it out, and that's important to allow them to let it out. And then I make them feel heard and I actively listen, and that makes them realize that I'm not trying to run away from the pain that they're feeling. I'm not trying to leave them alone with it. I sit with them as they have it, and then I try to help them get through it.

Lenny (00:59:06):
And that's our top 10. It was actually really hard to make this list because all 50 episodes have something really fascinating and interesting to share. For example, if you need help with pricing strategy, don't miss the Modavon episode. If you want to get better at communication, don't miss the episode of West Cow. If you're building a marketplace, there's the Hockenmaier episode. If you're trying to figure out your marketing and how to build your marketing function, don't miss the episodes with Emily Kramer and Ariel Jackson. I could keep going, but I'm just going to stop here. I encourage you to check out the full list of episodes in case you're currently facing a problem that one of the episodes can solve.

Lenny (00:59:40):
To close, this podcasting journey has been so much more fulfilling and exciting and interesting than I ever expected, and I'm so thankful for you for listening and for supporting this podcast, telling your friends about it. I'm also really thankful to our wonderful sponsors for supporting this work. In terms of what's ahead, basically more the same. More amazing guests, more topics that maybe you haven't thought about, that you need help with, maybe more amazing topics that you know need help with that I want to help you solve. I'm still learning how to interview, how to do this podcast, how to make it more amazing, and so my goal is just to continue to refine and iterate and continue making this podcast better and better.

Lenny (01:00:22):
With that, I'd love to hear from you. What do you love about this podcast? What do you hate about the podcast? What annoys you? What do you find most interesting? I'd love to hear your feedback. You can either email me at podcast@lennyrichards.com. You can also go to this episode on my newsletter, if you go to lennysnewsletter.com and find this episode, you can leave a comment at the bottom of that episode. You can also DM me on Twitter if you just want to reach out directly. Seriously, I'd love to hear from you. This is how I'm going to make this podcast better. Until then, happy holidays. Happy New Year. From the bottom of my heart, thank you for listening and for supporting this podcast. I'll see you next year.

Lenny (00:00:02):
Today we've got another very special compilation episode. Something I've been pulling on more and more with the podcast and the newsletter, in case you've noticed, is failure. Normally I spend a lot of time researching how the best companies and the best product leaders operate, but you can learn a lot and often a lot more from failure. And so what we've done with this episode is we've looked at all of the past episodes we've done and pulled out all the most interesting and insightful stories of failure and turned it into this very focused episode on failure. I hope that you find this useful and interesting. Let us know what you think in the comments on YouTube or on lennysnewsletter.com, or just let me know on Twitter. If you like this, we'll keep doing this. If not, we'll, probably not. Either way, I hope you enjoy. Before we dive in, here is a short word from our wonderful sponsors.

(00:00:52):
Let me tell you about a product called Sendbird. The all-in-one communications API platform designed for both web and mobile apps. In a world saturated with multi-channel communication, product teams are discovering the effectiveness of in-app communication with Sendbird, businesses can elevate their in-app experience with decluttered and branded communication featuring AI-powered chatbots, one-way messages, chat, video calls and livestream capabilities, all tailored for commerce, marketing and top-tier support. Forward-thinking companies such as Hinge, Patreon, Yahoo, Accolade, and more use Sendbird to build in-app communication experiences that drive engagement, conversion, and retention. In-app communication has the highest conversion, highest engagement, and highest satisfaction of any communication channel. And when it comes to investing in this channel, trust Sendbird to take your in-app communication experience to the next level. Start today with Sendbird's free plan and as a listener of Lenny's Podcast, you'll get an additional two months of unlimited usage and access to all premium features, including creating your very own generative AI chatbot. Visit sendbird.com/Lenny to begin your free journey. That's sendbird.com/Lenny.

(00:02:08):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next-generation, A/B testing and feature management platform built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams. Companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth and for understanding the performance of new features. And Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does.

(00:02:38):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most was our experimentation platform where I could set up experiments, easily, troubleshoot issues, and analyze performance all on my own. Eppo does all that and more with advanced statistical methods that can help you shave weeks off experiment time, an accessible UI for diving deeper into performance, and out-of-the-box reporting that helps you avoid annoying prolonged analytic cycles. Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insights with your team, sparking new ideas for the A/B testing flywheel. Eppo powers experimentation across every use case, including product, growth, machine learning, monetization, and email marketing. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com/lenny and 10 X your experiment velocity. That's geteppo.com/lenny.

(00:03:26):
All right. First up, we've got Katie Dill, who is head of design at Stripe and former head of design at Airbnb and Lyft sharing this amazing story of how the entire design team at Airbnb basically rebelled against her soon after she joined and what she learned from that experience.

Katie Dill (00:03:42):
I'm happy to talk about it because frankly, it was the biggest learning experience of my leadership career, or at least that happened in one moment, and it happened in my early days at Airbnb. So I was hired to take on the experience design organization, that's basically the product design team, which was 10 people at the time.

(00:04:02):
And so they had been reporting directly to one of the founders and they were going to start reporting to me. And during my interview process, I learned a lot about what was working and what wasn't working and some of the trials and tribulations with the design organization and its collaboration with others. So it seemed like there was room for improvement in how engineering and product management and design all work together. And there was also really low engagement scores in the design team.

(00:04:29):
And so I came in ready to go and excited to try to help make some change based on all the things that I had learned from various leaders and people across the company. And I came in swinging ready to go, and then about a month into my time there, I got a meeting on my calendar. Thursday 8:30 AM, was an hour and a half with half of the design team, so that was five people, and our HR partner.

Lenny (00:05:00):
Oh, no. That's never a good sign.

Katie Dill (00:05:01):
Usually it's [inaudible 00:05:01]. Yeah. And I remember this so vividly. I remember walking into the office and all the rooms in Airbnb's office are very unique spaces that look like Airbnbs, but of course this was the one room with all white walls and just a gray flat rectangle table. And I walked into the room and there were five of them seated around the table and they had a pack of papers in front of them, and they went on taking turns quietly reading from the papers all the things that they saw that I was doing wrong and all the things that they didn't like about me. And it was a really hard moment there. I went through all the usual stages of grief when one hears feedback, which is just immediate want to respond to be like, "Oh, well there was a good reason for that." And, "That's not how it actually was," and, "This is why I did that."

(00:05:59):
But luckily I had, thank goodness, I had the sense to just listen and not respond in that way. Clearly, what they were telling me is that that was one of the things that was missing. And so I heard them out and took it all in. And regardless of each individual thing, what was very clear was that the missing piece, the theme that was across all of that is that I hadn't earned their trust. So whether how right or how wrong what I was doing was is the key piece is that I wasn't bringing the team along with me. They had no idea that they could trust in what I was trying to build and what I was trying to shape and that I cared about them and that I had their best interest and shared goals at heart. And that was absolutely my fault.

(00:06:45):
And in retrospect, as hard as that was, I'm very grateful and very amazed that they could come together and share that with me. It can be hard to bring feedback forward like that.

(00:06:57):
And so it was an extremely valuable learning experience and I took from that to then immediately shift how I was operating. And really a key part in building trust was to listen, to hear out what the individuals on the team were setting out to do, what they cared about, what motivated them. And so I started to make pretty fast change and still moving in the direction that was necessary for the org to make the really large impact in how we were operating, but bringing folks along with me. You can inflict change on people, but if you want to do it with them, really trust is the key element there.

(00:07:37):
And then a couple of months later, we had the best engagement scores in the company. So it actually, it did objectively improve the situation and since then taken that on into next steps in other companies that I've joined and just think about instead of coming in swinging, come in listening, so that you can really set out to make change that actually has true positive impact on the folks around you and you bring along with you.

Lenny (00:08:04):
Next up, Paul Adams, chief product Officer at Intercom, sharing the nightmare experience of freezing on stage in front of thousands of people, having to walk off stage, and then people hearing him curse because the mic was still on, and then how he recovered. Plus a few stories of building some of Google's most infamous product failures.

Paul Adams (00:08:24):
Some things have happened in work, are very memorable at the time and they don't really scar you. This goes in the book that have scarred for life. Yeah, let's go long story short, I was at Facebook just over a decade ago, loved it at the time. I think it was a great place to be at the time. And basically San Francisco, I did a lot of talks for Facebook internally and externally. Facebook had a keynote slot, always have a keynote slot at Cannes, the world's biggest advertising festival. And the year prior, Zuck had been interviewed. He was the speaker, he'd been interviewed, gotten a hard time on privacy. It didn't go well, as well as they'd hoped.

(00:09:00):
So the next year they asked me to do it, maybe it was the Irish accent that made the offer come my way. And yeah, I got out into front the stage of the world's biggest advertising stage, and I'd say I was like three or four minutes into the talk, a talk I'd given, a very similar talk that I'd given lots of times.

(00:09:19):
And I just froze. I couldn't remember what I was supposed to say. It was the first ever time in my life I'd rehearsed a talk word for word. Usually, I have talking points and I'd ad lib and things get mixed around and it's kind of informal. This was media trained, do not say the wrong thing kind of talk. And I just could not remember what to say. I had some version of a panic attack, walked off stage, I was still mic'd up, cursed. I was laughing. I was like, "Geez, are they laughing at me. Oh my God, this is..." But I can manage to turn it around, I walked back out, I'd kind of been disarmed internally in my head, and the rest of it went well. And I was famous that night out in Cannes afterwards on whatever the seafront, it's just like rosé everywhere. I was famous and infamous for my performance.

Lenny (00:10:13):
I feel like you lived the worst nightmare that everybody has when they're thinking about giving a talk. And I think what's interesting is you survived, and I think that's a really interesting lesson is you could freeze in front of thousands of people, walk off stage, and then it works out okay.

Paul Adams (00:10:30):
And it all happened organically, I guess, or very naturally. But yeah, ever since then, every time I walk out onto a conference talk stage, still today, I ask myself, I have this tiny doubt in the back of my head. It's never happened since. But yeah, I think you have to go with it with these things. When life kind of throws you these whatever curve balls you have got to kind of adapt, and it's not that big a deal. None of these things are that big a deal. At the end of the day you kind of move on, live and learn. Yeah, but I still hope it doesn't happen again.

Lenny (00:11:02):
I also hate public speaking and I always fear this is exactly what's going to happen to me. And so I think this is nice to hear that even when the worst possible thing basically happens, things can survive.

Paul Adams (00:11:13):
You can turn it around. Yeah.

Lenny (00:11:15):
A second area I wanted to hear from is your time at Google and there's a couple products you worked on at Google. Both of them were not what you'd call big successes, and then there's kind of a transition to Facebook, which was also kind messy. Can you just share a couple stories from that time?

Paul Adams (00:11:31):
Yeah. Similar to the walking off stage thing, you live and learn, and I was at Google for four years. I was at Facebook for two and a half years or so. At Google I worked on a lot of failed social projects like you mentioned, Google Buzz, Google, and later Google+. I think a lot of the motivation for those projects came from a place of fear. It didn't come from a place of let's make a great product for people,.let's really understand the things people struggle with when communicating with family and friends. That's really, really try and create something wonderful. It came from a place of fear.

(00:12:10):
And so during those times I learned I think how not to lead in places. And by the way, I should say at the time in Google, there was other things happening that were amazing, like Google building Google Maps. Incredible product, one of my favorite products. I think one of the best products ever made. They were building Android. I was in the mobile team, in the mobile apps team at the time that Android came out. So incredibly good product. So I just happened to be in the social side, which wasn't as good.

(00:12:37):
And yeah, Google Buzz was kind of a privacy disaster, and Google+ similar. And so kind of halfway through I kind of published research about groups, and I've done a ton of research. An interesting kind of side note there is at the time I asked, I was working in the research, in the US team as a researcher, I was being asked to do a lot of tactical research, like usability study type stuff, like can people use these products? And I ended up doing a lot of formative research as well in the same session. So I'd kind of say to the team like, "Hey, I'll do the research, I'll answer your questions, but also I'm going to do this other thing, and I'm going to take 20 minutes doing that."

(00:13:16):
And so what we used to do is, what I used to do with people was map out their social network, all the people in it, their family, their friends, how they communicate. We'd map on all the channels, we'd talk about what worked well, what didn't. And we did this with dozens and dozens of people over the course of maybe 18 months. And the same pattern emerged every single time, which was people need way better ways to communicate with small groups of family and friends. And I kind of look back now and go like WhatsApp, or it maybe iMessage if everyone's on Apple, but really obvious in hindsight, but at the time, not obvious. And so we kind of tried to build a product around that called Google+, but again, it was kind of came from the wrong place. And so halfway through the research that I've done, all this research had been made public through a conference talk and Zuck and Facebook noticed, got in touch, one thing led to another and I left and joined Facebook, which was an amazing thing for me, personally.

(00:14:13):
Facebook was amazing, an amazing place at the time and exciting. And they were trying to do things for the other reasons, the kind of good reasons, like, "Hey, let's build an amazing product for people."

Lenny (00:14:22):
And this was during Google+ being built? You basically shifted.

Paul Adams (00:14:26):
Yeah, midway, I'm stressed to even telling you about it. The project hadn't been launched. It was still under wraps. It was highly confidential. Google had done a lot of things at the time that were the first for them. I don't know if they've done them since, but things like everyone worked in Google+ was sent to a different building. That building had a different key card. If you didn't work on Google+, you could not get in. All sorts of counter-cultural things at the time. And as a result, there was a lot of antagonism internally for Google+. And so when I left in the middle of the project, leaving with all of the plans in my head to the enemy, some people saw me as a traitor, understandably. Other people thought I was enlightened. It depends on who you talked to, but it was the right thing for me to do. But at the time it was a hard thing to do.

Lenny (00:15:17):
I know there's also a lot of scrutiny in what you took with you and the process.

Paul Adams (00:15:23):
When I left, Google kind of assumed that I was one of the spies. I was quarantined when I told them I was leaving. They forensically analyzed my laptop, all sorts of stuff like that. So it was pretty intense. Looking back, I can understand why that happened, but the root cause for me is that the project has been run from a place of fear, competitive fear, which I don't think leads to good things.

Lenny (00:15:53):
So one of the themes through the stories you just shared is, let's say failure is... I don't want to make it that harsh, but just things not working out. And I'm curious as a product leader, how important you think that is for people to go through if you think that's something that is almost a good thing. And I guess just is there anything there that you find helpful as a coach, as a mentor, as someone, to people that are trying to become basically you?

Paul Adams (00:16:19):
It very, very... It still is. It still is. I've personally failed so many times. There are two stories and the Google one is long deep tentacles. There are two stories. I've failed a ton of times like at Intercom. I remember when I was at Facebook, I was very happy and I knew I wanted to [inaudible 00:16:39] the co-founders of Intercom and they're trying to persuade me to join Intercom. It was like 10 person company at the time. But Owen said something to me at that time, which has stuck with me ever since. He said, "At Facebook you can design the product, but at Intercom you can design the company." And that was extremely appealing to me, a great pitch. He's like, "Just design the company with us that you want to work in."

(00:17:03):
And so part of that was a company that embraces failure that says it's okay to try things. I'm a big believer in big bets, higher risk, higher reward. I don't get as excited about incremental things. Now I haven't said that, there's of course a place for that too, especially as companies get bigger. But I get excited about big bets and if you make big bets, you're going to get a lot of it wrong. So a lot of the principles that we built here at Intercom, on building software, we have a principle called ship to learn, and we've actually changed it since, still on the wall here. Ship fast, ship early, ship often is what it says now. Used to say ship to learn. Ship fast, ship early, ship often. It's like in that idea is the idea of failure. It's not going to go right, and it's going to go wrong more often than not. But if you ship early and fast and learn fast, you can change fast, and you can improve fast. And that's the kind of culture that we as much as possible try to embrace and teach people. But it's much easier said than done.

Lenny (00:18:05):
Especially when you're in the moment. Like Go damn, it, everything's going to fall apart. I really messed this one up.

Paul Adams (00:18:09):
Yeah. And there's a trade-off with quality that people really struggle with. We've high standards of ourselves. A lot of Intercom comes from a design founder background. We value the craft a lot. We never want to be embarrassed by what we ship. So there's a real tension there, a real trade-off where people have these high standards, which we encourage and we encourage them to ship fast and learn and make mistakes. It's a constant kind of tension that we're navigating.

Lenny (00:18:38):
Next up, we have Tom Conrad, who is chief product officer at Quibi and engineering leader at Pets.com. Two of the most memorable failures in product history, sharing his lessons from those wild experiences. Tom is currently CEO of Zero Longevity Science, which is a killer business and an app in case you haven't come across it. I'd definitely check it out. Here's Tom.

(00:19:00):
You brought up this phrase of notable disasters and I want to talk about that. You've worked at two of the most famous notable disasters of product companies, Pets.com and Quibi. I think it's really rare someone sees the inside of so much hype and then such a fall at a company. And so I just want to spend some time in these two areas, and maybe the way to set it up is just what's a lesson you took away from each of these two experiences that you've taken with you to future work, and maybe advice you share with people?

Tom Conrad (00:19:30):
Probably the biggest lesson, it's not really about the specifics of the business. The biggest lesson really is these things make you better. In some instances, actually I think in both instances, they became kind of dominoes that opened doors for me in my own ambition and my own sort of professional life that maybe just wouldn't have opened at all if I hadn't gone to those companies and learned those things and had those experiences. And frankly, even in the case of Pets.com, like even the high profile nature of it, I could have worked at one of a thousand e-commerce websites in 1999. And when I went on to some subsequent job interview or something and talked about my experience, I had never heard of the thing that you worked on, but everybody certainly heard about Pets.com.

(00:20:17):
It's a pretty funny example too of how some struggles are timeless. That was 23, 24 years ago now. And while as a leadership team, we made, I'm sure, all kinds of mistakes. One of the things that happened was that there were three kind of over-funded pet e-commerce sites, and we all raised in excess of $50 million, which is a tremendous amount of money now. It was a tremendous amount of money then, and we all thought it was a zero-sum game and that we as one player started to spend on promotion or to spend irrationally on national broadcast television advertising. We all did, and it became this kind of unwinnable arms race. So there is, I think a fundamental lesson about having an excess of investment can be its own albatross or lead you to make decisions that maybe would be unwise.

(00:21:28):
And then of course, it's just like timing is really important. Chewy is a online pet store. It's worth $9 billion today. They were a private company and bought by PetSmart and then spun back out. But when they were bought by PetSmart, they were acquired for 3 billion, biggest e-commerce acquisition of all time. And while I think it's probably unfair to compare, Chewy who executed exceptionally well over a decade, grew their business brick by brick, and turned it into something really remarkable. To Pets.com, which was in a very, very different moment in time and tried to go to market in a really different way.

(00:22:07):
The critique that is often leveled at Pets.com or at least at the time, was like, this is just a stupid business. They're shipping dog food around. You could never make that work, and that's just wrong. You absolutely can make it work. Probably can't make it work when 80% of the country on the internet is still on dial up. It's really, really early.

Lenny (00:22:25):
I saw a stat I think you shared somewhere that you took Pets.com from nothing, to a public company, to completely out of business in 19 months.

Tom Conrad (00:22:33):
Yeah, yeah, I think that's about right. The other thing that's forgotten in the tale is that we actually didn't go bankrupt. We shut the company down and returned the remaining balance to the investors, which no public company had ever done before. And the leadership team just reached the conclusion that given the way market conditions had evolved, there was just no way we were going to be able to get more capital into the company. And it was a company that required additional investment to get to profitability. And so it was better to wind down early, take the money that we had in the bank and get it back to investors than to just spend every last penny on what was sort of a fruitless attempt to salvage it.

Lenny (00:23:22):
Did not know that. Let's talk about Quibi. What went wrong there? Do you think there was a path to Quibi having worked out? Any big lessons that you took away from that experience that you bring with you?

Tom Conrad (00:23:33):
The kind of miraculous thing about Quibi for me was it relit my enthusiasm for the industry for doing this work. I had left in, I think it was December of 2018, and I thought that maybe I was just done making software. I had done it for a really long time, I had done it for twenty-five years or something. And I had changed a lot. The industry had changed a lot, and I thought maybe I just didn't have the same passion for it that I had a decade before. And it also seemed like maybe it'd be fun to have another chapter of my life that was just completely different. And I had a whole list of things that I thought I might want to do. They were really, they were kind of ridiculous. Maybe I want to be a pastry chef. Maybe I want to be a landscape photographer. Maybe I want to learn to make bad music to put up on SoundCloud or something. Really the only thing they had in common were they were all things that I knew nothing about. People would be like, "Oh, you think you might want to be a pastry chef? Do you like to bake?" And I'd be like, "No, I don't know anything about baking." "Oh, you might landscape photography. Do you take photos?" "No, I don't make photos."

(00:24:41):
But I was kind of committed to the bit, actually to the point where when TechCrunch interviewed me about my departure from Snapchat, I was like, "I'm out. I'm going to do something else entirely." So that story is very much out there. But a few months after my last day at Snap, I got a call from Meg Whitman and Jeffrey Katzenberg who were starting up, it was called New TV at the time.

(00:25:07):
And the pitch was, "We're going to try to take the best of mobile and Silicon Valley and Consumer Tech and sort of weld it to the best of Hollywood-style content production to build something completely bespoke and purpose-made for consumption on the phone." They were looking for both technology leadership and product leadership and wanted to know if I was interested in one or both. And I took the meeting, even though I wasn't really taking these kinds of calls from anybody. It just seemed like who's going to pass up the opportunity to have lunch with the two of them? So I listened to the pitch and politely declined and told them that I was going to be a pastry chef or something. And we kept doing that every couple of months for seven months. We'd go to lunch, they would give me an update on the progress they were making, and I would decline the invitation to get involved somehow.

(00:26:05):
And then late in that year, I went to lunch one more time and Meg explained that they brought on someone to lead technology and they brought another person to lead product, and both of them really truly for reasons that are completely disconnected from Quibi itself, both of them had left after about six weeks. And Meg's like, "We've raised all this money, and we've told the world that we're shipping this product in about a year. We got an awful lot to do, and I really could use some help, and I would consider it a personal favor if you would come and spend just a couple of days a week helping." She's like, "I'll continue to look for someone who actually wants the job, but it'd be great if you could help me get this off the ground."

(00:26:53):
And my wife is a freelance writer, marketing strategist and loves her life as a freelance contributor. And she's like, "You should do this. Why not? It's two days a week, it's just a few months. What's the worst thing that could happen? Maybe you'll like it." And I'm like, "No, no. Here's the thing that will happen. I won't do it two days a week. It will immediately be three days, then four days, then five days, then six days. I just know myself." And she's like, "No." She's like, "Just on Wednesday night at six o'clock, close your Quibi laptop and be like, all they're paying me for is for Tuesday and Wednesday and then open it back up on Tuesday morning. That's all you've got to do."

(00:27:35):
Well, she's right about most things and she's wrong about this. I fell deeply into it right away, and it was just so fun to get to build a team from scratch and to design and build a product from scratch and to take advantage of all of the sort of modern software architecture stuff that had come into being over the course of the 15 years since we had started Pandora. And I'm embarrassed about some of the what happened with Quibi for sure, but I'm super grateful for the experience, because I just really fell in love with the industry again and was reminded of just how rewarding it can be to build something and to try to put it out there even if you stumble pretty mightily along the way.

Lenny (00:28:28):
Is there something that you took away from that experience that taught you what to try to avoid, to try to pull towards?

Tom Conrad (00:28:36):
I think I sort of misunderstood or misjudged companies sometimes by thinking about them really focused on the product execution. If you find an interesting problem that people care about and you solve that problem in a really beautiful, elegant, delightful way, that's 10 times better than anything else that they can get in that same space, they'll tell their friends and all the rest will take care of itself. And so that was always my ambition. Find a thing that I cared about building, do a great job building it in a delightful way, go really deep on listening to people and their feedback and iterate your way to success and breaking through that membrane that we all strive to get across, the really great word of mouth.

(00:29:27):
But I think the thing I've come to better appreciate is that companies are also, they're kind of a math problem that describes how you take investment and pour them into the equation, and out the other side comes returns on some time horizon. And yes, there are variables in that equation that are influenced by the product that you build and all of the little details and decisions that you make about making that product great. But if the equation is fundamentally broken or a big swing in and of itself, no amount of iteration and execution can get you out of the failed outputs of the broken equation.

(00:30:14):
And I think Quibi made a bet that you could build an entirely bespoke content library that was sufficiently scaled to get people to subscribe and retain for a couple billion dollars. It was a huge amount of money, but we made 70 shows in 18 months, which is more content than all of the major broadcast networks combined made in a single year. So it was a pretty major accomplishment. And we made a bet that we would augment those sort of episodic and serialized or Hollywood style shows with a bunch of daily content that we produce at the level of network television, nightly news, and so forth that would be an alternative to some of the sort of daily content that you might otherwise get on YouTube. And that was going to be about a third of the content spend.

(00:31:19):
One super interesting thing that no one talks about is that all of that content was designed to be made day of or day before it aired. So there was no back catalog of it, and it was all designed to be shot in these professional studios that we built out, and it was really expensive. Like I said, it was a third of the investment we were going to make in content, almost half the investment we were going to be making content. And we launched two weeks into Covid, and we couldn't make any of that content except literally in the garages of the host's homes. And so we had this thing that was supposed to seem really set apart from YouTube that literally now was being made exactly YouTube content, which is sort of like self-produced at home with very little sort of the support infrastructure of Hollywood.

(00:32:10):
Now you can argue, I think the content on YouTube is really, really exceptional in this category, and maybe we were never going to do better than that. But I think what was really fundamentally broken with Quibi was that the actual foundational equation of can you make enough premium content that's totally bespoke and made for the service and takes advantage of the nature of the phone, is that enough content to get people to sign up and retain, and can you do that for a couple billion dollars? And I think the answer is no. The library has to be much, much bigger and you have to have, like any company, you have to have sufficient time and energy to iterate on the content format itself. Our roadmap really wanted to innovate on the content format. And so I think part of what happened is pretty quickly it became clear that the math was just wrong. It wasn't going to take 2 billion, it was going to take six or eight or 10 billion. And the risk reward profile of betting 10 billion on the format was just more than anyone can stomach.

Lenny (00:33:20):
Next up, we've got Sri Batchu, former head of growth at Ramp who shares something that I've thought about ever since we had this conversation, which is this idea that when you fail, make sure you fail conclusively to make this failure an actual learning that you can build off of versus just a waste of time. Here's Sri.

Sri Batchu (00:33:38):
Growth experiments in my history are typically like 30%-ish success rate. So the vast majority of things that you try don't work. And so you want to create a culture where people aren't afraid to take risks and aren't afraid to fail. And for me, failure is not that you didn't drive revenue, failure is not learning. So it's really important that you learn when you fail. And so we celebrate failure as long as you're learning, and you can only learn if you've designed the right test and you failed conclusively, because otherwise I think many of us have been in situations where there's intuition that something might work and it doesn't work, and then you end up doing it over and over for years because every time a new executive or somebody else has the same idea, you try it again. And it's because you haven't been able to design the test to fail conclusively.

(00:34:31):
It's hard to do. But at the end of the day, there's only two ways to make an experiment successful. Either you have a very large M or you have a very significant treatment, which is what you're doing in the experiment itself. And in B2B, you don't usually have the luxury of large M, which you [inaudible 00:34:54] consumer.

(00:34:54):
Facebook can get [inaudible 00:34:56] in two hours. A B2B company could take two years to get to the same number of touch points. And so to counteract that, I recommend people just trying to maximize the treatment effect, which is like if you have a hypothesis that you're testing, just throw all of the possible tactics and resources that you think would move that needle because you can always cost rationalize later if it works.

(00:35:22):
And so just maximize the treatment effect. And if with all of that it didn't work, then you can say, "Hey, we're not going to try this again because we literally did try everything that we could to test this hypothesis. And if it doesn't work in the best version, and it's expensive as it is, this is not worth spending more time on." But if it does work, great. Then you do another version of the test with half the tactics or whichever tactics you think work better or worse and you optimize over time.

Lenny (00:35:49):
Is there an example you could share when you did that?

Sri Batchu (00:35:53):
Account-based marketing is something that is very common in enterprise software where you've selected certain customers that you think are high priority and you're saying, "I want to touch them in as many nuanced ways possible to see if that drives conversion." And this is something I've seen tried many times where people do it, but they kind of do it halfway where they're like, okay, tried these three things. Conversion of the control group wasn't higher, and so we think it is not going to work. And then a new go-to-market executive comes and they have to do it again. They have to do it again. They have to do it again. It's like a very common one wherever this happens. And so when we did it at Ramp, we did exactly what I just described, which is like, let's really be thoughtful about the experiment design, both in terms of maximizing the number of people as well as maximizing the number of ways and types of ways that we're effectively touching these target customers to show the value one way or the other.

Lenny (00:37:03):
So what it sounds like is the hypothesis isn't like this email will have a big impact on conversion. It's like this strategy of coming after customers is what we're testing.

Sri Batchu (00:37:15):
That's the example there. And I think for example, if you had the... This kind of framework is more important for cross-functional, larger scale, bigger tests rather than an email modification. But we can even use it on a micro example like an email modification where you are like, "Okay, I think this particular email is underperforming because it's not talking to this part of the customer's pain point or journey or what have you." And you could just, the simplest test would be, okay, let me make some tweaks to the text and edit that, and that could be the end of that test. And if that doesn't work, you're like, "Oh, maybe those weren't the right text edits. Let me do a different text edits or whatever."

(00:38:02):
And that's fine, that's low cost. It's not the end of the world and it's for you to be wrong there. But an alternative that you could do is like, "Oh, what are all of the things that I could change about this email in the same test?" Is it the trigger of the email? Is it the text content of the email? Is it additional personalization? Is it the design of the email? Trying to think of what are all of the various levers that you think could be wrong and put them all together to test your hypothesis of this touch point is wrong, and how do I improve that?

Lenny (00:38:34):
Well, obviously the downside of that is you, if it doesn't work, you don't know if it's like, oh, maybe it was this thing could have worked in the subject.

Sri Batchu (00:38:40):
Yeah, so there's always trade-offs on this, but what you're hoping is you've done a complete refresh where you did all the things that you thought were intuitive that should work. And if it doesn't work, then you're like, okay, maybe my hypothesis wrong. But you're right. There's always going to be a challenge if maybe the execution is wrong. And I did too many things potentially in that case.

Lenny (00:39:01):
Our next story is from JZ, who is a colleague of mine at Airbnb, head of product at Webflow when we recorded this episode, and this is her sharing the story of one of the biggest product misses at Airbnb.

(00:39:13):
You've seen a lot of new PMs, and you've seen these PMs succeed, you've seen some fail. What are the most common mistakes that you find new PMs make in this experience of helping new PMs get into the field?

Jiaona Zhang (JZ) (00:39:27):
I think something that is really hard to untrain, but I think every human does it, is you jump to solutions. And so one of the biggest things I see, not just in my course, but also just as a PM and some of the mistakes that you make as a PM is the idea of you get really attached to a solution, a way of implementing something, something that you can see in your head that you want to build. And so that's the first thing I really want to like unteach in our course.

(00:39:50):
And so a lot of people will literally come in, they'll be like, "I want to build X startup," or, "I want to do this thing," or, "I am in blank school, and I've been doing a lot of research on this particular area." And so untraining that and being like, "Hey, we're going to go out there. We are not going to think at all about the thing that you want to build, but instead we're going to be focused on users and people in the real world and their problems. And the first step is to understand their problems and then understand if there's an opportunity here as opposed to, hey, you want to build X thing for Y person." So that's the biggest mistake that you really have to unteach and retrain thinking around.

Lenny (00:40:25):
So let's go to the other side of this question. We talked about what mistakes new PMs make. I'm curious, what's the biggest product mistake that you've made?

Jiaona Zhang (JZ) (00:40:34):
Wow, that's a good one. It's so interesting. I feel like as product people we're always making mistakes and we're always learning. Maybe I'll give an example from Airbnb since you and I were both there.

(00:40:43):
 And this one does stand out to me. So we're working on this concept called Airbnb Plus. If you took a step back, what we're really trying to do is to be like, "Hey, not everyone trusts Airbnb in terms of it's a platform. It's not like it's managed inventory, it's not a hotel. How do you go in and really make sure that we're all the Airbnbs are meeting the quality bar?" But I do think we were very solution first, and I think we're also competitor afraid at the time. So it was during a time where there were managed marketplaces, there were the Saunders out there, and I think that as a company we're very much like, "Oh, look at this. What are we going to do in the world of managed marketplaces?"

(00:41:19):
And so we went really hard down the solution space. We essentially were like, "Let's go inspect our inventory. Let's actually try to manage our inventory more." And really what we should have done is taken a step back and be like, "What's the real problem?" The real problem is people want to know what they're getting themselves into. We need to represent the homes a lot better. And I think the other piece here that's really important is what, as a company, is there strategic strength? And what's in your wheelhouse? So for example, Airbnb, we weren't that strong in operations. We again, we're this platform with this marketplace. And so if you don't have that muscle and then you're asking the company, the teams to essentially build it from the ground up, that's really, really difficult. Not to mention the unit economics. Are the unit economics actually going to work, even as you scale?

Lenny (00:42:03):
Yeah, I feel like Airbnb Plus is an untold story that somebody should tell, and that could be its own podcast, I guess.

Jiaona Zhang (JZ) (00:42:09):
You and I can tell it.

Lenny (00:42:10):
We could tell it. This could be Airbnb Plus the hidden, the story. As you said, the problem it was trying to solve was people don't really trust, they don't want to even consider Airbnb. Like, "No, I don't want to stay in someone's home. I don't know what it'll be. It's unpredictable." And so as an outsider, it felt like a really clever approach. We're going to get them, we're going to make sure they're awesome. There's a minimum bar. And I guess this is the question is do you think it was just like this is never possible because we'll never make money as a business doing this, because we don't make that much booking and investing time, resources, sending people pillows, all that stuff is ever going to be economical. Or do you think there was a path, and it was just not executed well?

Jiaona Zhang (JZ) (00:42:51):
I think there wasn't really a clear path. I think there was [inaudible 00:42:55]. Exactly. And it was more just like if you understood, again, this is my point around unit economics, there are things where I think you have magical thinking around unit economics. You're like, "Well, when we get to the scale of X, it's all going to work out. We can make these things happen." I think you actually need to really make sure the unit economics work right at the beginning. So that is definitely one lesson.

(00:43:14):
And I think the other thing is, and going back to the spirit of what are you trying to achieve. If you're trying to achieve this idea of really knowing the quality of the place, and for a platform like Airbnb, the right way to go about doing is through our reviews, through our guest reviews, which are essentially free as opposed to literally sending out inspectors.

(00:43:32):
And I think that the other things are if you can get signal on what are the things around quality that people care about? Is it cleaning? Is it the, "Hey, I'm locked out." And I think that there are other solutions besides inspection that then get at that. So for example, it is actually cheaper to go send everyone a lockbox than to deploy an inspector and go look at your property, right? It is actually cheaper to maybe do a partnership with a bunch of cleaners in different local areas, and then get that as part of the feat as opposed to doing inspection.

(00:44:04):
So again, it's really about what are you really trying to achieve? What is the user problem in each of these areas, and can you target that problem with the particular listing that you're looking at? And so yeah, I personally don't believe the unit economics ever would've really worked out. I think we should have known that, or we should have dug into that more at the very beginning, and then to get very tailored instead of one blunt instrument to solve it all. Hey, we're going to go inspect. It's like, what is the problem for this listing, and what's the best solution to fix that problem?

Lenny (00:44:33):
Our second to last story is from Gina Gotthilf, who was an early growth leader at Duolingo. She's currently COO of Latitud, and this is her sharing a wide-ranging and important point about how everyone has both an A side and a B side to their career, and people often only share their A side. So this is Gina sharing her B side.

Gina Gotthilf (00:44:53):
We are very encouraged in our lives, especially professionally, to talk about our A side all the time because that's what impresses people. That's what opens doors, that's what allows us to keep growing, and it's so important. So it means that a lot of what you hear in podcasts and on stage ends up being the Instagramable version of someone or a company or a country's trajectory. It's just the highlights. And when I talk about my A side, it's very impressive. I did things like, we'll talk about, I met President Obama, I worked on the Mike Bloomberg presidential campaign. I helped Duolingo scale from three to 200 million users. I worked with Tumblr, helping them scale Latin America, Andreesen Horowitz invested in my company, etc.

(00:45:34):
But between all of those highlights, there were so many B moments that get shoved under the rug because it's just easier for me and it's more impressive for others. But I really like to highlight those because I think that most of us have a lot of B moments every day, every week, every month, and every period of our lives. And it's easy to think that things aren't just not going to work out for us because we're in one of those B moments if we don't recognize them as moments.

Lenny (00:45:59):
I love this concept. We're going to talk as you expected about a lot of your A side stuff. Is there any example of a B side story of your life that would be interesting to share?

Gina Gotthilf (00:46:09):
Look, I think those are the most interesting because they're funny or ridiculous. I had a lot of B sides, and I still do. For example, I had no idea what I wanted to do. I actually wanted to be. I thought I wanted to be an actress. I either wanted to be that person in Sea World, who goes like this with a dolphin. This is before Sea World was canceled. Or I wanted to be an actress. I applied to schools. I didn't get into any Ivy League. I didn't get into any of the top schools I wanted to go to. When I got to college, I actually ended up dropping out because I got so depressed, incredibly depressed, couldn't get out of bed depressed. Ironically, I dropped out of Reed College, which is the same college that Steve Jobs dropped out of. So I was just destined for greatness. I knew it at that moment.

Lenny (00:46:53):
It all makes sense looking backwards, as he said.

Gina Gotthilf (00:46:55):
Totally. I was dropping out, being like, "Yes, this is exactly the path." No, I was miserable. I thought there was no path forward. And I finally went back and graduated. The college counselor looked at my curriculum and said, "What have you even done with your life? There's nothing to show for." And it was shocking because I was always the overachiever who wants to do the maximum curriculum and ace all of my classes and do whatever. I did three diplomas in high school, the international, the American, the Brazilian.

(00:47:22):
And so that for me, I think my one learning there that has stuck with me, and I think it can work for other people too, is that it's not just about doing things that actually matter and learning. It's about being able to tell the story, and it's about understanding what other people perceive as valuable. I applied to a hundred companies. I didn't hear back from most of them. I finally got an internship at kind a tier B/C digital marketing agency in New York City because I wanted to live in New York so badly. And they forgot to apply for my visa on time. So I lost my visa and had to go back to Brazil, and then I ended up leaving that organization to go work for another one. And I won't even go into the details of the shadiness of that company that I worked for, but then they ended up laying me off. So I lost my visa again, had to go back home, found another opportunity, got fired that time. So there was just a lot of rockiness in my start that I don't think you would imagine when you see someone up on stage leading a conference for 5,000 people. That I think is important.

(00:48:26):
And even when I started working for Tumblr, I was like, "This is it. I made it. This is a really interesting company. This is going to work out." That was super rocky because it was an early stage startup. So for example, they couldn't figure out how to wire money to Brazil. So I was not paid for six months. And at one point, me and my colleagues were trying to get money out of the teller to pay contractors because we had no money to pay them, and we borrowed money from people. And finally they also laid me off because they decided to sell to Yahoo.

(00:48:54):
And then I had to figure out what am I going to do? No one's going to hire me. I've been fired and laid off so many times. So this is all before I started an agency to help US-based tech companies and startups grow in Latin America because I figured I was in this really great place to make that happen. And it eventually worked for, well-known companies such as Duolingo. At the time they weren't well-known. They were a tiny little startup. They didn't have an Android app. And that's how I started working with Duolingo because their head of marketing connected with someone they had worked with at Flickr and said, "I noticed Tumblr grew a lot in Brazil last year. Can you recommend a company or an agency to help?" And they said, "This girl." And I was twenty-six. And so that's how they connected me with Duolingo. And I started helping them grow in Brazil as a consultant. They were like, "This is great. Can you help us grow in Chile, Argentina?" And I was like, "Yes." They were like, "How about Mexico?" And I was like, "Yes." Did I know anything about these places, Lenny? Did I know people there? No, but you can figure it out.

(00:49:51):
And then they ended up asking me to come on full time, do that across the world, Japan, China, Korea, Turkey, Spain, France, et cetera. And then to own growth, which ended up meaning communications, social media, government partnerships, anything to grow. And then eventually became an A/B testing growth engine with engineers and PMs and designers of which I knew nothing about.

(00:50:15):
And even after that, I left Duolingo five years later, didn't know what to do with my life. You'd think, "Oh wow, you have it figured out now. You left Duolingo, you have the world in front of you." And I'm like, "Maybe I can finally go work for nonprofits," which is what I actually wanted to do in the first place. Tried a hand at that. Had a couple of experiences before going to work for the Mike Bloomberg campaign.

(00:50:36):
Working for the Mike Bloomberg campaign is impressive. But you know what? Mike Bloomberg didn't win. He's not the president. So that was not a successful campaign if you really look at it. And yeah, Latitud seems like it's a really promising path, but there's A days and B days. So it's just a lot of that. And just staying resilient and believing in yourself and getting back on the horse when you fall on your face.

Lenny (00:51:00):
Amazing. That's such an important message. I think one of the threads from what you're describing, something that I think about a lot is people kind of underestimate how long their career is. There's just so much time to do stuff and for things to start to work. This going to sound really fancy, but I think Marcus Aurelius has this quote about how our life is actually very long. We just use it really badly and we just waste a lot of our time.

Gina Gotthilf (00:51:21):
I think you're so right, Lenny, and I love that because people are going around being like, "Life is short, life is short." But that's so true. We waste so much time. But also I think we don't recognize how much opportunity we have in front of us. And as a 26-year-old, I definitely thought my career was over. I was like, "I blew it." And looking back, it's funny.

Lenny (00:51:40):
Yeah, I know exactly what you mean. I spent nine years at my first job at a random company in San Diego in a startup. I was like, "What am I doing here so long?" And it turned out that was really useful for the thing I did next. And then eventually, wow, things started to really take off. So I think that's a really good lesson for people. It's just a long time. This is my fourth career. I've switched careers many times. I was an engineer then. I was a founder. Then I was a product manager, and whatever this is. Whatever you call this thing.

Gina Gotthilf (00:52:06):
I guess me, too. I was an operator. I was a consultant. Well, I was an employee. I was a consultant. Then I was an operator, which is a fancy way to say employee at a startup. And then now I'm a founder and a VC and an angel and whatever this is..

Lenny (00:52:22):
Awesome. Awesome. So I think that's a really important takeaways. Just there's a lot of time to do stuff and don't stress if things aren't moving as fast as you want. I'm curious, what's a mess-up or a big mistake maybe that you made or your teammate that was like, "Oh wow, that was a big waste of time."

Gina Gotthilf (00:52:38):
Yeah, look, a lot of things didn't work out. More than 50% of our A/B tests didn't work out. We made bets that didn't make sense. I will say though, that in the spirit of A and B sides, I, and I think in general, we are really good at forgetting the B stuff. I talk so much about all the stuff that worked that it's hard to remember all of those moments that didn't actually work. And the thing that I tend to talk about, which is this mistake that we made as the growth team is almost like one of those, when you get asked in an interview, what's your biggest weakness, and you're like, "I'm a perfectionist." It's like one of those things that actually makes you sound good because it's the story about how my team really wanted to implement badges. We spent a lot of time playing all the games that were popular at the time, trying to understand how those gamification growth hacks that we could find in those apps would potentially overlay onto Duolingo and how we would do that.

(00:53:35):
And badges was just pervasive in all of the top games. And so it seemed like a no-brainer, but since we ranked all of our experiments in terms of ROI and return being like how many users we think we're going to get from this DAUs, and time investments, it never made sense to focus on this because we thought that the time sink would be too high. So I actually ended up not letting the team run this experiment for six months so that we focused on lower hanging fruit. So that's a mistake on my end.

(00:54:04):
Then we decided to run this experiment in the most lean way possible. We're like, "You know what? There's MVEs. There's minimum viable experiments. We don't have to run a whole badges thing. We can just do something more simple and actually see if that leads to growth in an interesting way, and then we'll know."

(00:54:20):
And we ran this very simple experiment that was like, you signed up and then you get a badge. And it was like this girl with a balloon. I don't know, she was happy or whatever. And of course in retrospect, it led to no results, because no one is proud of signing up. It's not an exciting moment, and you don't even have badges to collect. You can't show it to other people. None of the things that make badges compelling were there, but we were like, "Okay, well, we tested it didn't work." And then we moved on.

(00:54:42):
So we moved on for another, I don't know, eight months and we didn't look back. And then when we did look back, first of all at that point we discovered that we hadn't been dogfooding, which also was embarrassing. Looking back, we hadn't been dogfooding in the growth team. We just come up with hypotheses. We were super careful about prioritizing them and making sure that we were doing the best possible write ups and all these things. But the dogfooding piece, I didn't come from a product background. I was a marketer and I didn't really understand the term dogfooding, but when we thought, we had a conversation, we were like, "You know what? If we had just tested that, we would've all known that this was a super lame badge." And I was like, "Why are we not testing our experiments?" And so that became part of our practice.

(00:55:26):
It's still relevant. I just had a conversation yesterday with engineers at Latitud. I haven't explained what we built yet, where we're building it. Maybe we'll get there, but I was talking yesterday, [inaudible 00:55:35] at Latitud, and they're awesome. In terms of product team, we have the number eight employee at NewBank. You might've heard of NewBank, but it's this massive banking fintech in Latin America. And we have people from other fintechs. And then we have this guy who was a lead PM at Twilio, and I was explaining to them why we should be dogfooding. And they were all like, "Oh yeah, we should dogfood." It's just easy to forget stuff like that.

(00:55:58):
So that was a mistake that we could have probably gotten to the growth that we got to with badges much earlier on. And not only did we get to growth with badges, but it became this amazing treasure trove of opportunity because once you have badges and people want them, you can now ask people to do anything. Go find friends, go buy things, whatever it is. And so we impacted almost all metrics across the company positively, including some we hadn't expected, but it's easy to talk about a mistake that ended up being a win. So that's why I compared it to the interview thing in the beginning. But we tried making Duolingo a social app really early on and failed. It was called Dual Duels. Dual Duels. You could duel.

Lenny (00:56:42):
Very clever.

Gina Gotthilf (00:56:43):
Yeah, I know we were clever, but people didn't use it and we didn't figure out why. We tried making a Duolingo for schools platform. We couldn't get it to pick up. I went and watched dueling go in China and it got downloaded by a million people in the first day, and then the app got blocked because of the government, and then we couldn't figure out what to do. And then everyone rated the app like one star because it didn't work. And so then we had a lot of trouble actually recovering from that. We launched Duolingo in India and didn't realize because we couldn't have unless we went there, which we finally did, that most people set their phone UI in India to English, because typing in Hindi is hard. And of course there's a lot of languages throughout India, and we were making it so that when you downloaded Duolingo, whatever UI you open your app, your phone was set to, we offered not that language for you to learn. That was your base language. So we were telling people learn French, Spanish, German from English, and they were all trying to learn English, so they didn't find what they were looking for and they left. There were so many mistakes and luckily I think we were able to bounce back from most of them in terms of how Duolingo was doing today.

Lenny (00:57:53):
And our final story is from Maggie Crowley VP of product at Toast, and one of the most beloved episodes of the podcast. This is Maggie sharing something a little bit different, her favorite interview question about failure and what it tells you about the person you're interviewing. Plus a story of her own product failure. Here's Maggie.

Maggie Crowley (00:58:12):
A question I ask in every product interview is, what's the worst product you've ever shipped? And that's because I don't think you're a good PM if you haven't shipped something that's really shitty. You just haven't had enough reps, you haven't done it enough times. And it's not only that you've done it, but that you can admit it and which one it is. That's so important.

(00:58:34):
I remember... It was so dumb. I'm still so mad about this that we did this. I won't name which team, which company, I'm not going to call that out, but we decided we needed to do a rewrite red flag number one of existing product, and engineer who I'd worked with many times, we had a really good relationship and this person was like, "Yeah, yeah, it's going to take six months. No problem." Core part of the product, been around for forever. One of those things that the code is still the code written by the founders kind of thing.

(00:59:07):
It didn't take six months. It took two and a half years. It still wasn't done. It almost never... It went on for so much longer than it should have. It took us forever to get to feature parody. It was the worst project. So many people rotated in and out of it. Everyone thought it was dumb. Sunk cost fallacy, just the worst. And it's because, A, we got arrogant and we thought we could do it. B, we skipped discovery. We didn't really write a one pager. We just went for it. We didn't do enough technical and design research into what the requirements would actually have to be. And there you have it.

Lenny (00:59:46):
And did not work out, or was it a huge success in the end and it changed the trajectory of the business?

Maggie Crowley (00:59:50):
Absolutely not. But you know what? I didn't get fired, so it's fine.

Lenny (00:59:54):
I feel like I've gone through those experiences and then three, four years later, it's like another... Maybe this rewrite and redesign may work. We haven't updated this thing in a long time.

Maggie Crowley (01:00:04):
Just don't do it. Don't rewrite. If anyone ever tells you to do a rewrite, don't do it. A side-by-side rewrite, nope.

Lenny (01:00:11):
Yeah, I've never had... What I run into is once you get too far down a redesign slash rewrite, everyone's building in that new world, and then you launch, and experiment's negative, and then it's just like, "Oh, we just got to launch it. We're going to call it back. We're going to figure out how to get back to neutral someday."

Maggie Crowley (01:00:26):
Yeah yeah. Don't do that.

Lenny (01:00:28):
Good times.

(01:00:29):
And that is a wrap. I hope you enjoy these stories of failure. I want to give a huge special thank you to all of our amazing guests for being vulnerable and sharing these stories of failure in their career. I hope you leave this episode with a new perspective on how setbacks and challenges and failure can often be exactly what you need to get to the next step of your career or your life. If you've got a great story to tell about failure, I'd love to hear it. Leave a comment either on YouTube or on Lennysnewsletter.com or just DM me on Twitter. Or you could reach out at LennyRachitzky.com and click the big contact button. Thank you for listening. Bye, everyone.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
You are ostensibly a professor at Stanford Graduate School of Business, and you shared that when people come ask you for advice, the most common question you get is, "What should I do with my life?"

Graham Weaver (00:00:10):
Imagine that you're walking home from work, you see this bright, shiny object, and you realize it's a magic lamp. And you rub the lamp and this genie comes out and the genie says, "Hey, I can give you one wish. Whatever you throw yourself into with your whole life and your career, it's going to turn out great." If that were true and you had that genie, what would you wish for? At some point in this one life we get, you want to get yourself on that path of that journey.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:35):
This whole exercise connects to something that you're a big advocate of, this idea of getting out of autopilot mode in your life.

Graham Weaver (00:00:40):
You're unconscious, and you may not even realize why you're doing what you're doing or even realize what you're doing. So for example, I get up, work out, drive into work, fight traffic, commute, maybe I return some emails, fight traffic on the way home, rush through dinner, go to bed. It's not a day that is intentional. It's not a day where I've said, "Where do I want to be going with my life? What's important to me in this world?"

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:02):
You another quote, which is, "Everything that you want is on the other side of worse first."

Graham Weaver (00:01:07):
Pick anything. You want a better body? Okay, you're going to need to go to the gym. When you go to the gym the first few times, it's going to not be that fun. The first move is negative. If I'm optimizing for tomorrow and I just want to have a great day tomorrow, I'm going to stay exactly where I am. So many people I see have this happen, where they hit a plateau and they never move past it, because they're not willing to have that hard day, month, week, year.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:35):
When should you quit something, because some things are just not worth it.

Graham Weaver (00:01:37):
I think the time to quit is when you can no longer ...

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:44):
Today, my guest is Graham Weaver. Graham teaches a top-rated course at Stanford's Graduate School of Business, a course which is technically called Managing Growing Enterprises. But as you'll hear in our conversation, he ends up mostly helping students figure out what to do with their lives and how to get out of the autopilot mode that most people are in. He recently won Stanford Graduate Business School's 2024 MBA Distinguished Teaching Award. And teaching is actually his side gig. His full-time job is founder and CEO of Alpine Investors, a private equity firm, which based on my research, is one of if not the top-performing private equity fund in the world. So the advice you're going to hear today is coming from someone who is actually doing the thing, not just teaching the thing.

(00:02:28):
In our conversation, we cover practical exercises that can help you figure out what you should do with your life, including something he calls the genie framework and the nine lives exercise. We talk about why life is suffering, and you may as well choose something worth suffering for, also, why most things in life that are worthwhile take more time than you expect, some practical advice for creating accountability in your life to help you achieve your goals, and so much more.

(00:02:53):
If you listen to this episode and actually try some of the exercises that Graham shares, I promise you that your life and your future will be better off. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes, and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Graham Weaver.

(00:03:16):
This episode is brought to you by Merge. Product leaders, yes, like you, cringe when they hear the word integration. They're not fun for you to scope, build, launch, or maintain, and integrations probably aren't what led you to product work in the first place. Lucky for you, the folks at Merge are obsessed with integrations. Their single API helps SaaS companies launch over 200 product integrations in weeks, not quarters. Think of Merge like Plaid, but for everything B2B SaaS. Organizations like Ramp, Dorada and Electric use Merge to access their customers' accounting data to reconcile bill payments, file storage data to create searchable databases in their product, or HRAS data to auto-provision and deprovision access for their customers' employees. And yes, if you need AI-ready data for your SaaS product, then Merge is the fastest way to get it. So want to solve your organization's integration dilemma once and for all? Book and attend a meeting at merge.dev/lenny, and receive a $50 Amazon gift card. That's merge.dev/lenny.

(00:04:23):
This episode is brought to you by Persona, the adaptable identity platform that helps businesses fight fraud, meet compliance requirements, and build trust. While you're listening to this right now, how do you know that you're really listening to me, Lenny? These days, it's easier than ever for fraudsters to steal PII, faces and identities. That's where Persona comes in. Persona helps leading companies like LinkedIn, Etsy and Twilio securely verify individuals and businesses across the world.

(00:04:52):
What sets Persona apart is its configurability. Every company has different needs depending on its industry, use cases, risk tolerance and user demographics. That's why Persona offers flexible building blocks that allow you to build tailored collection and verification flows that maximize conversion while minimizing risks. Plus, Persona's orchestration tools automate your identity process so that you can fight rapidly shifting fraud and meet new waves of regulation. Whether you're a startup or an enterprise business, Persona has a plan for you. Learn more at withpersona.com/lenny; again, that's withpersona.com/lenny.

(00:05:35):
Graham, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Graham Weaver (00:05:38):
Thanks so much for having me, Lenny. I'm super excited to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:40):
Okay, so you are ostensibly a professor at Stanford Graduate School of Business, of a class called Managing Growing Enterprises. But I was reading an interview with you, and you shared that when people come ask you for advice, they're not asking, "How do I start a company? How do I manage my growing enterprise? How do I make my company grow faster?" Most of the questions, the most common question you get, which is surprising to me, is, "What should I do with my life?" First of all, is that accurate?

Graham Weaver (00:06:10):
Yeah, that is accurate. About half of all the times I meet with students, that's the question they ask. It's really funny too, because sometimes they'll come with a PowerPoint presentation and a two-by-two matrix and an expected value and all that. But really they're asking the question of, "Hey, what should I do with my life," which is, by the way, a great question.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:29):
Why do you think that's the case? That's not what I would imagine someone at an MBA school in a business class asking for advice on.

Graham Weaver (00:06:36):
My typical meeting with a student will say, the student will start to tell me about these two or three different career or job alternatives that they have, A, B and C. Let's just use two, A and B. And then they go through and they start talking about A, and they tell me all the pros and the cons of A, and they go through it. And then they go through B, and they start telling me all those things. And I start asking some questions.

(00:06:56):
And after about five or 10 minutes into that, I can tell that their heart and their soul and their energy is really for B. That's really what they want, but they're talking themselves out of B, and they're going to talk themselves into A. So what I try to do is, A, first, I try to let them realize that their real energy is for B, just let them feel that and understand that. And then secondly, I try to figure out, what are the limiting beliefs they have? What are the fears? What are the obstacles? What are the voices in their head? What are all the societal pressures that are keeping them from doing B? And then we try to deconstruct those and get them to go do B. So that's the process.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:41):
Is there an example of a student going ... just this actual conversation you had with someone?

Graham Weaver (00:07:45):
Absolutely. So there's a great example of a student of mine was from Brazil. And he came in and his prior job prior to business school was he worked in consulting. And that was more or less what he wanted to do. And then at some point I asked the students, "Okay, imagine you knew you were going to be successful and you were going to have a dream. And whatever you dreamed was going to come true, what would you dream for?" And he wanted to start a nonprofit in his home country of Brazil to help students have more access to education. That was what came up for him.

(00:08:27):
And over the course of our class, we just chipped away at all the fears and limiting beliefs of why he shouldn't or couldn't do that. And by the end, that's what he did. And so that's a real life example. And there's all kinds of other examples, but that second one of going and starting a charity, it's not on the beaten path. It's not what probably your parents are thinking you should do. There's probably 100 reasons not to do it. You probably don't know exactly how to start, and so it's intimidating. But if you start with this idea, "Hey, five years out, 10 years out, I know I'm going to be successful," and work backwards from that, you're going to come up with a better answer.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:07):
This is a framework that you call the genie methodology or the genie framework, this question that you just asked that we should spend more time on, which is ... I guess, you tell the story of the genie and how to think about this [inaudible 00:09:20].

Graham Weaver (00:09:19):
Well, when I was 13 years old, I used to listen to these motivational tapes, mowing lawns. And I'm pretty sure it was Brian Tracy had this exercise. And I've adapted it, so I'll use my exercise now. So I say basically imagine that you're walking home from work and you see this bright, shiny object. You walk over and you realize it's a magic lamp. And you rub the lamp and this genie comes out and the genie says, "Hey, I haven't been in this bottle for 10,000 years yet, so I'm not fully formed. So I can't give you three wishes. But what I can do is I can give you one wish. And the wish I can give you is whatever you throw yourself into with your whole life and your career, it's going to turn out great. It's going to work out great. It's probably going to take longer than you think. It's going to be harder than you think, but you're going to be really happy you did and it's going to work out beyond your wildest imagination." If that were true and you had that genie blessing you with that wish, what would you wish for?

(00:10:19):
And then the students come up with an answer that's really close to their heart. It's a thing they would do, absent the fear of failure. And then the second part of the exercise is basically that's what you should go do. You should be spending your life in pursuit of your genie goal. Maybe you can't start that tomorrow; you have financial obligations, maybe there's some experience you need. But at some point in this one life we get, you want to get yourself on that path of that journey. And that's the exercise that I go through with the students.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:56):
It's such a simple idea, that I can totally see how it could be so powerful. And I love the way it's framed as not like it'll guarantee you'll be successful. It's instead, I'll guarantee you'll be happy.

Graham Weaver (00:11:09):
You'll be happy that you took the path. And the reason I say that is that usually the genie goal is the not well-trodden path. So you don't even know exactly what the goal is. This charity to start education for underprivileged kids in Brazil, that takes its own form over the course of a decade. And it will almost certainly turn out differently than you think. So it's more that you'll be really happy you went and started that journey, and it will go great. It'll probably go differently and take longer than you think though.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:46):
What are some other examples of genie goals folks have followed that are kind of non-traditional and they've ended up being happy about it?

Graham Weaver (00:11:52):
Mine was buying companies in my dorm room at business school. I have a student who's starting an amusement park in Texas. That's a pretty crazy example. Many students who are leaving their job and doing startups. A lot of students who going in the nonprofit world. So really just lots of examples. It's as variant as the number of students I have. And that's the magic of it, because you have inside of you some really unique dream that you maybe haven't even shared. And the goal is that that's your uniqueness, and that's what you should be bringing into this world.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:37):
This whole exercise connects to something that you're a big advocate of, this idea of getting out of autopilot mode in your life. And the way I think about it is people ... and I'm going to ask you to describe it, but just it's almost like you're driving and you've never turned off the cruise control in your car, and you don't realize it. Talk about this idea that most of us are in autopilot and why it's so important to realize that and get out of it.

Graham Weaver (00:13:00):
You start off and you're unconscious, and you're kind of going through the motions. And you may not even realize why you're doing what you're doing or even realize what you're doing. So for example, a typical person gets up, they have whatever their morning routine ... I'll use myself. I get up out, work out, take a shower, drive into work, fight traffic, commute. I'm late. I get in, I'm late to a meeting, I'm kind of rushed meeting; meeting, meeting. Okay, quick break for lunch. Maybe I return some emails; a few more meetings, a couple of Zoom calls. Fight traffic on the way home, rush through dinner, get back on email. Go to bed. Okay, that's my day. And that's a busy day. I felt like I did a lot. I'm exhausted, but it's unconscious.

(00:13:45):
It's not a day that is intentional. It's not a day where I've said, "Where do I want to be going with my life? What's important to me in this world? What are my values? What 10 years from now will I wish I was starting to embark on?" Adding that level of intentionality and then working backwards from that is really the magic of getting to that 10 years from now and looking back without regret and getting to a later point in your life and feeling like you're doing the thing you're put on the earth to do as opposed to just going through the motions.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:22):
So the question then here is, how do you get out of that autopilot mode? Because first of all, no one really realizes this is the case. And I'll tell a quick story. We're going to different preschools and daycares for our son. He's a year and a half oldish. And we went to this Montessori school, and the teacher's like, "I'm going to be very clear: what we're doing here is informing your child's subconscious. That's what they're learning here. And that's a huge responsibility. We put a lot of love into that idea, but it's very important you understand that's what we do at the school." And I never thought of it that way.

Graham Weaver (00:14:56):
That's amazing that they said that. So you just opened up another part of this, which is depending on what research you read, somewhere between 95% and 98% of our thoughts are subconscious. And those get programmed in somehow, some way. A big part of that, by the way, is media, our friends, our parents, our boss, our coworkers, what we think we're supposed to do, social media: "This is cool, buy this Ferrari," all these different things. And then you're just operating out of that. And so the idea of being intentional is create space, get out of that, get out of the fog of war, make some space. We'll probably get to this in a little bit, but I do it with an executive coach, and really ask deep questions, make space, ask questions, create the intention that you want in each of the areas of your life. And then start having your calendar reflect that intention.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:58):
And so this genie exercise is one approach, is just ask yourself this question. Can you say it again just for folks so they don't miss it, what's the question you should ask yourself?

Graham Weaver (00:16:08):
I mean, the biggest question I think with respect to your career is, within reason, what would you do if you knew you wouldn't fail? That's the biggest question. I'll give you a few more if you want.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:24):
Yeah, please.

Graham Weaver (00:16:26):
Different questions trigger different things with people that could be helpful, trigger in a good way. So here's a few more. If you didn't have to make money, what would you do? And that'll answer what you enjoy. Naval Ravikant has a great question, which is, what's play for you that is work for other people? So for you, Lenny, that might be a podcast. That might be play for you; that's really fun. You're always going to do better at that. You're going to spend more time, you're going to enjoy it more. That's a good one.

(00:17:00):
Another one is, what's the thing you really want to do? But you're just too embarrassed to say it? And my answer to this question was that I wanted to be a motivational speaker like Tony Robbins. And I was super embarrassed to say that, but that actually works into a lot of my life at this point. Another question, who are some people that you admire and want to be more like, and what do they do? Where do you find those people? What are some things you want to learn and how do you want to grow over the next five, 10 years? So I know a lot of your listeners are working in tech. So five, 10 years from now, you're amazing, you're best in the world at X. What's X? And how do you start to work toward becoming great at X? So there's just a few more other questions you could throw in to help you figure out some things you're excited about.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:55):
You mentioned this idea of limiting beliefs. And I think a lot of people listening to this are probably having these beliefs right now of, "Okay, but I have a family to support. Am I going to go start a charity in Brazil? That's absurd. It sounds easy, but I can't actually change my life this radically." Can you just share something to help people get past that in some way?

Graham Weaver (00:18:14):
Sure. The first thing I would say about limiting beliefs is they're the most powerful and the most dangerous when you don't even know what they are. So when they're in the recesses of your subconscious mind, that is 95% of your thoughts, that's when the limiting beliefs are the most dangerous.

(00:18:32):
So a simple example might just be like I have a limiting belief that I'm not funny. That's in my subconscious and I don't even realize I have it. So I avoid things where I'm trying to be funny or tell jokes. I mean, that's a silly example. But let's use your career now and come up with some maybe deeper ones. Let's use that charity example, the Brazilian charity, "I'm going to start a Brazilian charity." What are the limiting beliefs? Well, oh my gosh, there's a million. "I don't know how to start. I don't know how I would pay for myself. I have business school debt. I don't really know what I'm even talking about. I don't even have a plan for it. How would I get funding?" Those are all these things that are flooding your mind.

(00:19:15):
So the first exercise is just write all that down. Just get it down on paper, and then two things will happen. One is when you get it down on paper, it will almost immediately strip that limiting belief of a lot of its power and a lot of its scariness. Because now it's just something like, for example, "How would I fund this?" So the second thing that is that a lot of that scariness becomes just a to-do item. In the recesses of your subconscious, that is a very scary, limiting belief that will actually keep you from doing the thing you love. Once it's on paper, now it's just a to-do item that you can actually deal with with your conscious mind, just like you do anything else. So, "How would I fund this," just becomes a plan, like, "I need to design a plan where I'd get funding for this charity." And then that just is a problem like any other problem. It's not this nebulous, scary fear. It's just literally a to-do item.

(00:20:14):
So the first part of limiting beliefs, write them down, understand what they are, look at them in the cold day of light on paper, and then translate them into things that are just obstacles to be overcome. And by the way, if you're listening to this podcast, you've overcome millions of obstacles in your life, and these are no different once they're down on paper.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:34):
Are you actually doing these exercises with your students? They're taking a class about growing their enterprise and then it's like, "Okay, let's analyze what you want to do with your life"? Is that how this class goes?

Graham Weaver (00:20:42):
That's a really good question. So I'll give you a little bit of background. So I was a case guest at Stanford Business School while I was buying companies in my dorm room. And it was talking about all the things that went wrong. And so it's kind of a really fun case. And I did that for 12 years. And I started to realize that was my most energetic day of the year. And so long story short, I started teaching a class full time. So I did that for four years. And I was teaching the Xs and Os of being a CEO, basically: hiring, firing, having hard conversations, managing a board, fundraising, selling, all the things you would imagine that a young CEO would need to know.

(00:21:20):
After about four years, I started to realize that was great, except that no one went and did it. So the class is on entrepreneurship, and they learned how to be an entrepreneur. There was only one problem: they didn't actually become entrepreneurs. So then I said, "Well, wait a sec. I have to readjust my class a little bit, and I have to spend some time on the stuff we've just been talking about: finding out what your dream is, your limiting beliefs, starting to map out goals toward your actual entrepreneurship dream or whatever your genie goal is."

(00:21:53):
So the way I say it is the university allows me to teach the class because I teach them entrepreneurial tricks, tactics, tools that will help them become a great CEO. But the real reason I teach is because I'm trying to help people really go find the thing that they're excited about and get into the life path of doing that thing. So I do both, but I do the second one kind of ... maybe that's not the headline of the course, although I think that's probably why people like the course so much.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:30):
It's like a Trojan horse element.

Graham Weaver (00:22:32):
Exactly, yeah. Tony Robbins used to say that people hire him for success, and he has to give them that so that he feels like he earned his money, but what he really delivers them is fulfillment. And it's a little bit like that. People take my class to learn how to be a CEO, but what they really get is hopefully on the path of doing the thing they want to do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:54):
A lot of what you've been talking about, it's almost an assumption that you'll be more successful and happier if you follow your energy, your passion, versus the, "Here's how I'll make a bunch of money. Here's how I'll move up the ladder." Can you speak to that?

Graham Weaver (00:23:09):
Yeah. Gosh, Lenny, it sounds so cliche when you say it like that, that I almost cringe a little bit. Let me try to give it a little bit different framework where it won't sound as ... because cliches are cliches because they're true. But let me try to give you a little bit different framework to think about it.

(00:23:29):
I think about it as you have sort of your heart or your soul or your internal scorecard, and then you have your head and your mind and the world's external scorecard. And I'll speak from this from experience. So when I graduated from business school, I took the job I was supposed to take. And it was the safe job at the big private equity firm that paid well and looked great on my resume. And I took that job. That was the external scorecard. My head said that. I built an expected value calculation, all that stuff.

(00:24:02):
The problem was it wasn't my internal scorecard. It had nothing to do with what I actually cared about and wanted to do with my life. And so the way that shows up is just this tension, friction, stress, anxiety, burnout, all those things. And you can will that, you can will yourself through for long periods of time. In fact, if you want, you can will yourself through that your whole life.

(00:24:31):
But then once I got into the path of the thing that I was excited about, that's when I really felt my energy change dramatically. And I developed almost a superpower in that thing, because I had more energy. I was willing to work longer, I was willing to do it. I've been running my company now for 23 years. I was willing to do it for a longer period of time. I thought about it in the shower. I thought about it when I went on runs. I talked to people. They wanted to join because I was excited. And it was a whole different level of power and life force that I was able to bring to that.

(00:25:14):
So I'm saying this from experience, that you're going to show up so much differently in the thing that you're excited about, that that alone is going to make your life a lot better. But the great irony is you're going to do so much better in that thing than you are the thing you are, quote, "supposed to do." And I certainly, certainly understand that people have real life constraints on their finances. And I 100% get that. And so a big part of what I do with students is work through those things and say, "Okay, great. Let's talk about this job you're going to take for X years and you're going to pay off your loans or whatever. But during that time, let's get you on the path of the thing you really want to do." So sometime soon in your life, you want to get on that path.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:02):
There's a bunch of directions I want to go here. One is I'll just share, what you're describing is exactly what happened to me, without knowing this advice. I just started writing things online because the poll was there and people seemed to enjoy it. So I just kept following that path. And the whole time, my wife's like, "You can't make money writing on the internet. That's not a thing. Why would you do this? You have all these skills, that you can make a lot more doing other things." But I just kept doing that, and that's what led me to this life now where I make much, much more than I made as a product manager at Airbnb. And also, it's a lot less stressful. And so, I'm a living example [inaudible 00:26:39].

Graham Weaver (00:26:38):
Yeah. And if you go back to what I was saying before, you probably were answering the question, "What would I do if I didn't have to make money?" You just did that because you enjoyed it. What's play for you that's work for other people? What do you do in your free time? You were answering all those questions. And then I think a lot of people just say, "Oh, well, that's just a side hustle or a hobby." It is until it isn't, right? And you're a great example of that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:04):
Just to set it some expectations with folks, you tell me, how often does this actually work out for someone where this ended up being the right path for them, that it ended up working well for them? Just because people can hear this and be like, "Yeah, okay, I'm sure it works for some people; probably not for most people." What's the success rate, however you define that, for your students?

Graham Weaver (00:27:25):
Okay, so the short answer is I don't know, because I don't have full information about how my students do or what their path would have been had they not done it. So it's a kind of difficult question to answer. But what I would say is that the formula you're solving for is you, excited about something for a decade or more. So what has to happen? You excited about something. We just talked about what that is. The decade or more is going to come true more likely if you're excited about it. But also, you have to go in at the beginning with that mindset and the structural ability to stay at it for a long period of time. So the missing ingredient in most of the people that fail is time.

(00:28:18):
And I'll use myself as an example. I started Alpine. We lost money on our first fund. We started doing well. We got hit by the recession, we started digging out, whatever. But long story short, I was 14 years into running my firm until I could say with confidence we were going to even stay in business, let alone be really successful. And probably 18 years until we were what I would say really successful by external standards. And now 23 years, we've had a great run. But if you take away the time period, then I would've gone down as one of the, quote, "failures," as opposed to, I would say, one of the success stories using this methodology.

(00:29:10):
So time is the variable. And I think the biggest part of that is it's really, believe it or not, not typically the finance or the structural piece. It's the entrepreneur or the individual's willingness to actually stay with it. And then upstream of that, it's their belief about how long it's supposed to take. And I really hate this about the social media and just media in general, where they try to paint this picture that things are going to happen overnight. And we've invested in 600 businesses. Let's say 550 of those are founder-started businesses where we're the first money. I've never, in one of those examples, seen anyone who did something quickly. They've all been very, very long stories to get to that point.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:12):
This reminds me of a quote I read. I don't know if you wrote this or you shared it, this idea that the life is suffering, so choose something worth suffering for.

Graham Weaver (00:30:20):
I wrote that, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:22):
You wrote that. Talk about that, because it feels like it's exactly what you're describing. It's going to take a long time to figure something out.

Graham Weaver (00:30:28):
Exactly. Yeah, exactly. I'm glad you brought that ... Yeah, I mean, think about it. Again, using myself as an example, the first job I had, I wasn't suffering any less. I was getting on planes, I was working late hours. My time was not my own. If I would've had kids, I'd be missing their little league games and all that stuff. So I'm doing that anyway. I'm just doing it for something I don't care about. And then I start my own company and I was, quote, "suffering," getting on planes, doing all that. It was just something that I cared about. So yeah, the quote, "Life is suffering. So figure out something worth suffering for," you're going to suffer either way. And that's another thing I think people don't realize, is there isn't really a path that is easy that I've ever found.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:16):
You have another quote along these lines, which is, "Everything you want is on the other side of worse first."

Graham Weaver (00:31:21):
Yeah, I mean, I know those are two non-super optimistic quotes perhaps, but I think they're true. The second one, everything you want is on the other side of worst first, and this is something where I almost can't think of many exceptions to this. Pick anything. You want a better body? Okay, you're going to need to go to the gym. When you go to the gym the first few times, it's going to not be that fun. You're going to set your alarm, you're going to get sore. It's not going to be great. You're going to have to probably make some changes to your diet. That's not going to be fun, at least initially. And so that's one example.

(00:32:05):
You want to change careers, you're going to have to learn a new career. You're going to have to leave your career. You're going to have to maybe interview for new jobs, or whatever it is. In each case, the first move is negative. The first move is negative to getting in shape. The first move is negative to get out of a bad relationship, to get into a career you want to be in. The reason I think that's important to say is because if I'm optimizing for tomorrow and I just want to have a great day tomorrow, I'm going to stay exactly where I am, because my life will be better tomorrow if I don't make any changes. I don't have to break up with my girlfriend, have a hard conversation, have the tears, be alone, go on dating apps. I don't have to do that if I just stay in it one more day.

(00:32:55):
So if you realize this and instead ask the question, the version of myself five years from now, what would they wish I was going to do right now? So I can guarantee your five-year version of yourself will say, "Get out of that toxic relationship, no matter how painful it is for the next two months." And if you can make decisions from that, and then on top of that, realize it's going to get worse first, then that's why I say everything you want is on the other side of worse first. But if you don't do that, you just end up plateauing. And so many people I see have this happen where they hit a plateau and they never move past it because they're not willing to have that hard day, month, week, year whatever it is.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:45):
I am imagining many people hearing this right now are like, "Yeah, I see what I need to do now." That was really powerful advice. It makes me think of parenting advice, some parenting advice I recently saw. Dr. Becky has this advice of your job as a parent isn't to make your kids happy, but it's to make them resilient.

Graham Weaver (00:34:02):
I love that, yeah. By the way, watch how people parent. They parent exactly the opposite of that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:07):
Exactly [inaudible 00:34:09].

Graham Weaver (00:34:09):
You and I both live in Marin. I don't know if you have kids or how old they are, but when you get kids in school in Marin, you see parents, they try to clear all obstacles away from their kids. It's the worst thing you could do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:25):
Today's episode is brought to you by Liveblocks, the platform that turns your product into a place that users want to be. With ready-made, collaborative features, you can supercharge your product with experiences that only top tier companies have been able to perfect until now. Think AI copilots like Notion, multiplayer like Figma, comments and notifications like Linear, and even collaborative editing like Google Docs, and all of that with minimal configuration or maintenance required. Companies from all kinds of industries and stages count on Liveblocks to drive engagement and growth in their products. Join them today and give your users an experience that turns them into daily active users. Sign up for a free account today at liveblocks.io/lenny.

(00:35:14):
I want to talk about another exercise that you have, but before I do that, there's all this advice you're sharing that people might be hearing and be like, "Yeah, yeah. Okay, this is great." I'm going to share this in intro, and we're not going to talk a lot about your fund, but I did some research on it. And from what I understand, it's one of the top performing PE funds in the world, which is very hard, considering how many smart people run PE funds and how ruthless that industry is. Anything you can comment on there? Yeah, I think that's important for people to know.

Graham Weaver (00:35:48):
Well, I think one of the things I would say is that I never stand up in front of students or be on a podcast like this and say anything that I'm not doing myself or that I'm advising students or people who work at Alpine to do. And so I appreciate the kind words. And I think that the things that I'm talking about are rooted in real results. And this is not just happy talk podcast. The formula, I think, for greatness is to be intentional, get in the path of the thing that you're most excited about, and then give yourself several decades to do it. And that's based on investing in 600 companies and building my own business. So I appreciate the kind call out.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:37):
Yeah. For people that are listening and be like, "Okay, I'm motivated. I want to do this," other than taking your class, anything you can recommend to just do these sorts of exercises, ask yourself these questions that you've seen work?

Graham Weaver (00:36:49):
I mean, the answer is accountability. How do you keep yourself accountable to living the life you want to live? And the analogy I would use is let's say that your number one goal in life is you've got to get in better shape. You just have to. Let's say you have even medically, you're going to have real health problems if you don't do that. I would say you hire yourself a personal trainer, pay what you need to pay. Okay, maybe you don't have a ton of money, but that's where I'd spend it. That person, A, they're going to hold you accountable to showing up at a certain time, and B, they're going to show you the exercises. They're going to call you if you're not there. You're just increasing the chances of success. Plus you spend some money, you want to get your money out of it.

(00:37:40):
The equivalent of that in your life is an executive coach. And I figured this out in 2009 in the dark recesses of the recession. I hired my first executive coach. And I was like, "Wow, it's a personal trainer for me for two things." Number one, make space to ask yourself the big questions in life about your career, your relationships, your health, your spirituality, your children. Whatever the big things are in your life, ask the big questions, find out what your intention is. What are you looking for in those areas? And just have, in my case, several hours a week to get clear on those things. Okay, so that's part one.

(00:38:25):
And then part two is that person can hold you accountable. I have one coach that I can't even have the call with the coach unless I fill out a piece of paper or an online form that says, "Here's what my one year goals are, outcomes I want to have this year are. Here's what I did last week, based on those. Here's what I'm going to do next week toward those. And here's the outcomes I want to have for the call we're about to have." And even if I never had the call, just having to fill that out every single week is incredibly powerful and allows me to hold myself accountable.

(00:39:03):
So 100%, that's what I'd recommend. Let's back up and say, okay, let's say you can't afford a coach or you're worried about that. And this is the same thing as, let's say you couldn't afford a personal trainer. I would give you the same advice, which is find a very like-minded friend of yours and sit down and do it for each other. So if you're using the workout example, okay, you're going to go on a run Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Fridays with your friend, and they're going to meet you at 7:00 AM at this trail, or 6:00 AM at this trail. That's your accountability. And you're going to be more likely to do it. You don't want to let them down. They're going to beat you up if you don't get there.

(00:39:44):
Same is true with this. This is how I started. I did this with my roommate in business school. And we would go on a walk for 30 minutes and talk about my dreams and hopes. Then we'd turn around and talk about his. And it was great, because we made room for each other to have those conversations, and we also developed a great friendship. So short of having an actual executive coach, find a really-minded person that could get into this with you, and that would be another thing. But accountability is huge. I'm going to just say one more thing. I'm sorry. I'm going on a little bit long on this.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:20):
[inaudible 00:40:20] please.

Graham Weaver (00:40:19):
There's another thing that happens that's kind of magical, which is you activate a different part of your brain when you talk. You actually activate more of your brain when you talk than when you think or write. So thinking activates the least amount of your brain. Writing is a little bit better, but talking activates a whole different region of your brain. So that's the other big benefit of not doing this just on your own, is being able to talk about it with someone.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:54):
I love that there's a whole spectrum of ways to create accountability for yourself. I love the second coach you've shared, where just filling out that form was basically the biggest benefit.

Graham Weaver (00:41:07):
I learned this from these audio tapes. When I was in college, I had this green notebook. And I was trying to row crew, and I never row crew before. And I wrote down at the top of the page every single morning, I wrote down, "I am the number one rower in the country." I wasn't. I was a freshman novice, 135 pound Midwesterner, never had been in a boat. But I wrote that down. And then I wrote down three things I was going to do that day to move toward that goal. And I did that every single day that I was in college. And it's just incredible. We talked earlier about your subconscious mind. You're just locking your subconscious mind into your goals and where you want to go and who you want to be and how you want to show up. It's really powerful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:46):
And that's advice anybody can implement. "I want to be the best [inaudible 00:41:51] founder"-

Graham Weaver (00:41:50):
You could do that. You could do that [inaudible 00:41:50] exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:53):
Yeah. It's such a simple thing. "I want to be the best product manager. Here's three things I'm doing today to help me along the lines."

Graham Weaver (00:41:59):
Absolutely. My students have to do this twice a week. It's one of their assignments, and they actually have to turn it in. And I have so many students that say five years later, "I still do this a couple times a week, and it's been unbelievable." I'd say this to all your listeners: you will get more done writing down your goal and three things you're going to do to move toward that goal, you'll get more things done in three months than you will in three years without that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:28):
That's an awesome thing to just try tomorrow at work. Write this down, see how it goes. The coach point, I just want to highlight that. What convinced me to get a coach back when I was working is I just realized, one, every athlete has a coach that tells them, "Here's how to become better," slash, everyone that you work with that is a leader and exec basically has a coach. And the people that have an exec coach will do better in their career and life than those who don't. So why would you not have someone there just helping you become better at this craft? It just makes so much sense if you can afford it. There are different price points for different coaches. Most people can probably afford it in some [inaudible 00:43:09].

Graham Weaver (00:43:08):
That's right. That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:11):
Sweet. Okay. Let's talk about another framework that you have that you call nine lives. And this is essentially another way, it's like another way to hack your brain to come up with things you really should be doing, probably. Talk about this exercise.

Graham Weaver (00:43:23):
So this idea of what's my passion and what's my career goal, it can be really intimidating. And it is intimidating. And so this exercise is to make it less intimidating. And you basically come up with nine lives. So you say your first life, life one is the life you have now. So when I did this exercise ... let's pretend I did this exercise when I'm right out of school, taking that job. So life one is I'm working at this big firm, I live in the Bay Area, here's what I'm doing. That's life one.

(00:44:05):
There's two rules. The first rule is all the lives have to start from today. So you can't go back in time. They all start from today. And the second rule is you have to be excited about all these lives. So I might say, "Hey, my second life is I want to start a private equity firm and be a founder and be a CEO." And that's life too. And life three is I want to be an author and I want to write whatever fiction or nonfiction. And then life four would be I want to be a professor and teach. And life five is maybe I want to make videos and be on social media. And life six, I want to be an actor. And you go through this whole list of these lives.

(00:44:43):
And the idea is that ... A couple of things from this exercise. One is let's say that you're in a position where you need to be working in the job you're in. There might be one of these lives that gives you the most energy, and it's the thing if you knew you wouldn't fail, you would do this one. And it's good to recognize what that is and then pull that life a little bit into your current life.

(00:45:10):
So let's say, Lenny, that you were a product manager, but you really loved doing podcasts, and that was one of your nine lives. Do a podcast every other week, and just pull it into your life, which it sounds like what you did. You started doing it as a side hustle. And then that'll have two amazing effects. One is you will just have more energy everywhere else in your life. Forget if you ever do this full time or not; just the act of pulling something into your life you're really excited about will give you a tremendous amount of energy.

(00:45:45):
And then the second thing is you'll ideally find the path that is the thing that gives you the most energy. The other thing that I've learned in doing this exercise is you actually can have pretty much all nine lives. You can't have them at once, but if you're fortunate enough to live long enough, you can have all of these things. So I have had the corporate job, been the founder, been the professor, been a writer, had videos, taught people. I've been able to bring most of those lives into this current life.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:25):
There's a couple things there that come up as you talk about. One is, on that point, what I do now is my fourth career. First I was an engineer, then I became a founder, then I was a PM, and now I do whatever the heck this is. And I think people don't realize that's how life often goes. You think you're going to do one thing, and then you have many different careers that pivot into [inaudible 00:46:46].

Graham Weaver (00:46:45):
Exactly. And I think that's the thing. It's just trying to make it a little less intimidating. You don't have to have this one life purpose, passion, thing that you do for the rest of your life. If you just follow the thing that gives you energy at each time, it'll probably be a good indication of where you want to be going.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:03):
The other thread there is, I know one of your other really important pieces of advice is to avoid this not now idea, where everyone's like, "Here's the thing I should be doing, my genie goal, but not now." Thoughts on just how to think about that, of just like, "Okay, I know I have these lives I could live, but not now," on this or that?

Graham Weaver (00:47:21):
Yeah, I mean, in 20 years of teaching, I've never had a student come to me and say, "Hey, Graham, my real dream is to do X, but I'm just going to give up on it. I'm not going to do it." No one's ever said that. Instead, they say, "Not now." And not now, if they're not careful, will turn into not ever, because not now is just really another way of saying, "I'm not going to do it." And then there's a million reasons why you can't do it now. And those reasons, some of them are legit and some of them are just fear in another form.

(00:47:58):
In terms of how to overcome that, I think it's kind of hopeful to realize that it's never really the right time. When you're making a change or you're going to go do something different, it's never going to feel secure and safe. You're always going to have some fear. You're always going to feel like you're not ready. You're going to feel like it's too soon. You're going to feel like you don't know exactly what that path looks like. And so just understanding that's normal. That's called entrepreneurship. That's called life. And if you wait for the clouds to part and this ray of sun to come down and say, "Now is the time," you're going to wait your whole life.

(00:48:43):
And so I think that realization can maybe be helpful. And then try to figure out, what are the things that need to be true for you to launch? And usually for my students, it's something financial that is the big bottleneck. And what I tell them is, "You know what? People have raised money to start a business before. That's happened, where you've had people who've started businesses without their own money that have been able to pay themselves. And that's not a reason to not do it. It's an obstacle. It's something you have to solve, but it's not not an insurmountable obstacle."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:30):
This touches on a quote I definitely wanted to get to, something that you wrote not long ago. Here's the quote: "The most important thing I've learned in the first 50 years of my life is that the true game of life is an internal one, not an external one. And that journey starts with three powerful words: I am enough." Talk about that. Why is that so important?

Graham Weaver (00:49:51):
Well, I mean, that's a really a deep topic, but I'll talk about the internal and external journey. So life presents itself as a series of external obstacles and events. And it feels very much like an external journey. And it can feel that way your whole life. But I think what you'll realize, and I started realizing this when I really started meditating and spending time distancing myself from the subconscious thoughts, is a very, very large part of life is internal. I say a very large part because obviously you need some food, clothing, shelter, some basic needs that are external. But for most people that have the ability to even listen to this podcast, I would say the vast majority of your life is internal.

(00:50:52):
So what do I mean by that? I mean that you're writing a story about what it is you think you need to be happy, or you're writing a story about things you think you need to be to be enough or to be respected or to feel worthy or to get admiration of other people. You're writing that story, and it's just a story. And if you really follow this logic, you'll realize that. You'll realize it is 100% just a story, or it's a story that you should even care. And then that opens up a lot more agency that you have over deciding what is important to you, what is your internal scorecard, what are the things that matter to you, not what the external world thinks or the story you've been writing for a long time. When you start to open this up, it's really kind of scary at first, because you'll start to realize most of the things you're operating from are really just stories that have been written at some point in your life. And so it's actually terrifying at first, and then it starts to become really liberating.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:10):
Was there an example of that in your life? Because externally, it feels like you're killing it: a killer PE fund, teaching at Stanford. The scorecard is looking good. So it's interesting you say that.

Graham Weaver (00:52:21):
The first time I really realized this, it was in 2015. I mentioned to you it took me 14 years to be successful. So we had just sold the last company from our second fund, which is where we really got paid. I had a financial event that was ... it wasn't like I never have to work again in my life. It was just like I could exhale a little bit. I knew I was going to be able to pay my mortgage and put my kids through college. It was that kind of an event. And for a couple days I was euphoric, because I felt like I'd worked so hard for this. I'd been, again, at this for 15 years, but really longer than that, if you go back to getting into college. And the whole thing had been a long journey.

(00:53:05):
And then it hit me that nothing changed. Nothing internally changed at all. I still had the same problems. I still felt the same way about myself. I still had a lot of negative thoughts about myself. This goal that I thought that I had for this whole long period of time, it didn't actually change anything. It changed externally, for sure. Like I said, I could exhale and pay my mortgage. And those are all really good things. But that was the first time when I realized, "Oh, wait a second. It's really up to me to find things that are going to give me joy. And the achievement of some kind of external event is not one of those things."

(00:53:54):
And I know that sounds really, really weird, but there's so many people that I've heard that have had very, very similar stories. And so it was really disorienting for me. And actually it was the first time in my life where I experienced depression, because I just had this thought of, "I think I was working my whole life for that, and it wasn't what I thought it was going to be." And so now I was thinking, "Well, what is it then? What is the thing that's going to give me joy?" And that takes some introspection to ask those questions.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:34):
I was just having a conversation with a friend who's an angel investor, and he just had a bunch of exits. And he's like, "Cool, I got some money in my bank account now, but I don't feel anything. I thought I'd be like, 'Holy moly, this is exactly what I was hoping for. And nothing changed.'" Exactly how you're describing.

Graham Weaver (00:54:53):
I think you get a little bit of peace of mind when you have some financial security, which is valuable. But in terms of now my life changes, now I'm enough, now I am happy, now I feel good about myself, none of that changes, for really anybody that I know.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:15):
And the hardest part, as you said, is you think it will. You think, "Oh, I'll be so happy once I achieve this thing." And I think an example of this is there's a lot of miserable billionaires, from what I've read and see. And that should tell you a lot.

Graham Weaver (00:55:26):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:27):
Maybe a second-to-last question; I'm curious if there's anything recently you're focused on, have been thinking a lot about that maybe you changed your mind about, or has changed the way you think about the world?

Graham Weaver (00:55:38):
The last two years, I had my two oldest boys go off to college, 2022 and then 2024. And that really hit hard. You would think that I would've been preparing for that for 18 years for each of them, but for some reason it just really hit me really, really hard. And I think it was a real wake up call of mortality, I guess, and to realize that nothing goes on forever. And these wonderful people that I had lived with, each for 18 years, were no longer going to really be a part of my daily life.

(00:56:17):
And that really set me off on a journey of a lot of spiritual work, doing a lot of meditating and working with some gurus. And it's been really profound. And it's put me a lot closer in touch with the things that really matter to me. I've given myself more permission to spend time doing those things than the normal external world type things. So that was a pretty profound change for me. And the spiritual journey is arguably really the important journey. And this could be a longer conversation. And maybe you have the luxury of doing that journey as you get older or something, but it's been a really profound, profound journey.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:17):
I'm excited to see what insights come out of this part of your life. Final question before we get to our very exciting lightning round. We have this segment on the podcast called Failure Corner, where people come on this podcast, they share all these wins: "Oh, I have this amazing PE fund that's killing it. I teach at Stanford. I've launched all these things. All these students, they're so great. Life's amazing. Nothing ever goes wrong," when in reality, it does. And those stories often aren't told. So I'm curious if there's a story you could share of a time you failed in your career and, if you learned something from that experience, what you learned.

Graham Weaver (00:57:51):
Yeah, I'll tell a couple stories. So when I was in high school, I wrestled. And I cut a lot of weight to make the varsity team. And I was not in the best mental place because of cutting weight. But anyway, I lost a big match my junior year. And I quit and I never wrestled again. And that haunted me. So first of all, that was a failure, a big failure for me. And it really haunted me. And so I, after that, made a promise to myself that it wasn't going to have that happen again. When I went to college, I tried to row crew. I failed year after year trying to make the team, trying to make the boat. Eventually had some real success my senior year, but prior to that, just failure after failure.

(00:58:44):
And then at Alpine, I mean, we lost money on our first fund. We had real trouble during the recession. I think five of my first eight investments I ever made in my life, I lost money. And in venture world, that's one thing, but in private equity, that's a whole different ratio, which is not a good ratio at all. When I first started teaching, I wasn't good at teaching, had a lot of insecurities. I was really young when I started, and I didn't feel like I had really anything to share with the students. And I think that showed up, and it took me a long time to kind of figure that out.

(00:59:26):
So I guess almost my entire track record is one that starts with things not going well, and then just over a long period of time of chipping away, looks like a success on paper. But anytime early in the process would look like an abject failure. So I'm quite familiar with failure in the form of setbacks. I think the ultimate failure though was the wrestling one, where I just quit. That was really the only one I would characterize as a failure. The other ones, because I kept going and staying with it, turned out to work out well, with a lot of scars and bruises, but the failure would've been quitting.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:15):
I love that the circles back to your core advice of stick with it. Most things that are important take a long time and there's a lot of suffering [inaudible 01:00:24].

Graham Weaver (01:00:24):
Yeah, they do. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:26):
Something I wanted to ask, I can't help but ask at this point, because I think a lot of people are wondering this, just when do you quit? When should you quit something? Because some things are just not worth it. Is there any advice there you could share?

Graham Weaver (01:00:37):
Yes, for sure. I think the time to quit is when you can no longer see the vision and you can no longer really believe the vision. And then when that happens for a long period of time ... or maybe you're no longer even excited about the vision; somewhere in there, I think. The excited one, you have to be a little careful of, because in the dark days, exciting is not the word you're going to use. But at least in our company, for the first 10 years it was not going well. But each time, we'd make fewer mistakes, we'd start to see something working. We'd do one really good deal in this fund, we'd start to learn from that. We'd get one really good hire, we'd learn from that. We would little by little start to see these green shoots.

(01:01:24):
And I have this unbelievable statement. I didn't write it. Dan and Chip Heath wrote it in their book, Switch, which is "Scale your bright spots. Find what's working and do more of that." And as you start to progress, for me, for example, at Alpine, almost all the time, we always had at least a small glimmer of a bright spot. And then we'd scale that and then we'd continue forward and we'd find some more and we'd scale those. And over time, all those bright spots became our business. That became what we did. That became our strategy. That became how we hired people. That became where we recruited from. All those bright spots just started to magnify until the entire business was pretty much a bright spot. But it took time, because we had to figure out where those were. And we had to do a lot of things wrong to figure out where the bright spots were.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:19):
Graham, is there anything else that you wanted to share or you think is important to leave listeners with before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Graham Weaver (01:02:25):
I mean, I think what I would say is just in general, you got one life, you get one shot. And so take the time to really figure out and answer the question, what does a wonderful, amazing, incredible life look like? And just get as clear as you possibly can on that. No matter how crazy or aspirational it seems, write it down. Write down that thing is write down that thing that would make this life amazing. And write it down for your life, your career, your relationships, your friends, your body, your spirituality, your financial situation. And just the first magic is just knowing what you want. And I'd say 90% of people never even know what they want. So take the time to do that. And the more clear you are on that, the more invested you are in that, the more likely you are to make it come true.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:18):
What I love about that is you don't have to do this thing, just step one is understand what it could be if you could do that.

Graham Weaver (01:03:18):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:27):
And it's almost like understand where your Google directions could take you if you turned off autopilot. Oh, man. Okay. Well, with that, Graham, we reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Graham Weaver (01:03:37):
Let's do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:39):
First question, what are two or three books that you find yourself recommending most to other people?

Graham Weaver (01:03:44):
So in the realm of a lot of the topics we've been talking about, which is your internal and external game, I love the book Untethered Soul. And I love the book, Don't Believe Everything You Think. They have very similar themes, but they come at it differently. But I think both of those will really change your perspective if you read them.

(01:04:08):
And then a very, very practical book that's probably the book I've read more than any other book, is How to Win Friends and Influence People, by Dale Carnegie, which was written in like 1930. There's no other book it. There's a reason that people are still recommending it 100 years after it's written. So it's definitely worth checking out.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:31):
Yeah, that book, I still think about it often, even though I read it 30 years ago at this point. I love that recommendation. And it's like a very old book to read, but you have to get past the fact that it was written a long time ago. Okay, next question. Do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show you really enjoyed?

Graham Weaver (01:04:48):
I, for the first time, watched the movie Where the Crawdads Sing. And I just loved it. It's kind of a romantic comedy, or not comedy, sorry, romantic love story meets murder mystery, meets coming of age. And it really, really touched me. Then I promptly read the book as well, so I love that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:14):
Do you have a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love?

Graham Weaver (01:05:17):
I'm a really big fan of sleep. I think it makes a massive difference in your life. And that's a whole other topic we could go down another time. So I have a few things that have helped me on that. So if you saw me sleeping, I have earplugs, I have a noise machine. I have a sleep mask, and then I have a Chilipad that goes on my bed to keep the bed cool. And I sleep great. All those things really help. The earplugs and mask and noise machine allow you to not hear the ambient noise. And then there's a lot of research actually on the temperature at which you want to sleep. And your body goes up and down throughout the night. So this Chilipad that goes under your mattress, there's a whole bunch of versions of that. And that helps a lot.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:11):
I also sleep with an eye mask. My wife and I rotate the earplugs, because someone has to pay attention to the baby, in case he wakes up.

Graham Weaver (01:06:18):
There you go. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:20):
And this Chilipad, is this the Eight Sleep, or is this in just a cold bag?

Graham Weaver (01:06:24):
Well, no. So I actually bought the Eight Sleep, and it was too much.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:27):
Yeah, it's a lot.

Graham Weaver (01:06:28):
It would turn on and off. And I would wake up. And then it would track my sleep, and then I'd start to freak out because it'd tell me I wasn't sleeping well. So I actually returned it and I got a really simple one called OOLER. And it just turns on and off. There's no timing. There's no any weird functionality. And it was a lot cheaper, and it works better for me. So everyone use their own thing, but that one worked better for me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:55):
Okay, two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often think about that you find useful in work or in life?

Graham Weaver (01:07:02):
I love this quote that sums up a lot of what we talked about in the podcast. It's by Howard Thurman. And he says, "Don't ask what the world needs. Ask instead what makes you come alive, because what the world needs most is for you to come alive." And I think that just talks about it's really about you coming alive that's the most important thing. And that is going to have so much positive exhaust in the world. And things from that will come that you can't even imagine right now.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:38):
I was thinking of that quote as you were describing your philosophy. Final question. I feel like a lot of people might be listening to this being like, "I came here for one of the most legendary private equity investors of all time, and you don't talk about private equity at all." So let me just use this opportunity to ask you just a question here. What do you look for in a company that you want to buy that maybe other people don't? Is there some insight you could share?

Graham Weaver (01:08:04):
Yeah. Well, I'm happy to talk about private equity, by the way. It's just that we talked-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:10):
We'll do another episode on that. This could be a whole podcast episode. I understand.

Graham Weaver (01:08:13):
Really happy to talk about that about. So I'll answer the question more like, what's a little bit of a different philosophy that we have? So when we were coming out of the recession and I hired this coach, we looked at all of our companies. And we were looking for where did we make our most money, and what was the most consistent trend? And we looked at valuation, growth rates, capital structure, geography, industry. We cut the data every way you could imagine. And we had these three companies that kept showing up on all these lists that were three of our top performers, but they didn't seem to really have anything in common.

(01:08:53):
And then we're like, "Well, they have one thing in common, which is they started off really badly, so badly in fact that we put our own person from Alpine in to go run the company, and then they ended up becoming our best companies." So we said, "Wait a second. Maybe that's the highly correlated thing, is us putting our own team in place, and even upstream of that, maybe just having an incredible management team." So that was foundational. And now, we put our own leadership team in 100% of the time. And not only that, but we have spent an inordinate amount of time trying to build a program to help people who are in their late 20s, early 30s learn how to become CEOs. And that's been foundational.

(01:09:38):
So the thing that we probably believe to be true that not that many people agree with us on is that the management team is really where we think all the alpha comes from. You can't get the industry wrong, because if you hire the best management team in the world to run a typewriter business, you're going to lose money. So you can't be wrong on the industry, but you also don't have to be perfect on the industry. You have to have a good enough industry and then a world-class management team. And we found that to be a really good formula for consistent returns. And it's way more fun because you're literally in a board meeting with someone that is on your side of the table, because you hired them and put them in. And so you're building the company together. And they're bringing a lot of similar values. And so it's been a real differentiator for us.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:32):
I have so many questions, but I'm going to cut it off there. We could do another episode going deep on all this. Graham, this was amazing. I think we're going to be helping a lot of people with what they want to do with their lives, and if nothing else, give them a little opportunity to break out of autopilot, at least for a little bit. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to maybe follow up, ask maybe some other questions that they are thinking as they hear this? And then how can listeners be useful to you?

Graham Weaver (01:10:56):
My website's grahamweaver.com, and I have a blog on there as well as a lot of videos and different things. And then on Instagram and TikTok, I'm grahamcweaver. And then on LinkedIn, I'm Graham Weaver. And on YouTube, I think I'm Graham C. Weaver. So Graham C. Weaver will pretty much get you on all those channels.

(01:11:16):
How can listeners be helpful? I would say I'd love to hear from you. So my best way to reach me is grahamweaverblog.com. And tell me what's on your mind. I may not respond 100%, but I will read all the emails. And then if you're interested, subscribe to my blog. So go to my website, grahamweaver.com, and I have a blog where I talk about a lot of the topics that we're talking about today.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:44):
Amazing. Graham, thank you so much for being here.

Graham Weaver (01:11:45):
Thank you, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:46):
Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at LennysPodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Joe Hudson (00:00:00):
A lot of the people in my circles may have spent hundreds of millions of dollars to try to arrange a life that they enjoy, and it doesn't fucking work.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:08):
What is holding people back?

Joe Hudson (00:00:09):
It's the fact that they have emotions that they are not sitting, feeling, or expressing. Whatever emotion that you're trying to avoid, you are inviting into your life in exactly the way that you're trying to avoid it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:20):
What the hell? Why would... Why does this... You have this really amazing insight. The voice in your head is often telling you bullshit.

Joe Hudson (00:00:27):
What most people try to do is they try to stop it, and that doesn't work very well. I think the best way to work with the voice in the head is to pick an experiment every day and respond to the voice in the head in a new way every day. One of my favorite responses is, "Oh, I see that you're really scared. Don't worry. I'm right here with you. I got you."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:43):
You're really big on helping people feel joy.

Joe Hudson (00:00:45):
It's such an important tool for productivity. If you say, I'm going to figure out how to enjoy what I do 10% more and you succeed, you are 10% more efficient. Not only that, usually, the quality is going to get a lot better too.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:57):
Is there just one thing you recommend that basically everyone try to experiment with?

Joe Hudson (00:01:02):
Yeah, it'll change your life dramatically really quickly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:09):
Today, my guest is Joe Hudson. Joe is one of the most sought-after executive coaches amongst tech leaders and has worked with folks from OpenAI, SpaceX, Apple, and other world-class companies. Joe's unique approach to coaching draws from his spiritual, psychological, and neurological practices. In his intimate courses that he runs a few times a year, and in his podcast, he helps people create the life that they want with enjoyment and ease. In our conversation, Joe shares the two things that he finds most often keep people stuck in their life and in their job, and how to work on getting these things unstuck. Why the critical voice in your head is always wrong, contradictory, and telling you bullshit, and how to build a different relationship with that voice.

(00:01:51):
Why falling in love with your emotions is so important and so powerful. Why you'd be better off focusing on what you want versus what you think you should do or think that you need to do, plus a bunch of amazing advice on how to make better decisions, help your team run more effectively, and why a seven-minute daily gratitude practice will change your life. This episode is basically for every single person. It will make your life and your work better. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing feature episodes and helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Joe Hudson. Joe, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Joe Hudson (00:02:34):
Oh, thanks. Good to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:36):
It's good to have you. I'm curious if there's any common themes that emerge often in terms of what is holding people back from success or just living the life that they want, especially ambitious tech people, which I know is a lot of the folks that you work with. Are there archetypes of like, here's the thing, often come up most often and hold people back?

Joe Hudson (00:02:57):
A nonspecific answer to that would be a critical voice in their head and a relationship with that critical voice that is not productive. Oftentimes, the critical voice in the head says, "You need me to be productive," but it's usually a huge detriment to being able to really be successful. Even if you are successful with a really critical voice in your head, you never get to enjoy it. You might have the money, but then you're like, "Oh, shit, I'm still miserable." Or, "I got the car, I got the house, I got the money, I got the successful career, and why am I unhappy all the time?" That would be, I would say one of the biggest ones. Another really big one that in a large category I would say is their relationship with emotions is all fakata. They are either trying to pretend they don't have them or compartmentalizing them or trying to manage them rather than harnessing them and falling in love with them. That would be a big place.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:06):
This episode is brought to you by BuildBetter.ai. Back in 2020 when AI was just a toy, BuildBetter bet that it could cut down on a product team's operational BS. Fast forward to today, 23,000 product teams use purpose-built AI in BuildBetter every day. First, BuildBetter uses custom models to turn unstructured data, like product and sales calls, support tickets, internal communications, and surveys into structured insights. It's like having a dedicated data science team. Second, BuildBetter runs those structured insights into workflows, like weekly reports about customer issues, context-aware PRDs and user research documents with citations. It even turns standups into action items that automatically get assigned and shared into your tools. Plus, with unlimited seat pricing on all plans, BuildBetter ensures everyone at your company has access to this knowledge. Truly, no data silos. In a world of AI demos over-promising and under-delivering, see why BuildBetter has a 93% subscription retention, yet a personalized demo and use code LENNY for $100 credit if you sign up now at buildBetter.ai/lenny.

(00:05:19):
This episode is brought to you by WorkOS. If you're building a SaaS app, at some point your customers will start asking for enterprise features like SAML authentication and SCIM provisioning. That's where WorkOS comes in, making it fast and painless to add enterprise features to your app. Their APIs are easy to understand so that you can ship quickly and get back to building other features. Today, hundreds of companies are already powered by WorkOS, including ones you probably know, like Vercel, Webflow and Loom. WorkOS also recently acquired Warrant, the fine-grained authorization service. Warrant's product is based on a groundbreaking authorization system called Zanzibar, which was originally designed for Google to power Google Docs and YouTube.

(00:06:05):
This enables fast authorization checks at enormous scale while maintaining a flexible model that can be adapted to even the most complex use cases. If you're currently looking to build role-based access control or other enterprise features like single sign-on SCIM or user management, you should consider WorkOS. It's a drop-in replacement for Auth0 and supports up to one million monthly active users for free. Check it out at workos.com to learn more. That's workos.com. These are awesome. Okay, so the voice in your head, you have this really amazing insight that I heard on one of your podcast episodes that the voice in your head is often wrong, often contradictory, often telling you, and that your advice is to learn how to work very differently with this voice in your head, which a lot of people just assume, oh, that's just like what it is. It's telling me how it's trying to help me, but it turns out it's not. Can you talk about that?

Joe Hudson (00:07:04):
I would say every single time the voice in your head is wrong. That critical voice in your head. To be specific, I'm talking about the voice in your head that is critical and repeats. There's the voice that says the same thing over and over again. You got to work out more, you got to work out more, you got to work out more. Whatever that is, it's always wrong, and that doesn't mean there isn't truth to what it says, but it's incorrect. As an example of this, you should work out more, you should work out more, you should work out more, or you need me or you just sit around on the couch as a great example of one. If I was your boss and I was sitting right next to you and I was criticizing you every couple of minutes, there's no way that you would say, "Wow, I really need you. I couldn't be productive without you." It's a bunch of crap. Or you should work out, you should work out.

(00:07:58):
I see the truth that I'd be healthier if I work out. I get that. Should I? Is it really a should? There's another question. What makes it not say, "Oh, hey, why don't you enjoy working out? How do we get you to enjoy working out? What would motivate you to work?" It's not doing any of that. It's, "You should work out, you should work out." It's never an accurate thing that's happening inside of your head. Until you can see through that, it's hard to work with the voice in your head. You can do it, but until you see through it. The second part that I would say is that if you want to work with the voice in your head a new way, what most people try to do is they try to stop it. They try to control the voice in the head, and that doesn't work very well. Instead, I say, change the way that you relate to the negative voice in your head.

(00:08:46):
Instead of being, "Okay, stop doing that, stop doing that." Say, "Oh, I see that you're really scared and I'm right here with you." Or sing a musical to it or just go, "Eh, I don't believe you." As a matter of fact, I think the best way to work with the voice in the head is to pick an experiment every day and respond to the voice in the head in a new way every day to have an experimental approach and say, "Oh, what's the relationship I want with this negative voice in my head?" Because right now, what it's typically doing for most people is that it says something and the person's like, "Yeah." Or, "Yeah, but I'm not going to do that, so fuck off." Or, "Yeah, that'll never work." Something like that is the response. What happens if you change the response to the voice in your head? That gives you a crap ton of freedom, and it's the beginning of what can be a state where the negative voice in the head disappears, which is really, really quite lovely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:43):
Oh, wow. I love this so much because there's so much that comes from this thing in your head just shooting you down or scaring you about stuff. It's so hard. I hear this, but it's so hard. Next time I'm, I don't know, giving a big presentation, I'm going to hear like, "Oh, something could go wrong. You could look really stupid or you could totally forget what you're saying." It's hard to really intellectualize, okay, I don't have to listen to this. Is there anything more there just how to turn that around and be like, just shut up?

Joe Hudson (00:10:11):
The shut up usually doesn't work. Experiment with all of it. To me, one of my favorite responses is, "Oh, I see that you're really scared. Don't worry. I'm right here with you. I got you." Because part of the deal is that the voice in the head has assumed the position that it's like the boss, but it's really a little kid having a temper tantrum. If you listen to it, if you just dictated everything it said, it sounds like usually like a five-year-old having a temper tantrum, or it sounds like the way your mom used to chastise you or the way your dad used to chastise you or whatever, a teacher. It isn't, it's not logical, it's not thoughtful, it's typically not thoughtful, it's usually abusive. It's a lot of fear. It's one of my favorites, one of my favorite ways to respond.

(00:11:06):
I've tried, I mean, gosh, dozens of ways, and there's a lot of neat effective ways. I particularly think it's really good to set up a series of experiments rather than just take the one that I have because the experimental mindset means that you can never really fail. Typically, somebody, like worse with the voice in the head, they fail and they go, "Ah, fuck it." Because we have this part of our brain called the habenula, and the habenula basically is the part of our brain that is trying to teach us not to fail over and over again. It's the thing that when you go on a diet or you go to work out and then you don't do it one day and you say, "Ah, fuck it, I messed up," and then you don't try anymore or you don't try for a couple of weeks or whatever, that's basically what's happening in that part of the brain.

(00:11:48):
If you do it as an experimental thing, then you can't lose, you're just learning about yourself. You're learning about the voice in your head. The way I like thinking about that is people are like, "I understand the problem, but I don't have a solution." I'm always like, "If you understood the problem, there would be no question about the solution." If you fully understand the problem, you know the solution. All you have to do is really fully understand the voice in your head through a series of experiments and the whole thing goes away.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:16):
The advice here is next time you're hearing something in your head that you don't think is going to be helpful to you is try to respond to it in a different way from what you've been doing.

Joe Hudson (00:12:25):
I would be even more subtle than that, which is I really wouldn't care if you think it's helpful to you or not. I would just experiment with different ways of interacting with it. I wouldn't even do it as a goal of, okay, I want the voice in the head to be nicer to me. I would do it with the goal of just, hey, how do I learn? How do I understand this thing? It's a far more productive self-development. Generally, it's far more productive to learn, say about the river valley by walking through it, putting your feet in the river, going down the river with a canoe, smelling the soil, looking at the plants, than it is to say, "Okay, I am going to dam this river valley and try to..." You're not going to understand it the same way. You're going to make some mistakes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:18):
Amazing. The second bucket that you shared of what you find most often is the root of what's holding people back is the way you described is your relationship with your emotions, which I don't think a lot of people would think of as the thing that's holding them back. Can you talk a bit more about what that looks like?

Joe Hudson (00:13:31):
Yeah, a great way to explain it. For the logical folks, so in 2012 or so, there was a person who wrote a book called Descartes' Error, and in Descartes' Error, the whole idea is that I think therefore I am, and this person's like, "Yeah, that's the error." It's a neuroscientist who looked at people who had damage in the emotional center of their brain, and they just basically ceased to be able to make decisions. Their IQ would stay the same, but it would take them half an hour to decide where to have lunch or decide what color pen to use. It would take hours and hours to make simple decisions, so their IQ would stay high, but their entire life would completely fall apart. What it tells us, and this is not exact, I'm paraphrasing for a podcast, but we make decisions in the emotional center of our brain. We use logic to try to figure out how we're going to feel.

(00:14:23):
You can see this just by asking yourself the question, how many decisions have you made to feel like a success or to not feel like a failure or to feel happier, to not feel trapped? There's these huge buckets of emotions that we are trying to feel and not feel, and we're making decisions based on those. There's no such thing as a logical decision. That idea is like, I'm just going to be logical and just make a logical decision, it doesn't. Neurologically, it's just untrue. If you learn to fall in love with all of your emotions, then solution sets become available that you didn't have before. If you are like, "Oh, I can't feel like a failure." Well, then you're probably not going to take certain risks. If you are, "Oh, I want to feel loved and I can't feel unliked by people." Well, then you're not going to say your truth, and then the world is going to not give you the things that are truthful to you.

(00:15:20):
I go into my boss, I say my truth, I get fired. Okay, I get fired, but then probably my next boss, I say my truth, I'm going to find a location where my truth is and how I want to be in the world is going to be acceptable. If I don't do that, if I'm constantly managing myself, then I'm not going to have that reality. It's really important, just for the decision-making part, how important emotions are to be able to fall in love with each of the emotional experiences so you're not making decisions based on your inability to feel stuff. That's like one, there's literally a thousand others. Most people, they feel stuck. They can have a big emotional release and they don't feel stuck anymore. When people feel overwhelmed, it's usually not the amount of crap that they have going on in their life. It's the fact that they have emotions that they are not sitting, feeling or expressing. That's another huge chunk of stuff.

(00:16:11):
Depression is usually unmoved anger, is another example. There's so many levels in which people not able to feel really limits their life. Just one that's like almost everybody can relate to is feeling excitement is something that most people can only do for about 10 to 20 seconds. Most people aren't like, "Oh, I'm excited." If you walked into a Denny's and there was this person, a 60-year-old man and just excited and was excited for 10 minutes, you'd be like, "What's wrong with this person?" When we're excited, it's contagious. I walk into a meeting and I'm excited, probably other people are going to walk out excited. We're limiting just our ability to create collaboration by the fact that we're limited by our excitement. I could go on forever. There's so many experiences like this.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:06):
What I'm hearing is the core issues, we're not able to feel our emotion, but there's something there, like we are angry or scared. Because we can't feel it, we just can't break through that.

Joe Hudson (00:17:17):
Not quite. If you have somebody who's experienced a lot of emotional abuse in their life, then they might not be able to feel the emotions that they're having, and particularly where you experienced the emotional abuse. That might be the case for them. For instance, if you had physical abuse and I put a quarter in one of your hands and a key in another one of your hands without telling you which was which, you wouldn't be able to tell me if you'd suffered enough physical abuse because you've literally cut that sensation off. Similarly, people who've experienced emotional abuse can often not tell what the emotions are. Now, emotional abuse is, it's a big word. Generally, people don't even like equating the two. Just to agree on terms here, when I say emotional abuse, I mean you were told that you weren't allowed to have a certain emotion. That's what I mean by emotional abuse.

(00:18:08):
Maybe you got fed every time you got angry or you got your love removed, or you got punished, or maybe every time you cried, you were made fun of. My particular background was that. It's when you weren't allowed to feel certain emotions, you were told to cut it off because it wasn't going to be safe because you're either going to get bribed out of it or punished out of it, or loved removed because of it or made fun of or whatever it is. That might be a step that one has to take, but the place you want to get to is where the emotions are fluid, where it just moves right through you. It doesn't mean that you lose control. As a matter of fact, losing control means that there's still resistance in it.

(00:18:53):
The way I think about this is that emotions are like a tube, let's say, and there's water moving through the tube. You kink a tube one way, the water comes out a little funny. Kink the tube the other way, it comes a little funny. Let's say you have anger and that's the tube of, and you kink it one way and it's like, "You son of a bitch. You blah, blah, blah, blah, blah." You kink get another way and it's like, "Nice dress. You crank it another way and it's guilt. It's like, "Why would you ever do that to me?" Then if it's unkinked, then it's like Gandhi or Martin Luther king. It's this very loving boundary that's set. It's this clarity of purpose. That's how I think about it. The idea is to get to fluidity, to unkink the hose so that all of the emotional experiences come out with love.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:44):
I did a meditation retreat, a 10-day silent meditation retreat, which I know is a big part of your practice and something that led to the work you do now. A term that's coming up for me is non-judgmental awareness. Basically, experiencing the thing you're feeling and just letting it go, not attaching to it, not judging it. Is that along the lines of stuff you'd recommend?

Joe Hudson (00:20:03):
Yeah, it's definitely a huge part of it. There's a couple of things that I noticed get in the way, or the translation gets in the way there. One is it's like, think about emotions as like kids in your house. If a kid came into your house and you're like, "I will be non-judgmentally aware of you." You're probably going to get a very different response from the kid than if you're like, "Oh, I'm so excited to see you. I welcome you in my house." The emotions feel different if you're like, "I am non-judgmentally aware of this emotion," or, "Oh, cool. Oh cool, I'm sad. This is fantastic." If you have that welcoming invitation. One of the quotes that I'm most famous for is joy is the matriarch of a family of emotions and she won't come into a house where her children aren't welcome. A very joyful life is a life where all the other emotions are deeply welcomed, not accepted, not non-judgmentally aware of. I think those are really great steps, don't get me wrong. If you can be in non-judgmental awareness of an emotion, fantastic.

(00:21:14):
The other thing that's a little bit different about what you said is that emotions do need to be felt. If you stop feeling an emotion, you have to constrict your muscles. I can watch somebody come in, come up for one of my coaching rapid coaching sessions. By the crease in their eyebrow, I can know that there's repressed anger. By the hunch in their shoulders, I can tell you about the critical parent that they had. The body takes on a shape that's based on the emotions that you've been taught to hold. You don't just by sitting there, well, it's not entirely true, if you just sit there and feel them in that way without the full expression, they will move eventually, but it might take a couple of decades. You can actually just move them. You can actually make the sound, move your body. All mammals do it. Like mammals releasing fear, they all shake. It's part of how we exist. That's also a really big part of emotional fluidity. It's not just being still and feeling them, it's letting the muscles move, making the sounds.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:22):
For someone that wants to get better at the skill of feeling emotions, being more in touch with emotions, helping their emotions be more fluid. I know this is a lifelong practice and not something you would just hear on a podcast, okay, I've installed this. Is there anything tactically you can recommend to a listener of just like, here's something you could do this week that'll help you, along these lines?

Joe Hudson (00:22:40):
We have a free audio on our website called Emotional Inquiry, and that would be the easiest way that I would, that's a really good entry level first step into emotional fluidity. The bigger problem is that every step has a different thing. If you're in the not aware of emotions, then that step may not be the right step for you. Though, if you are aware two or three emotions and you can do emotional inquiry, usually, it'll open up a lot of the other ones. There might be a point where you really need expression, and so emotional inquiry is not going to work. Just generally, the emotional inquiry practice is a really good one. What it is, is imagine you're a little kid and you pick up a toad.

(00:23:28):
You're going to pick it up, you're going to look at it, you're going to feel it, you're going to smell it. Some little kids are even going to lick it a little bit. They're going to really want to explore this toad, and that's what emotional inquiry is, is a somatic mental experiencing of an emotional experience in your body and what is it like and what happens when you welcome it. What happens when you love it. What happens when you resist it. It's a series of experiments that you're playing with the emotion and observations and felt sense of the emotion, and that I find to be incredibly, incredibly useful for people.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:05):
Just getting very curious.

Joe Hudson (00:24:06):
Yeah, a lot of wonder.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:09):
By the way, the quote you shared about joy being the matriarchy of all the other emotions, imagine people have said this, but inside out too, I think is exactly a representation of what you're talking about, where joy is actually, she's like the protagonist almost. I don't know if you've seen it yet.

Joe Hudson (00:24:25):
I think I've heard about this. I haven't watched it, but I think where you think it's all about being happy and you find out that you have to accept everything for happiness to really work, kind of.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:34):
Exactly.

Joe Hudson (00:24:35):
Yeah, I have heard about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:36):
Anxiety takes over, and then things don't go well. Something else that I've noticed listening to a bunch of your conversations, you do these lightning round coaching sessions with people, and so I listen to a bunch of them. Something that was really interesting to me is that a lot of people come to you and they're like, "Hey, I have this problem. I can't do this hard thing I know I need to do." Or, "I have imposter syndrome just keeping me from doing this thing I need to do." you're often like, "No, that's not actually what's going on here. I can see that's not a problem for you. It's really this other thing." Is that super common where people think they need to work on this one thing, and it turns out that's not at all, they're actually okay at that and something totally else?

Joe Hudson (00:25:13):
I'd maybe put it a little bit differently. They're living in a story that describes an old version of themselves or they don't see themselves clearly enough to be able to see the whole issue, and so they're just kind of living with a story that's in the past. That's a really common thing. Oftentimes, if I do that in a coaching session, typically it's because they're showing me right there that it's not true. Somebody's like, "I'm so scared, I can't do anything." I'm like, "You just got in front of a hundred people to ask me a question. Clearly, you're not so scared that you can't do anything, so I'm not buying it." I don't do it quite like that, I do it with a lot more love than that.

(00:25:54):
Oftentimes, I see that people's stories are a culprit, like how they describe themselves. A great way that you can really see this in folks is that nine out of 10 times that you compliment somebody, I really appreciate this thing about you, they're going to go, "Nah." Or, "Well, my sister is even more." Or, "If you knew me." They're going to do some sort of version like that. It basically is one of the indicators that they can't actually feel who they are. They would rather, in effect, call you a liar. You're lying to me or you're wrong than they would to actually accept the experience of being seen in that way. It does a couple of things. One of the things it does is it stops people from seeing themselves clearly. The other thing it does is it makes people forever want to be seen and complimented and acknowledged and validated because they're getting the food, but they can't digest it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:59):
Do you have any advice other than working with you and you telling them, "Hey, here's actually going on," for someone to like, okay, maybe revisit, maybe this isn't actually a problem to see what's actually going on?

Joe Hudson (00:27:09):
We have a set of five kind of what we think are foundational tools for transformation, and we do these free workshops on them, and one of them is question the assumption. That's a really great way to have people start to see through their stories. At the beginning, I said, "Nothing in the critical voice in your head says is true." This is how it applies, so typically, there's an assumption that you have to make for the problem to be real. If somebody says to you, for instance, if somebody comes to me and says, "I am an asshole to my girlfriend." That's their problem. One, you have to assume that the girlfriend doesn't want you to be an asshole, as an example. Two, you have to assume that you know what being an asshole actually is. It's not just what your mom told you an asshole was.

(00:28:04):
Three, there's some validation, there's another assumption, there's some clear thing that says this in the world. Everyone's like, that's an asshole and that's not, rather than what actually happens in the world, which is 50% of the people think that this person is an asshole and 50% think they're a hero. It's something like that. Also, another assumption there is that the problem is that you're an asshole, instead of that you're resisting the fact that you are an asshole, and therefore, it comes out sideways instead of really clear. There's so many assumptions in there. If you see through those assumptions, usually the problem starts fading away.

(00:28:40):
It's like, "Oh, okay, what do I mean by asshole, exactly? How do I define that?" It seems like a silly thing when I am using this example of asshole. I remember this moment in my own development, I was in Bodega Bay, out of all places, and this very good friend of mine at the time was like, "Joe, you're an asshole." I was like, "No, I'm not." He's like, "Why resist it? Just fall in love with the fact that you're an asshole. Just allow yourself to be an asshole for just a minute, just one minute." I stopped, and I thought of like, I was doing venture capital at the time, and I could think of all the things that I had done that somebody would call an asshole, and all the ways in which I was unattuned to people, and I could, "Oh, yeah, okay, I can totally see that I'm an asshole."

(00:29:32):
In that scene, not only in the scene of it, but as the shame fell away, oh, this is nothing I have to defend. This isn't something that I'm a bad person because of, I don't need to be ashamed of it. This is just some actions that I took. As that faded away, then and then over the next couple weeks, lo and behold, I became less of an asshole. It's a strange thing when you really grok that, that it's often shame that holds bad habits in place. Is it a problem that I'm an asshole, or is the problem that I'm ashamed of being an asshole? Is the problem that you're a smoker, is the problem that you're ashamed of being a smoker? Typically, there's so many assumptions built into everything that we call a problem, and if we look through those assumptions, the problems disappear. As in this case, it disappeared for me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:25):
Wow, okay. There's a lot there. It connects to something I know you recently talked about, which is the emotion we want to avoid is the thing we end up experiencing a lot by trying to avoid it. What's going on there?

Joe Hudson (00:30:46):
Since I'm coach executives, let's do an executive example, so conflict avoidant executive. I don't want to feel the out of control in this that I do when people argue. I don't want to feel that level of out of control, so I am going to be conflict avoidant. I'm going to avoid conflict. Every way that we go to avoid a feeling, becomes the way that, that feeling gets invited towards us. We all know what it's like to work for a conflict-avoidant CEO or a boss, people get really fucking upset. Eventually, people get really upset. Decisions aren't being made. There's all this tension. It's never relieved.

(00:31:30):
Then wow, sure enough, the conflict-avoidant CEO is dealing with a whole organization that's tense and they feel completely out of control and the fact that they can't do anything about, so that's an example. Or when I was younger, it was emotional abandonment. My dad was an alcoholic, and I didn't want to feel that emotional abandonment again, and so I would get really hard when I felt like people were leaving me, I'd be like, "What the dah, dah, dah, dah, dah?" Which of course, made them abandon me quicker, or I would try to caretaker people, which would build resentment, which would make people abandon me. Whatever emotion that you're trying to avoid, you are inviting into your life in exactly the way that you're trying to avoid it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:14):
What the hell? Why does this happen?

Joe Hudson (00:32:14):
That doesn't sound right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:14):
This is counterproductive.

Joe Hudson (00:32:20):
It is counterproductive. I think that the really cool thing about it is you can look at any issue that you're having in your life, so you can say, oh, one of the problems that I have in my life is that I am constantly in an argument with my girlfriend or boyfriend, let's say. What is the thing that you don't want to feel in that argument? I don't want to feel ashamed. You're getting in arguments because you don't want to feel ashamed, and that's making you feel more ashamed. What am I doing at that first time to not feel ashamed? I'm defending myself. Oh, and me defending myself is actually the thing that's starting the fight. You can backward engineer it to, oh, I don't want to feel ashamed, therefore I'm going to defend myself, which creates the fight, which makes me feel more ashamed.

(00:33:10):
Any problem that you're having, you can actually backwards engineer it and see, oh, I can solve that problem by just being okay with that feeling. God damn it, you didn't take out the trash. Oh, that's a shame I don't want to feel. I'm not going to defend myself. I'm going to feel that shame. Oh, yeah, then maybe I'm going to say I'm sorry I didn't take out the trash, or I'm going to say, I don't feel ashamed, I don't want to take out the trash. I have to defend myself to get in the fight, and then I'm going to feel ashamed. You can reverse engineer all your problems this way. It's like it's such a cool hack, but it's very hard. For somehow or another, it's very simple, but very hard for people to utilize.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:53):
This is amazing. The advice is basically feel the thing and just come to terms with this is the emotion I'm feeling, and maybe, like an example, the asshole. Well, maybe I'm an asshole.

Joe Hudson (00:34:03):
It's what's required for you to love and accept yourself would be, and love and accept the emotion that you're having in the moment instead of resist it. There's that saying, what we resist persists. How do you fall in love with and stop resisting the reality on the ground? In doing so, it changes the reality on the ground.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:30):
In this argument with your supposed girlfriend, say you disagree about her perspective on what's going on. I guess that's not the root issue here. It's your feeling, it's not her perception.

Joe Hudson (00:34:41):
Hey, sweetheart, I really hear you want me to take out the trash, and that's not my truth. That's going to be very different than defending that shame. The defending the shame is going to be like, no, it's not my job to take out the chat. You're trying not to feel the experience, which is what's going to do it. The response isn't the important thing. It's really where the response comes from. It's so interesting because people are taught constantly, this is something we teach in the connection courses that it's really not about the conversation, it's about where you're at in the conversation. For instance, when my friend said to me, "Hey, you're a dick." Here's what he didn't do, he's like, he didn't go, "You're a dick. You asshole. You're being an asshole. You're being a dick. Fucking stop it." He was like, "Eh, you're a dick, so what? What's the problem?" He was coming from a place of love for me, and so I could not be defended in my response to him. It's really where you come from.

(00:35:49):
It's the emotionally where you come from, that's the important part. Not as much what you say. You can see this, a perfect example of this is, this happens all the time in my work. Let's say there's a person who has a CEO and the person is scared of their CEO. Let's say this is the CMO, and they're, "I'm scared of the CEO. I can't say my truth. They're always getting upset. They're going to yell, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah." I'll say, yeah, there's one person who says it though. The answer is always yes. That CEO has one person who they don't yell at, who they listen to, who they'll take the objection from, that they don't get angry with. It's because there's somebody who doesn't approach them in fear. It's because somebody approaches them a different way. Not with judgment, but like, "Hey, look, this is what we have to pay attention to." It's really about how you're coming at it and not what you're saying typically.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:52):
This episode is brought to you by Coda. I use Coda every day to coordinate my podcasting and newsletter workflows. From collecting questions for guests to storing all my research to managing my newsletter content calendar, Coda is my go-to app and has been for years. Coda combines the best of documents, spreadsheets, and apps to help me get more done, and Coda can help your team to stay aligned and ship faster by managing your planning cycle in just one location, set and measure OKRs with full visibility across teams and stakeholders, map dependencies, create progress visualizations, and identify risk areas.

(00:37:27):
You can also access hundreds of pressure-tested templates for everything from roadmap strategy to final decision-making frameworks. See for yourself why companies like DoorDash, Figma, and Qualtrics run on Coda. Take advantage of this special limited time offer just for startups. Head over to coda.io/lenny and sign up to get six free months of the team plan. That's coda.io/lenny to sign up and get six months of the team plan. Coda.io/lenny. This is amazing, Joe. I'm very happy with what advice we've already shared and there's more I want to tap into.

Joe Hudson (00:38:04):
You keep using the word advice, and I just want to, so for anybody who's listening, do not take my advice. Do not, do not, do not. Test it. Experiment. Set up an experiment, try it out. See if it's true for you. It's one, I just made this shit up. Somebody else could make up something different. It's like Jeff Bezos made up Amazon. We make stuff up, but we're humans. Two, is if you instead of just listen to it as a soundbite, if you actually do it and make an experiment out of it, you get to learn. It's in your bones. You get to see what's actually real for you. What's real for you in this moment might not be real for you what's in the next moment. For instance, I could give the advice that says, hey, you can't even control your thoughts.

(00:38:55):
You can't even decide what thought you are going to have next is, it's just going to fucking happen. you're completely out of control, and so it's all a gift. Can you look at life as all a gift? Wow, that could be really useful for one person, but the other person, they feel so disempowered that they're like, "I can't even control my own thoughts. Man, I am totally trapped." They might really need at that moment to learn that, "Oh, I have empowerment, I have choice." That's the advice that they need to hear. Do the experiment, find out what's true for you in this moment. If there's a piece of advice, that's the one I want to give.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:40):
let's share more experiments people can run. Another is this thread that I feel comes up a lot in your work is you're just really big on helping people feel joy. Feels like that's the core of what you're trying to help people is feel more joy. Why is that so important? Why is joy so important, so powerful?

Joe Hudson (00:39:57):
I definitely would not want anyone to feel joy. I wouldn't want to push somebody into or like, "Hey, you should feel joy." What I would say that's a close cousin to that is that enjoyment is such an important tool for productivity. Enjoyment is such an important tool for living a meaningful life. Enjoyment is an amazing tool. As an example, let's say you drive a Ferrari, you're not going to say, hey, that's an efficient car. That's a super-efficient car. You're going to say, no, that's a fast car. Somehow in our own lives, if we get something done quickly, we're efficient, but that's not efficient. You can go and get something done quickly and then you're so exhausted. What's efficient is if at the end of whatever you did, you feel like you have more energy, like you're stoked, like, oh, I can't wait to do this again tomorrow. That's efficiency, is that you've actually used the least amount of energy to get something done. If you say, oh, I'm going to figure out how to enjoy what I do 10% more and you succeed, you are 10% more efficient.

(00:41:13):
Not only that, usually, the quality is going to get a lot better too. If you enjoy running, you're probably going to run more than if you don't enjoy running. If you enjoy doing a podcast, you're probably going to make a better podcast and you're going to do it for longer if you enjoy doing it. There's something really, really important about enjoyment because it's not only a measure of efficiency, it also has a strong correlation with hire in most things has a strong correlation with how long you're going to do it, your staying power, the quality of what you're going to do, all of that. That's one of the reasons that I think enjoyment is really great. The other thing is that if you enjoy things, they feel different. I think one of the things that people do is they say this, they say, "I want to enjoy my life more, so I'm going to do less things, take out the trash, and I'm going to do more things like go on vacation."

(00:42:14):
That's not how enjoyment works. You can enjoy taking out the trash or you can hate taking out the trash. That's a choice. Right now, somebody listening to this as an experiment that they can run is like, okay, you're going to stay listening to this for the next minute. How do you enjoy it 10% more? Typically, what will happen is somebody will take a deeper breath, they'll settle into their body a little bit more, they'll relax a little bit more. They might physically get more comfortable. There's a thousand things that they might do to just enjoy the experience 10% more. That, and in that, they're becoming more efficient in that the quality is getting better in that they're hearing what I'm saying differently. It's just a really powerful tool. What I know the problem to be is that some people will go, "Okay, now I have to enjoy life. I'm going to disregard all these negative emotions so that I'm in enjoyment." That doesn't work. It's horrendous. It's just a recipe for shit stew.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:18):
Along these lines, how much of the work is learning to enjoy the thing you're doing more versus finding something that you innately enjoy? Which one is more powerful? I guess, which do you point people to? Which experiments do you find people should run more?

Joe Hudson (00:43:31):
In our society, typically, it's how to enjoy what you're doing more. What happens typically is that if you find a way to enjoy the thing that you're doing more, you're more likely to do the things that you enjoy. It's just an order of operations thing. As compared to there's people, a lot of the people in my circles because of who I coach and everything, they're billionaires and they have spent hundreds of millions of dollars to try to arrange life that they enjoy and it doesn't fucking work. They actually have more power to make everything that they're doing exactly what they want to do, but that doesn't work. Flying the jet or buying the island or blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, doesn't do it.

(00:44:25):
Whereas if you really learn to enjoy what's in front of you, all of a sudden, one thing that happens is that you're not as scared of enjoyment. You start saying, "Oh, wow, enjoyment makes me really effective, and so I'm want to do the things that I enjoy." You're more likely to do the things that you enjoy. Instead of having this story, I have to do X, Y, and Z so that at one point in the future, I can do what I enjoy. It's just an order of operations things. If you learn to enjoy the things that you're doing, you're going to naturally start doing the things you enjoy. If you only do the things you enjoy, you will not learn how to enjoy what you're doing very well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:03):
You show this tip of how can I enjoy this 10% more? Just ask yourself, how can I enjoy this 10% more?

Joe Hudson (00:45:09):
Yes, right now.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:10):
Is there anything else that you find helpful for helping? Yeah, right now, how can I enjoy this 10% right now?

Joe Hudson (00:45:14):
That's right. It's not about changing anything in the external world.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:19):
Got it. Internally, what can I do? What can I change about the way I'm experiencing this?

Joe Hudson (00:45:23):
Yeah. I like to ask it as how do you enjoy it 10% more, because if it's what can I change, then there's trying, trying is usually not more enjoyment. It's actually usually letting go of trying that creates more enjoyment. The phrasing can really make or break the question.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:41):
Enjoy it 10% more. Say someone's sitting in a boring meeting that's really sucking their soul, look, they should ask themselves this question, how can I enjoy this 10% more?

Joe Hudson (00:45:51):
Well, should, they can. They get to, it's a great experiment.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:54):
It's an experiment. Okay, perfect.

Joe Hudson (00:45:58):
The reason I do the should thing is that as soon as you say you should and then you don't then you can fail. If you fail, then you're less likely to try it again. That's why the should, it ends up usually in stagnation. If you think about the way it feels in your body when you say, I should do something, and there's a stagnation, there's a, hmm. whereas if you say something like, oh, I want to do it, or here's an experiment I can do, or here's what I enjoy, there's less stagnation, there's more movement.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:31):
This touches on something else that you talk a lot about, and we've been circling around this idea of authenticity versus improvement, where you help people realize that you are good as you are, you don't need to necessarily improve. We've talked a lot about these sorts of things already, but just what else can you share there just how to help people learn this?

Joe Hudson (00:46:49):
My favorite metaphor on this one is at what time in the journey of an oak tree is it perfect? Is it when it's an acorn, when it's sprout, when it's 20 years old, 40 years old, 150 years old, 200 years old, depending on the oak tree? Now, I'm perfect. The idea is ridiculous. It's a similar thing for us. The idea that I need to improve myself, it really disturbs the natural process that's at hand, which is we evolve. We as human beings evolve. If it's like, oh, I'm evolving and I can enjoy it, and I'm acting from my authenticity, then that has a lot of alacrity. That moves quick. If it's I need to improve, there's something wrong with me, I need to improve, I should do it, that all goes really fucking slow. Because there's a lot of emotional stagnation in that.

(00:47:55):
There's a lot of should shame. There's a lot of stagnation in that, and so you don't actually get that natural flow of life. The Taoist talk about this as kind of like a river always finds its way, it just always goes in that direction. We are naturally evolving. That is our nature. Then to put a whole bunch of shoulds and shits in the way just slows the process down. The other thing about authenticity that I think is really important too, is that if you are one of the few people, I'd say 10, 15%, who can say, I should be this way, this way, and this way, and then you do it, which is very few people can actually do that. What most people do is they say, I should do this, should do that, should do that, and then a decade later, they're still saying they should do the same things. Let's say you're one of those really successful people, then you have a life for not you. Then you have a life of who you think you should be, not for who you actually are.

(00:49:02):
If you move from authenticity, naturally, certain things aren't going to work, certain things are going to work. Certain people are going to work, certain people aren't going to work. Certain jobs are going to work. The ones that you end up with over time are going to be the ones that are right for you, not right, for who you think you should be. The most obvious of this is you meet a woman and you're like, oh, this is how I should be for them to love me, and you just do it. You just do everything that you think you should do, and then you get married, and then they love not you, they love who you think you should be. They don't love who you are. What kind of marriage is that? As opposed to, this is who I am and I'm going to be as genuine. I'm going to show you all my parts. I'm going to be as genuine as I can with you. Then if you do get married, you're married to the right person, you're married to the person who actually sees all that and loves that and wants that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:01):
How do you hold that idea with I also want to get better, I want to develop myself, I want to feel my emotions more, those sorts of things?

Joe Hudson (00:50:10):
I love that I want to, the better part is kind of just, gets a little bit in the way. We all want to, like a little kid wants to run faster. They might want to be a better runner, but the part that they missed, the reason that they develop so fucking quickly is because they don't think they're going to be a better person if they run faster. The idea is like, yeah, you have this natural want, that want is the thing that moves evolution. A plant is like, "Oh, there's sun. I want to move in that direction." As compared to I should. Both of them are human concepts, but the want, it's the thing that what allows us to know that's our evolutionary path. Oh, I have this want to be closer to people. Oh, I have this want for great sex. Oh, I have this want for being able to have a business that supports me.

(00:51:07):
These are great wants, and they show where the growth is occurring or wants to occur. It's like that's our natural evolution. It's great. What makes it need to be better? I want to be better. It just slows it down instead of, it's like saying that what I am is broken and therefore, the whole thing slows down. We try to word everything as more in the experimental framework, but also, we try to word everything as self-awareness, self-experimentation, self-discovery, instead of self-improvement. Because if you understand the problem, then the problem goes away. Just explore it. Just understand it as compared to making a list of things that you should do to get better, that you will eventually fail and then you'll just be stuck in this should loop where you beat yourself up and where most people hang out a lot.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:10):
The experiment here that I'm taking away is think more about your want versus the should, and then things you think you need is okay.

Joe Hudson (00:52:20):
Because typically, when you say, I want to improve, it means the subtext in that is once I do X, Y, and Z, then I'm lovable. Once I do X, Y and Z, then I'm okay. Once I do X, Y and Z, I'll be worthy. Once I do X, Y and Z, I'll be enlightened, whatever the fuck, the thing is. That's just not how it works. What works is the person who loves themselves has loving relationships. It's not the person who's done X, Y, and Z so that they can be lovable, has loving relationships. The people who do X, Y and Z, so they can be lovable have relationships where people are critical and constantly telling them that they have to be better.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:01):
Coming back, you just said this interesting quote that you also shared at the beginning. This idea, once we understand the problem, it goes away.

Joe Hudson (00:53:06):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:07):
Let's make sure people understand what that means. Is it related to this idea once you feel like I'm an asshole, okay, and then like, oh, okay, and then it starts to kind of away, is that the core?

Joe Hudson (00:53:15):
I just mean practically. It's like, can you really fully understand a problem if you don't understand the solution to it? There's a principle, and I can't remember the name of it, like it's Strickland principle or something. It's something that this CFO that I used to work with said, and he would say, "Problems get solved if you spend time on them. If you just give enough attention to a problem, the problem will solve." That's the way it works in business. An unsolvable problem, obviously, it's not going to work that way. The reason that, that works is because the more you spend time on a problem, the more you understand it.

(00:53:58):
Another one, love him or hate him, one of the things that Elon Musk has said that I found it very valuable in my time, is that if you really want to interview somebody and they claim that they've done something, you ask them six levels down. You improved sales. How did you do that, exactly? Well, we improved the pipeline. How'd you do that, exactly? Oh, well, we made the pipeline more measurable by having things that could be. How did you know? What were the seven stages of the pipeline and what made you pick them? You go six levels down and you can really understand if somebody was the person who solved the problem or if they're the person who is claiming that they solved the problem. It's the same thing.

(00:54:47):
If we just explore a problem enough, the solution is apparent. If we understand the problem enough, the solution is apparent. Typically, if we come to a problem with a kid's mind, wonder, if we come to it, what could I learn here? What's exciting? What are the experiments I can run? Then typically, that's the most efficient way, enjoyable way to solve a problem as compared to, I have to get to this problem by this time and we're going to do it this way. Usually, that doesn't work. I could geek out on why that lets democracies win over autocracies because they're far more experimental by nature, and it's not one person saying how things are going, but just generally, just we're more efficient when we're exploring. We're more efficient when we're exploring ourselves and understanding ourselves and trying to improve ourselves.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:46):
There's a couple of more experiments I want to help people try to run. One is you have some really good advice around decision-making and how emotions and getting better at understanding and working with your emotions helps you make better decisions. Can you talk about that?

Joe Hudson (00:55:59):
That's similar to what I said before, which is if you learn to fall in love with the emotional experiences, then you have more solution sets. Let's say I want to have all human beings, I want to be a part of a great team. Nobody has ever raised their hand and said, "I'd like to be a part of a team." Yet, grand majority of people at their work right now have shitty teams or not A teams, not great teams, even though nobody wants that. If one of the things you're unwilling to feel is that conflict, that tension, as we talked about if you're conflict avoidant, you're not going to be able to make an A team because there's nothing that is alive doesn't require tension. A cell requires tension. Breathing requires tension. Playing pickleball requires tension. A good team requires tension. If you're going to avoid that experience, you're not going to be as easily, if at all, be able to create a quality team.

(00:57:05):
To be able to look forward to any emotional experience, creates more and more solution sets for more and more optionality. In creating a great team, for instance, you need to be good with people hating you. You need to be good with drawing boundaries and having people upset. You need to be able to have high expectations. You have to be okay with somebody being disappointed with themselves. You have to be okay being disappointed with yourself. All these emotional experiences have to be available to you if you're going to find the solutions to make an A quality team. The more you can fall in love with each emotional experience, the more you have and then the clearer the decision making gets. That's one thing for making great decisions. The other one that I find really, really useful and very hard to execute on until you really understand it is creating a set of principles to live by.

(00:58:06):
We all have a set of principles to live by that we're doing it. For a lot of people, those principles are what do I have to do to get likes on Facebook? I'm going to make a decision based on getting likes on Facebook. I'm going to make decisions based on whatever it is. Pretending that I want to get wealthy or trying to get wealthy or there's a series of things. If you really take a look at what it is you're making your decisions on and then really think about, well, what would be the five or six things that if I made decisions with these principles, I'm guaranteed success? Then experiment with them and then refine those principles and then experiment with them. Then there'll be these moments where you don't want to do it, but those are your principles, so you're going to go and do it.

(00:59:03):
As an example for this, one of the principles that I live by is embrace intensity. It's not create intensity, it's embrace intensity. It means that right now, any moment in my body, for instance, there's going to be a sensation that's more intense. How do I welcome that sensation? At any moment in running my business, there's going to be something that we don't want to talk about. How do we lean in and talk about that? We start all of our meetings with what are you scared to say in our business? What are you scared to say? Not all of our meetings, but some of our meetings are started with what are you scared to say? Because we want to embrace that intensity because we know that if we lean into the thing that we're trying to avoid, our life is going to get better, our business is going to get better.

(00:59:57):
If you can see what those principles are for you, and then run experiments to see if they work and then refine them every once in a while. Because of that embrace intensity, if somebody comes to me and says, "You're fucking up this business. You're doing it all wrong." I don't have to think about what I'm going to do. I'm like, "Oh, cool. Tell me what I'm missing." It's going to be immediate because I live this way. Maybe I don't want to hear it. Maybe I'm having a bad day. Whatever it is. Maybe I'll say, "Hey, I want hear you give me, I'm not able to, give me a day and I'll come back to you." all of a sudden, my decisions get made automatically if I live by a set of principles and very effective, I find very effective living by a set of principles

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:51):
For someone that wants to create their own set of principles. Is there a guide you have? Is there any advice for how to actually go about starting this list, putting it together?

Joe Hudson (01:00:58):
We have a decisions course, which is a large part of it is about how to do that. It's a difficult one to explain because there's a lot of nuance in it. Just as for instance, one of the nuances is defining the principles, not just by what it is, but what it isn't is a really significant, very minor thing, but it ends up being incredibly major. If you're going to do your set of principles and you want to do them on your own, the main thing I would say is keep it to five. I wouldn't even do six. I don't do six, but I keep it to five. I would test each one of them for five days.

(01:01:39):
Make your principle and then see if it works for you for five days and then keep on experimenting until you find five. When you look at those five and you say, "If I do that, if I live by those principles, I am just almost a hundred, if not a hundred percent confident that, that's going to create the life I want if I live by those principles." Then you have a really good start and make them simple. Mine are things like embrace intensity or connection first or everything is in iteration. As soon as I live by them, things work, company works.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:20):
Amazing. We'll point folks to that course if they want to take it themselves. Cool.

Joe Hudson (01:02:25):
It's only once a year, so it's a rare one.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:27):
Oh, wow. When is the next one?

Joe Hudson (01:02:29):
January.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:30):
Okay. Not too far away for folks to want to wait. Again, the two pieces of advice you shared, and that's our experiments that we can run to help become better decision makers. One is create a list of life principles, and there's a course that will point people to, to take that. The other is the thing you keep coming back to over and over and over, this idea of falling in love with your emotions, embracing your emotions, welcoming your emotions. There's also, I know you do a lot of work with teams. I imagine there's very similar advice for how to help your team be more effective. Principles, I imagine is a part of it, falling in love.

Joe Hudson (01:03:02):
We've run principles for teams, yeah. That's one of them. Teams would be more effective. We have a lot of, I mean I think I have, at this point, I have 12 things that I'll go into a company and do with a company. Typically, the way I like to do it is I will go in and I'll talk to the leader typically and they'll say, "This is what I want." Then I really want to assess. Typically, if the person who is a big part of creating the problem has a hard time seeing the way through the problem, or it wouldn't have been created generally. This is not demeaning any leader, we all have these issues. Usually, what I like to do is I like to go in and I like to talk to three or four people, see what their perspective, not just the leader's perspective.

(01:03:57):
Then I like to sit in a meeting or two and just see actually what the dynamic is. One of the things I like to say about how to change a company is that the atomic structure of a company is the meetings and the decisions. It's particularly true in Silicon Valley, but it's really true in all businesses that all we are as a company is a group of people's relationships and ideas. Especially, like Amazon, you got a couple of buildings and some servers. There's not a lot of hardware there, and they wouldn't be useful without the people anyways. Anybody, whether you're running a farm or a shoe factory or anybody's successful is going to tell you it's all about the people. The atomic structure is what are our meetings like and how do we make decisions? I'll just really pay attention to a meeting. One of the things we do is we talk about what we call five-star meetings, which is how do you make every meeting enjoyable?

(01:05:04):
Literally, how is it that everybody when they walk out of a meeting, they're like, oh, fuck, that was great? It turns out, we've all been in meetings that are hard as shit, and we've walked out and gone, oh, those are great meetings. We've all been in meetings where nothing happens and we're like, "Oh, God. Fuck, another one to just drive a nail through my head. I don't want to sit there." What's required to make one of your meetings five stars? If you do that, that's one of the things we'll do inside of a company is work with them to figure that out. If you do that, every single problem with your company will come to the surface. Every single one of them. I had ten five -tar meetings, but these two meetings sucked. That tells me exactly where we need to focus as a company.

(01:05:53):
That tells me exactly where to look for the problem that's happening. It's the same thing with decisions. If you really start unpacking how the decisions are made where people are frustrated in the decision-making process, you're going to find exactly the problems in the company. An example of this, I was working with a friend and he's a content person, and we were just talking about how do you make every one of your meetings a five-star meeting? He's like, "Okay, great." He's like, "Yeah, I'm never going to do this." I was like, "Really? Tell me why." He's, "My YouTube meetings fucking suck." That's not where he makes most of his money, but these YouTube meetings suck. They're never going to get better.

(01:06:39):
Luckily, there's a couple other people around at the time and everyone's like, "No, wait, I love my YouTube meetings. What do you mean? How could this not work for you?" He noticed, oh, the team didn't, the content, none of it was working for him. None of it was him. He was just like, "Ugh." He changed it. He was like, "Okay, I'm going to commit to that. I'm going to see what it's like for me to just say every one of my YouTube meetings have to be something that's super enjoyable to me." When he did it, his YouTube numbers went off the charts in a very short period of time. It's just that common. Wherever the meeting is that sucks, it means there's something else that's a problem that needs to be worked on. That's typically how. I can just look at, usually sit in any team meeting and see at least three or four of the major problems that are happening in the company.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:29):
Such a cool way of thinking about where to focus decision-making meetings. I love that the story comes back to something you shared earlier with the more you enjoy something, the more joy there is, the better it's going to go anyway. The more you can find those moments and make things enjoyable, the better.

Joe Hudson (01:07:45):
The other cool thing is most of the executives or the CEOs that I've worked with, when they get to a point, and it usually takes them like, we always have the goal of a month, it usually takes two months to make sure every one of their meetings is five-star meetings. Once they've done that, then it's like, how do you make sure all of your teams have five-star meetings? Usually, it's like within two months and they usually have half the amount of meetings at the end of it. Half the amount of meetings in their companies are more effective. It's an incredible tool.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:18):
I could see why people enjoy that if you were meeting as well. Is there anything more along those lines before we start to close out our conversation, either around teams or decision-making?

Joe Hudson (01:08:30):
I'll say for anybody who's running a team, Harvard has got a couple of these, but we used to do these tiny pulses. As a VC, one of the strategies that was really effective that I saw very few VCs doing was I would want these pulse, I would like to read the pulse of teams with these short surveys and stuff. It was the most effective way of not very happy, didn't want to come to work on Monday. They weren't going to make their numbers. The likelihood of them making their numbers is going down. There was this interesting thing that just about how Drucker, I think said it first and then the Virgin guy.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:15):
Branson?

Joe Hudson (01:09:16):
Branson said it. He's like, "Culture eats strategy for breakfast," or some such. If that's true, then it's measurable and it can be a leading indicator, and it absolutely is. If you really pay attention to the culture on a team-by-team basis, it's an amazing, very effective way to drive results, but also, a very effective way to know when bad results are coming. What's interesting to me is most people feel like they can't control the culture, like most people feel like.

(01:09:52):
Most people, I notice, they feel like, it's more likely for me to hear from a CEO, "God damn it, everybody agrees when I get out of the table. When I get off the table, everyone's like, yeah, we're going to do it. Then they don't do it. Why aren't they doing it?" I'm going to hear that more often than I'm going to hear a CEO say, "Oh, wow. I really noticed that the way the email system was working in our company, we were disempowering people by not requiring an action after every..." I'm going to hear more complaints about why shit isn't working than I'm going to hear about strategies, like very gentle, simple strategies to change the culture. it's an amazing thing to me that it's so powerful and yet people feel so out of control with it

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:40):
To give people something they can do, say today or tomorrow to work on a lot of these things we've been talking about. Is there just one thing you recommend that basically everyone should try to experiment with in the next day, couple of days or weeks, just to help them be better and more successful and happier?

Joe Hudson (01:11:00):
I would do seven minutes, no less than seven minutes. You can do more than seven minutes. Seven minutes of gratitude with another person every day. It can't be, I'm grateful for this, I'm grateful for this, I'm grateful for this. It has to be feeling the gratitude and then seeing what comes out of your mouth when you're coming from the felt sense of gratitude and doing it back and forth. You're savoring the experience of gratitude and you're going back and forth with another human being. Call mom, dad, sister, brother, business partner, friend, and every day just express gratitude back and forth for seven minutes, coming from the feeling, not from the thought. If you have a full body sensation of gratitude and you experience that for seven minutes a day, it'll change your life dramatically really quickly. Really, really quickly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:02):
Wow. I already feel it. The practice is you are expressing gratitude to the person you're with.

Joe Hudson (01:12:09):
It can be gratitude for anything in your life. As a matter of fact, I would say do it for a couple of weeks and then do it on the places where you feel lack. That's where the superpower comes in. In my own personal life, I was meditating. I spent seven, eight hours a day meditating for years.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:31):
That's a lot of hours.

Joe Hudson (01:12:32):
You can imagine, I didn't have a lot of money. The joke I used to make is I would meditate and worry about money most of my day. It's funny, but it's truth. One day, I was thinking about money and thinking I was driving in my car and I was thinking about this billionaire I knew and I was thinking about how I didn't have enough and then I thought, "Oh, this billionaire doesn't think they have enough either. I know I'm well enough." I'm like, "Oh, I have the experience of a billionaire right now." I was like, "He's probably driving in a car somewhere thinking he doesn't have enough, and I'm driving in a car somewhere thinking I don't have enough. This is great. I'm a billionaire."

(01:13:20):
It tickled me, the idea tickled me. Then I was like, well, what happens if I start focusing on everything I do have instead of focusing on what I don't have? Which is where the gratitude practice came from. My wife and I would sit every day and just be grateful for all the physical stuff that we had. We were living in a hobble, were living 15-year-old year cars. We had no money. I was in debt. I was in, I think $40,000 in credit card debt or some crazy shit. We just did it. Literally, was it three months later, my credit card debt was gone. Six months later, I had $60,000 in the bank. Entire life changed because I no longer defined myself by somebody who didn't have, I defined myself as somebody who did have. All of a sudden, I could look out the window and it wasn't, "Oh, shit, I can't have that. I can't have that. I can't have that."

(01:14:18):
I look out the window, I'd say somebody made money on that. Somebody made money on that. Every fucking thing I looked at, somebody made money on. 20 people, 20 companies made money on the fucking lamppost. The person who installed it, the energy company, the rubber company, there's just, holy crap, it's all over the place. Then in that definition, all of a sudden, it became really clear. It doesn't matter if the thing that you feel like you lack is time, or the thing that you feel like you lack is love or the thing that you feel like you lack is money. If you can really do a gratitude practice on the thing that you lack, there's a superpower in that one, changes everything.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:57):
Do you still do this?

Joe Hudson (01:15:00):
I do gratitude, yes. Do I do gratitude on stuff I lack? I don't really have an experience of lack. That's not really...

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:07):
You still do this gratitude, seven minutes?

Joe Hudson (01:15:09):
Of course, yes. That's like asking if I still have sex. Why would I give that up? It feels great.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:16):
Just to be clear, you find someone seven minutes every morning, probably think about things you're grateful for and share back. Focus not on your intellectual thing you're grateful for, but just what's coming out of your emotional body.

Joe Hudson (01:15:28):
Feel the gratitude.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:30):
Yeah, then gratitude.

Joe Hudson (01:15:30):
Let the feeling of gratitude speak rather than your mind, so that you get the felt sense of it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:38):
Joe, I'm incredibly grateful for you. I really appreciate you sharing so many experiments for people to run. I think this is going to make a real impact on a lot of people's lives. Two final questions. Where can folks find your courses? I know you have a podcast. Where can folks find the stuff they do online, and then how can listeners be useful to you?

Joe Hudson (01:15:55):
First of all, Art of Accomplishment, the podcast, it's Art of Accomplishment with Brett Kistler and Joe Hudson, I think. Then Art of Accomplishment, the website will show you where all the courses are. It'll give you a whole bunch of experiments you can run. There's all sorts of really great information there. The other thing that we just mentioned also is just that we really want to make sure that you think that the courses are for you. The way we do courses is that it's a very felt experience thing. It's not intellectual at all. It's really in your body. The way we like doing it is that you bring real problems that you're having and you use the tools that we teach you. The foundational course for that is called the Connection Course. If you want to get into it, go to the Connection Course.

(01:16:45):
To find out if it's right for you, if you're not already know that it's right for you, we do these little hour and a half free workshops and it'll give you a taste of what it is that we do because it's like anything that's going on out there. It's people doing, they're like, "What the hell was that?" It's just a completely different thing. It's not like learning in the normal way. You literally sit down with another person and run experiments face-to-face with how you're being in the moment. You learn all this stuff through direct experimentation. If you find out it's right for you, you can do it through these workshops, and I'm sure there'll be a place where they can find out where to go for that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:27):
There's one coming up in September, I believe.

Joe Hudson (01:17:30):
The Connection Course is coming up in September. It's a great place to start. It's foundational for everything else we do.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:37):
Then how can listeners be useful to you?

Joe Hudson (01:17:39):
I want my children to grow up in a fantastic world. The best way that, that can happen is that if the people listening to this discover who they are and their nature and the truth of how they operate. Not for them, but for their children and their children's children. You want to do me a favor and make my daughter's world a better place.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:08):
I also just had a son, and so I totally resonate with that.

Joe Hudson (01:18:11):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:13):
Joe, thank you so much for being here. What an amazing podcast episode. This ended up being as I expected.

Joe Hudson (01:18:19):
Pleasure. Thanks for having me. Appreciate it, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:22):
Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Jonny Miller (00:00:00):
I have this idea that I call the feather brick dump truck phenomenon, and basically what that means is when we are showing early signs of burnout, our body will give us feedback usually in subtle ways in the beginning. So the feather might be waking up in the morning and feeling a little bit tired, maybe a little bit exhausted. The brick, maybe you ignore that or you don't notice it, and then three or four weeks later, you have a fight with someone or an argument, or you just feel frustrated and terrible and you lose your cool. And then maybe the dump truck is a month later, or even a year later, there's a full-blown health crisis, or you develop type two diabetes or there's a whole range of things, or maybe you get fired. Ideally, you want to notice when it's the feather and then make adjustments or shift then and not have to wait until you experience the full-blown pain of the dump truck, which unfortunately is what happens to a lot of people, especially when they experience burnout for the first time.

Lenny (00:01:02):
Today, my guest is Jonny Miller. Jonny teaches courses and does one-on-one coaching with tech professionals helping them with something he calls Nervous System Mastery, which is essentially a set of tools and techniques for cultivating calm, upgrading your resilience, and increasing your aliveness. If you can get better at dealing with stressful situations, avoiding burnout and being more confident in meetings and big presentations, it becomes a superpower and a huge advantage in both business and in life. I actually read a post by Jonny about a year ago, and it totally changed the way that I think about nervousness and stress, and I still apply many of his lessons today.

(00:01:41):
In our conversation, we dive deep into Jonny's key insights. We talk about why the best way to stay calm in stressful situations is to focus on the state of your body and not your mind. How to create calm and confidence by changing the state of your body through breath. Jonny shares a bunch of very specific breathing exercises for creating calm and also for creating energy that we actually try out on the podcast. We also get into a bunch of advice for how to tell if you're seeing early signs of burnout, how to release emotional debt that you may be feeling. Also, why feeling the feels gives you a competitive advantage in business. Also, a practice called APE, which reminds you to focus on your awareness, your posture, and your emotions that have started practicing ever since our chat and so much more. If you enjoy this chat, definitely check out Jonny's full course at nsmastery.com/lenny. If you use that URL, you actually get $250 off the course. With that, I bring you Jonny Miller after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:42):
This time of year is prime for career reflection and setting goals for professional growth. I always like to spend this time reflecting on what I accomplished the previous year, what I hope to accomplish the next year, and whether this is the year I look for a new opportunity. That's where today's sponsor Teal comes in. Teal provides you with the tools to run an amazing job search with an AI-powered resume builder, job tracker, cover letter generator, and Chrome extension that integrates with over 40 job boards. Teal is the all-in-one platform. You need to run a more streamlined and efficient job search and stand out in this competitive market. There's a reason nearly 1 million people have trusted Teal to run their job search. If you're thinking of making a change in the year, leverage Teal to grow your career on your own terms. Get started for free at tealhq.com/lenny. That's tealhq.com/lenny.

(00:03:33):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate your growth. Thousands of fast-growing companies like Gusto, Comm, Quora, and Modern Treasury trust Vanta to help build, scale, manage and demonstrate their security and compliance programs and get ready for audits in weeks, not months. By offering the most in demand security and privacy frameworks such as SOC 2, ISO 27001, GDPR, HIPAA, and many more. Vanta helps companies obtain the reports they need to accelerate growth, build efficient compliance processes, mitigate risks to their businesses, and build trust with external stakeholders. Over 5,000 fast-growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2 and these other frameworks. For a limited time Lenny's podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Go to vanta.com/lenny, that's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discounts get started today.

(00:04:34):
Jonny, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Jonny Miller (00:04:37):
It's great to be here, Lenny.

Lenny (00:04:38):
So I read this post that you wrote, I think it was over a year ago at this point. It was called The Operating Manual for Your Nervous System, and first of all, blew my mind when I read it. Second of all, I always think about it when I get nervous or anxious in a situation, it's really stuck with me. And I know that people in the workplace often get nervous and anxious doing all hand presentations, meetings, performance reviews, all the things. So I thought it'd be awesome just to dive into the stuff that you've uncovered about how we can become less nervous and less anxious. Before we get into the meat of it, I'd love to just spend a couple minutes just getting a sense of why you got into this stuff. What actually got you to spend so much of your energy and life force trying to understand how the nervous system works, how to get people to be less nervous and anxious.

Jonny Miller (00:05:27):
My story starts in I kind of have a background in tech. I had a startup, we went through Techstars back in 2012. About five and a half years into that experience, I went through burnout, which is pretty common in the startup world, but that actually wasn't the trigger for me. I find that usually people that get into this type of work, there's some kind of catalyst or some kind of challenging life event. And for me, that was October 23rd, 2017, and my fiance at the time had an anxiety attack and she took her own life. And that completely just destroyed me at the time. And I realized that I'd been so disconnected from my body and my emotions, and it sent me on this five plus year journey to discover all of this inner landscape that I'd been numb from the neck down, and I went into breathwork meditation retreats, did hundreds of breathwork journeys, researched with a breath lab over in Bali, and basically just kind of directed all of my focus and attention onto understanding this inner landscape that I'd been pretty much oblivious to. And since then, I've been working with founders, executives, running courses and teaching what I'm learning and hopefully still researching at the same time as well.

Lenny (00:06:52):
Wow. And I imagine the thinking was that if your wife had these skills, she would've had another path.

Jonny Miller (00:07:00):
Yeah, that was definitely part of it, yeah. And also just since realizing how many people are struggling with anxiety, depression, all of this kind of constellation of mental health challenges both in the workplace and at home as well. And yeah, it's been a very rewarding journey.

Lenny (00:07:19):
All right, this episode's already gotten very heavy and I'm sucked in. I'm excited to learn all these things that you've uncovered. So let's just get into the meat of it. Just talk about this kind of general method that you've found for how to help people become less nervous and anxious.

Jonny Miller (00:07:38):
So I find this top down, bottom up distinction to be incredibly helpful. Most people when they try to calm down, they use tactical reframes or maybe mindfulness or maybe reframing the situation in a positive light. There's lots of different practices that people use which do have some effect. But in my experience, working with the physiology, using what's known as a bottom up approach, primarily using the breath, although there's also other approaches that you can use, it's just such a rapidly more effective way of shifting your state.

(00:08:11):
 And to give a little bit of context and maybe some science as well, we have what's known as afferent and efferent neurons going up and down our body, and there's four times more afferent neurons going from the body to the brain as from the brain to the body. So you can almost imagine there's a super highway of traffic of information going up to the brain and four times less going from the brain to the body. And so by learning how to pull on the levers of our physiology, we can rapidly change our state. And then from there, by changing our state, that impacts the thoughts and feelings that we have. So instead of trying to change the story or trying to fix something or trying to solve something, which is what most people do by default, myself included in the past, if you change your state first, then there's a cascading effect which changes your thoughts and your feelings.

Lenny (00:09:06):
Okay, amazing. Yeah, and just to share how I felt when I was reading this and try to understand this approach is whenever I get nervous, there's always this like, oh, my body's starting to feel anxious. And then I think of a reason. Oftentimes, I don't know why it gets nervous, why my body's starting to create this feeling of anxiety. And then I often realize I'm just now trying to just explain why it happened, "Oh, I have this big meeting coming up, or I have this podcast episode I'm nervous about, or I'm not going to make a deadline for my newsletter." I often experience this where it's just like, "Oh, something feels nervous." And then, "Okay, here's the explanation." So maybe just along those lines, what else is there that might be helpful for people to think about in this context?

Jonny Miller (00:09:47):
I mean, I think it's helpful to understand the process by which, by changing the way that we breathe, for example, it shifts our physiological state and changes our nervous system. So if you're listening to this, maybe you, Lenny, you can try this as well. If you start breathing into your upper chest and shallow fairly, fairly rapid, maybe even through the mouth, that will then there's a part of your brain called the insular cortex, which is basically constantly spying on the way that we're breathing and it will register that change, it will then send information to activate the endocrine system, which then creates shift in our blood chemistry. The sympathetic nervous system gets activated and that increase in adrenaline and cortisol starts to flood your body. Everyone's probably very familiar with that feeling. And then that will then have a cascading impact on the thoughts that you're having and the way that you feel. And so you just shared, we have a tendency to kind of confabulate or make up stories that match the state that we are in. And so that's kind of what happens when we're breathing in that way. And then you can also consciously change your breath to breathe in a different way, which has the reverse effects, which I can go into, but I'll pause there.

Lenny (00:11:05):
Yeah. So I think one of the big actionable takeaways here is that instead of trying to convince yourself, "No, this talk is going to go great, I don't need to worry about how I'm going to look in this meeting." Basically instead of going top down, trying to calm your body through thought, your advice is calm your body first because then your mind will notice, "Hey, I'm actually not as nervous as I thought. Maybe things are going to be okay." Is that right?

Jonny Miller (00:11:29):
Yeah, precisely. And I mean I've used this myself many times before presentations. I gave a TEDx talk a few years ago and I was like my entire body, I was just terrified. And I did in 15 minutes of this breathing practice before and walked on stage almost cool as a cucumber. It's very effective.

Lenny (00:11:47):
Sounds too good to be true. But we're going to do some of these exercises for people. Before we get into, why is it that breath specifically so powerful? It feels like such a strange thing to work so well, just this idea of breathing in a different way. You talked a bit about this, I forget what you called it, that kind of watches how you're breathing. But I guess what else can you share about just why is breath so effective in changing our state?

Jonny Miller (00:12:10):
Sure. Well, it's one of the few things which happens automatically, but we can also control it consciously. And so what scientists have discovered that when the exhale is twice as long as the inhale, it has a calming effect. And when the inhale is either more intense or twice as long as the exhale, it has an activating effect. So you can kind of think of this as an up or down lever on the nervous system.

Lenny (00:12:36):
You also have this really clever way of describing this system. You call it state over story, essentially focusing on the state of your body versus the story you're telling yourself. Is that the way to think about it? And can you just talk about that concept?

Jonny Miller (00:12:48):
Yeah, so it's basically a shorthand for what we've just been talking about, which is most people tend to approach the problem or try to solve things on the level of story. So there's multiple ways you can do that through the breath as we just talked about. You can also defocus your gaze and kind of relax your eyes, and that has a similar effect. It can expand your awareness and kind of bring your awareness to behind you and the sides of you and below you, or you can breathe in these ways which emphasize the exhale. And so when we breathe in a way with say the exhale twice as long as the inhale, that part of the brain, the insular cortex then sends signals to the parasympathetic nervous system, which then has the cascading effect on our endocrine system and calms us down. And what I usually find as well is that the kind of reactive thoughts and feelings that we have when we are in that kind of anxious loop, they can be self-reinforcing. And so if someone has a thought of like, "Oh no, I'm nervous before this important presentation." Then that exacerbates the breathing pattern and then the whole thing just goes into this spiral, which can end up in full-blown panic attacks if there's not an intervention of some sorts.

Lenny (00:13:57):
Yeah, that's what I find with my nerves. I hate talking on stage. I get nervous before every podcast. This is not my natural state.

Jonny Miller (00:14:04):
Interesting.

Lenny (00:14:05):
Yeah, and I hide it well.

Jonny Miller (00:14:07):
Is that still the case with podcast today?

Lenny (00:14:09):
Absolutely. And it's like different levels of nervousness, but it's always just like, "Oh, there we go." I'm not a performer person. Even I kind of push myself to do this podcast as a way to get better at this, to be honest. So it's still a thing that I think about. And what I find is the nervousness comes from exactly what you described is the nervousness of being nervous. I don't know, there's no reason specifically to be anxious, but I don't know how I'll be once I do the thing. So it's nervous of what it might look like or end up being like. So that's exactly what I ran into.

Jonny Miller (00:14:41):
Yeah. And there's obviously people say mindfulness, meditation, things like that, that can increase the psychological space between stimulus and response. And that is something that obviously does help over the long term, but it's in my opinion, nowhere near as rapid and effective and efficient as just changing the way that you're breathing.

Lenny (00:15:00):
Awesome. So let's get into it. I know you have a couple exercises specifically for this, and then we'll go from there.

Jonny Miller (00:15:06):
We can stack a few of the exercises and I'll try and keep it to a minute or so. So yeah, if you want to get comfy in your chair and sit up straight, feel your butt on the seat, and I find it helpful to kind of be aware of the space behind you and above you as well, kind of expanding your awareness so that you are aware of the space behind to the sides and above.

Lenny (00:15:29):
And should we close your eyes?

Jonny Miller (00:15:31):
Yeah, and close your eyes down. If you're listening and driving, obviously don't do that. But yeah, closing the eyes down for sure helps. And now we're just going to do simple breath. We're going to inhale in through the nose for four. We're going to hold the breath at the top for four, and we're going to exhale for eight, and then we're going to repeat. So let the breath go and inhaling through the nose. Inhale, 2, 3, 4, hold the breath, 2, 3, 4. And exhale, 8, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Inhale, 2, 3, 4, hold the breath, 2, 3, 4, and exhale, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And now you can let go of the breath completely and we'll end with one round of humming, which is surprisingly effect of it calming as well. So take a full breath in and humming through the nose all the way to the end of exhale. Let out a sigh if that feels good and open up your eyes.

Lenny (00:17:01):
I feel extremely calm. I should do this every podcast episode before we start.

Jonny Miller (00:17:08):
A note on the humming. It also releases nitric oxide, which is a vasodilator, and that helps to create that kind of calming effect and it also reduces eye tension as well. So I'll do it if I've been looking to screen for too long. It's really good for kind of reducing eye fatigue as well.

Lenny (00:17:24):
And there's also a vagus nerve component to it because your body's vibrating, is that true?

Jonny Miller (00:17:28):
Yeah, precisely. So it kind of tones or stimulates the vagus nerve, which stimulates the parasympathetic nervous system.

Lenny (00:17:35):
What's your advice for doing this? Is this before you go into a big meeting or a presentation? How do you apply this?

Jonny Miller (00:17:42):
I kind of like to share building a toolkit of different practices that are appropriate for different contexts. So something like the 4, 4, 8 breathing, you could do pretty much anywhere without anyone necessarily noticing. Humming is slightly more obvious, but if you're about to jump on a zoom or something, you can totally do it with your eyes closed. Things like expanding your awareness or bringing your awareness down to your feet and your hands, which creates a kind of grounding calming effect that also you can do if you're in a busy room. Maybe you have social anxiety, even orienting and labeling things that you are hearing and feeling, kind of bringing the awareness and attention back into the body that also has an effect. And then there's longer practices for say, non-sleep deep rests, belly breathing, things that you can do if you have 10, 20 minutes and you're at home and you want a downshift.

(00:18:30):
So I like to kind of give people a big toolkit to see what works for them and then cherry-pick which ones are suitable to different situations. And another way that I think about this is, I call it, if this, then breathe. So it's like if I feel overwhelmed, then I do the humming. If I feel anxious, then I do 4, 4, 8 breathing or alternate nostril breathing and kind of having my own little recipe set that I have for different context is really helpful and I work with people to kind of build those toolkits themselves.

Lenny (00:19:03):
This sounds like it needs to be a website where people can go with these lists of if this, then that is there a place that we could send people in the show notes and if not, you should make one before we go live.

Jonny Miller (00:19:13):
There is not currently. It's part of the curriculum in the course that I have, but-

Lenny (00:19:17):
Okay, great.

Jonny Miller (00:19:18):
... I can maybe see if I can spin one up as well, but yeah.

Lenny (00:19:21):
Okay, cool. We'll link to the course if nothing else. Amazing.

Jonny Miller (00:19:23):
Okay.

Lenny (00:19:24):
Along this line of calming breath exercise, Huberman also has a different version, which I've tried and I'm going to do both now. You breathe in fully and then you breathe in a little bit more. I imagine you've seen that piece of advice?

Jonny Miller (00:19:37):
That's also fantastic. He calls it the physiological sigh, and it's both very effective, especially if you just have five seconds and you just take a full sigh, it's great. I'd also add that the sigh happens naturally as a result of doing these downshifting practices. So if you notice after you do let's say the 4, 4, 8 breathing, at the end, you might naturally just want to let out a sigh, and that's a signal that your body is naturally downshifting. Or if you are with a friend and you feel just comfortable and relaxed, then your body might sigh. And it's something that we do a lot and as you say, you can consciously do it and that will help as well. That's another one of the practices.

Lenny (00:20:18):
Awesome. So link to that. And I think throughout this episode, as you said, we're going to give people a bunch of tools that they can use, and it feels like some are in the moment, "I need to feel calmer right now. Here's a thing you could do." And then there's things you can do ongoing that build... I guess another way to think about it's just make your body more calm as a baseline of practice to work on there.

Jonny Miller (00:20:38):
Yeah, precisely.

Lenny (00:20:39):
Awesome, okay. I think the other breathing exercise we're going to do is the opposite. Gets you all excited, is that right?

Jonny Miller (00:20:45):
Yeah, sure. We can do that as well. I call this espresso breath. So this is the opposite. This is very activating. I would only recommend this if you're feeling lethargic or maybe instead of drinking a coffee in the afternoon, you could do this for a minute or so. In the scientific literature, it's bellows breath or breath of fire, and it basically looks like a series of rapid exhales through the nose. I like to keep it through the nose only if you do it through the mouth, it can be very too activating and it can kind of overwhelm people. Obviously, there's the Wim Hof practice that I'm sure many people are familiar with. So this is a more gentle version of... If Wim Hof is like Red Bull, this is kind of like a small coffee.

Lenny (00:21:30):
I like that. And you call it the espresso breath, espresso breath.

Jonny Miller (00:21:33):
Espresso breath, yeah.

Lenny (00:21:33):
So yeah, that's a good metaphor there.

Jonny Miller (00:21:35):
Yeah, yeah. So yeah, let's do it. So again, kind of sit up straight, and this time you want to be pumping the breath from your lower belly and you pump the breath on the exhale. So I'll demonstrate it briefly. It's like breathe in.

(00:21:56):
Okay. So yeah, take a full breath in and begin.

(00:21:58):
And let go. And full breath in. And sigh on the exhale. I already feel a little bit tingly.

Lenny (00:22:25):
I'm energized. Let's do this. Go, go, go, go. That was great. Okay, look at that. We're back to where we started with the full circle of energy. That was great.

Jonny Miller (00:22:34):
Up and down.

Lenny (00:22:35):
And then how long do you recommend doing that one for?

Jonny Miller (00:22:38):
So it kind of depends on how activating you find it, but I usually find 30 breaths per round and then take a breath, have a long pause on the exhale, and then if you want to do another round or two.

Lenny (00:22:50):
Amazing. And the cases where this might be helpful is maybe you're about to give a big talk, I guess in a talk you both want energy and want calm, so that's kind of complicated.

Jonny Miller (00:22:59):
Especially if you are meetings early in the morning and you haven't quite got going yet, you can do the espresso breath to begin with and that activates you. And then do some of the downshifting practices to kind of ground and stabilize that aliveness.

Lenny (00:23:12):
Are there any other tactical breathing exercises that are worth doing real quick? I know we'll get into some longer practices and deeper stuff, but is there anything else that would be helpful here?

Jonny Miller (00:23:21):
No, I think we've covered the bases. I don't want to overwhelm people too much.

Lenny (00:23:25):
Just as a takeaway, there's these two techniques. One to help you get more calm when you need to be calm in the moment. The other is to get energy. And then I guess are these things that you recommend doing ongoing to build this muscle in your body or are these mostly for you need this now in the moment and it's not worth just doing a few times a day even when you're fine?

Jonny Miller (00:23:47):
Yeah, great question. So I like to recommend both a morning practice, particularly to build the muscle of just doing it and getting used to it. So maybe five minutes in the morning before you start work, before breakfast, something like that. And then you are more likely to remember that you have access to that in the moment because usually the challenge is that when someone is in that flustered state, remembering to do the practice is often the last thing that comes to mind. So by having a deliberate practice for at least 7 to 10 days and so that you get the hang of it, then it feels much more natural to do it when you're feeling. That's kind of like playing the game on hard mode when you are really stressed and anxious, that's when you need it the most, but it's also when you're least likely to remember to do it.

Lenny (00:24:36):
Awesome. Okay, so the first exercise to calm you down is essentially breathe in four seconds, hold it for four seconds, breathe out slowly for eight seconds and do that for about 30 seconds, is that right? Or for a minute?

Jonny Miller (00:24:48):
Yeah, I'd say for at least a minute or two. We kind of did a shorter version. I'll also add that the important thing is that the exhale is twice as long as the inhale. So if exhaling for eight is too long, you could do 3, 3, 6 or even 2, 2, 4 or even 5, 5, 10 depending on your lung capacity essentially and your CO2 tolerance.

Lenny (00:25:08):
Okay, good to know. And then the espresso breath, when you need energy or you just kind of pump air out of your belly through your nose and you do that for how long would you recommend?

Jonny Miller (00:25:18):
Two to three rounds of 30 pumps, yeah.

Lenny (00:25:22):
And again, the reason this is effective and powerful is coming back to your original big insight that our state is driven by what our body is doing and our mind often explains what we're feeling based on what our body's doing. So that if you can change the state of your body and become less nervous in your body, your mind will be like, "All right, everything's fine."

Jonny Miller (00:25:45):
Yeah. And maybe something that we haven't touched on yet, but I think is important to add in is this idea of interoception or somatic awareness. And the reason I bring it in is because if you do this practice but you're not really aware of your body and how you feel, then it'll be less compelling to you. But if you're kind of tuned into like sensations in your body, what's going on, you're more likely to notice the difference in the shifts.

Lenny (00:26:09):
Great. So let's get into that. That was something I definitely wanted to touch on here. This awesome acronym to help you with this process of interoception. So talk about what that is and then how to actually go about becoming better at being aware of what your body's doing.

Jonny Miller (00:26:22):
Yeah. So it's this idea of interoception, which is known as our sixth sense, and basically it's our ability to sense, track and feel our internal landscape. And I like to use the metaphor of a chef in the same way that you train your flavor palette for kind of sweet, spicy, umami, things like that. You can also train your interoceptive palette and become more aware of the internal sensations, whether that's your breath, whether it's tension, whether it's moods and emotions, whether it's the quality of your awareness, the quality of your thoughts. And the more kind of in tune with that you are, the more likely you are to notice the kind of early warning signs of something like anxiety. Because usually, certainly a panic attack doesn't come out of nowhere. There will be a kind of cascade of subtle things that happen in your body that eventually result in anxiety. And so if you can catch those things early and kind of nip them in the bud and do one of these practices, then you can avoid the kind of 10 out of 10 worst case scenarios.

Lenny (00:27:25):
Okay, awesome. So I know that there's also specific things you recommend people pay attention to, to understand what their body is doing in this process of inter...

Jonny Miller (00:27:33):
Interoception, yeah,

Lenny (00:27:34):
Interra... Okay. What is it?

Jonny Miller (00:27:36):
Interoception.

Lenny (00:27:39):
Interoception.

Jonny Miller (00:27:39):
As opposed to exteroception, which is awareness of all the external stimuli.

Lenny (00:27:44):
Got it. I guess before we even get to that, so you mentioned that it's another sense we have, and I think that's a really important point that I think maybe people didn't catch. So we have these five senses, obviously taste and smell and vision and touch. But you're finding and research showed basically this is another sense people don't really know we have.

Jonny Miller (00:28:02):
Yeah, exactly. And it has been studies quite a lot, especially in the last decade or so. And there's a number of interesting findings from the research that I found. One being that ADHD tends to correlate with low levels of interoception, as does if people have PTSD or trauma. Again, interoception is lowered. And I'd certainly say for myself, for the first 25 years of my life, I was fairly numb from the neck down. I was not very aware to what was happening in my body in real time. I was also reading a book recently called The Hour Between Dog and Wolf, which looked at Wall Street traders and they correlated higher degrees of interception with basically making more money and making better decisions. And I think the thesis was that by tuning into what their body was doing in certain moments, they could pick up on things more intuitive decision making essentially.

Lenny (00:28:55):
So I think there's a specific list of things that you recommend people pay attention to, their posture, their breath, things like that. What is that list and then how do we actually do this better?

Jonny Miller (00:29:06):
Yeah. So I simplify this to APE, which basically is an acronym which stands for awareness, posture, and emotion. So to kind of go through each one by one. Awareness is, to give an example, I could narrow my awareness and become really focused and just you kind of tense up and it also is quite activating sometimes or you can relax and expand your awareness and be aware of the space above me, the space behind me, the space below me. And that is generally a calming thing. Posture is fairly self-explanatory. But again, our posture affects how we feel. You're shifting there now. And then emotion, which I include somatic or body-based sensations which arise. So both kind of what is the overall mood and the flavor or the texture that I'm feeling. Like right now, maybe it's excitement, maybe there's some joy. I'm noticing there's some heat in my belly probably from the breathing. Yeah, there's a little bit of tightness in my lower back from working out yesterday. So just sense kind of mapping that landscape of sensation. And for most people it's almost like it's like a [inaudible 00:30:22]. You have those maps of [inaudible 00:30:25] and for a lot of people there's just these big kind blind spots in their body.

Lenny (00:30:30):
And the advice here is, so there's this acronym APE and the advice is think about these three things when you're feeling something that you may not, basically something's going on slash just often come back to this. I imagine just whenever you can think of, "Oh, APE: awareness, posture, emotion." Is that how to use this?

Jonny Miller (00:30:51):
Yeah, exactly. So again, it can be something that you do before you start your day, maybe with a cup of tea. I like to drink tea and just do a body scan essentially and just check each of those three areas. And it's really valuable, particularly if you are having racing thoughts or something doesn't feel quite right. Instead of just tackling the problem on the level of the mind dropping down into the body and bringing that into the picture as well, I find to be really helpful.

Lenny (00:31:26):
Basically, as often as you can. And generally when things are feeling all off, just remember APE, where's my awareness? How's my posture? And then what am I feeling? Am I feeling sad? Am I feeling happy, excited, angry? Things like that. I think you also talk about breath, like you have a list you wrote about this of other things that you might want to pay attention to. Actually finding paying attention to what my breath is doing is really powerful too. So I'm going to try a BAPE version of this or I'm going to try to think about where's my breath coming from, what am I feeling there?

Jonny Miller (00:32:02):
Yeah. So the breath and sensations are two other ones that are really helpful. The breath in particular, often people will... There's an idea of email apnea when people are checking their emails, they will, without noticing it, start to hold their breath, which is generally a very activating thing to do. Or as I mentioned earlier, if your breath is through the mouth and shallow and into the upper chest, that will also be very activating versus is your breath through the nose? Is it kind of into the belly and into the sides of the rib cage and does it feel easeful? Basically, breathing without tension is ideal.

Lenny (00:32:39):
What I think about using this practice is if I were sitting in a meeting and just not feeling amazingly confident, I just come back to this acronym, BAPE or APE, whichever one you want to choose, just like how am I feeling right now? Oh wow, my whole stomach is clenched. I'm maybe nervous about what might happen or I'm not breathing at all, or my posture is really bad. So I think in a meeting would be really helpful Here, maybe you're about to get on a zoom or an important call or something like that. Maybe a one-on-one. Is there anything else, any other moments that kind of triggers for people of like, "Oh, I should really be aware of what's happening right now. Let me do an APE exercise."

Jonny Miller (00:33:16):
Yeah, well, just to kind of piggyback on what you just said, if you are about to jump on a meeting and you're noticing that your stomach is clenched, that's actually really useful data to be like, "Why is this happening?" Is it your intuition kind of saying that maybe you shouldn't do this deal with someone or maybe something is off and so it's a sign to explore that more. Or it could be that you've been triggered by something or something that someone said and you've only just realized it and then that's again, more information or something that you can reflect on or go into.

Lenny (00:33:51):
Is there anything in your life recently that is an example of this where you're feeling unsure and maybe you realize, "Oh, here's what my body's doing, maybe I should pay more attention to this."

Jonny Miller (00:34:03):
Actually, last week I did a podcast conversation, so I have a podcast myself, and I got off the call and I remember I felt or got off the podcast and I felt pretty exhausted and I felt like there was this kind of tension in my chest. And again, my breath was kind of all over the place and I realized that I had very much over committed myself for that week. I'd scheduled back to back podcast interviews. The podcast wasn't even the priority for what I'm focusing on in this quarter, so I then made the decision to just push back all my episodes until the summer basically.

Lenny (00:34:42):
I love that example. I know that feeling very well.

Jonny Miller (00:34:46):
I'm sure.

Lenny (00:34:48):
When you wrote about this idea of interoception, you connected it to burnout, and I think you talked about how this is one of the best tools to avoid burnout. Is that right? Am I remembering that right? And if so, how do you think about this burnout and avoiding burnout in general, something a lot of people experience?

Jonny Miller (00:35:08):
Yeah, so I have this idea that I call the feather brick dump truck phenomenon. And basically what that means is when we are showing early signs of burnout, our body will give us feedback usually in subtle ways in the beginning. So the feather might be waking up in the morning and feeling a little bit tired, maybe a little bit exhausted. The brick, maybe you ignore that or you don't notice it, and then three or four weeks later you have a fight with someone or an argument or you just feel frustrated and terrible and you lose your cool. And then maybe the dump truck is a month later or even a year later, there's a full-blown health crisis, or you develop type two diabetes or there's a whole range of things, or maybe you get fired. There's a bunch of different things that can happen, but normally depending on how attuned or depending on someone's interoceptive capacity, ideally, you want to notice when it's the feather and then make adjustments or shift then and not have to wait until you experience the full-blown pain of the dump truck, which unfortunately is what happens to a lot of people, especially when they experience burnout for the first time.

Lenny (00:36:18):
This is such an important point and such a good way of thinking about it. It reminds me of Andy Johns and the episode we had there of just how long and willing to the episode there of just how all these little things came up along the way and then eventually just became incredibly unsustainable to live the life that he was living.

(00:36:34):
This episode is brought to you by Miro. Do you ever feel like your projects aren't as organized as you like them to be or it's way too hard for people on your team to find all of the documents and files and context that they need for their project? Miro helps you streamline your workflows, organize information, and get your whole team on the same page. If you want to see what Miro can do for you, check out my Miro board that the Miro team helped me create, which includes all of my favorite plug and play templates, like a user journey map, my favorite one pager template plus a brainstorming guide. My board also has a place for you to share suggestions for this podcast and also answer a question that I have for you. You can then take my Miro board and easily create your own to see how it feels. Make sure to check out some of my favorite features, like the sticky notes, the inline comments and charts, and also the really cool diagramming tools. Check it out at miro.com/lenny. Your first three Miro boards are free when you sign up today at miro.com/lenny. Find simplicity in your most complex projects with Miro. That's M-I-R-O.com/lenny.

(00:37:40):
What are some examples of this feather? So your advice here is just pay attention to these little signs that you're not living a sustainable life right now. What are some examples of these kind of feathery signs of like maybe I need to change something?

Jonny Miller (00:37:55):
Yeah, so I'll tie this in with a concept that I call emotional debt, which is basically when our nervous system experiences stress, there's known as a mobilization cycle, and if that cycle isn't completed or we don't get to downshift or relax on the other side, that gets stored in the body as allostatic load, which I call emotional debt. And over time, that creates fragility in the nervous system. And so what that fragility can look like is anything from being impacted by small things in a kind of disproportionate way. So noticing that you are more reactive than normal, maybe you're a little bit more snappy, maybe you get frustrated by little things, maybe your sleep isn't as good, maybe you wake up not feeling fully rested. Maybe relationships are often, especially intimate relationships are usually a place that this shows up or relationships at work. So those are the classic early warning signs. And then as that emotional debt threshold increases in the same way that say with technical debt, if you're building a product in the beginning, it's fine, and in fact it's even necessary in the beginning. It's great that our body can buffer the stress response because it allows us to function. But if we don't pay off that technical debt or emotional debt, then over time it accumulates and it can also come out through health crises, health challenges. It just gets basically progressively worse until that debt is paid off.

Lenny (00:39:25):
I feel like a lot of people listening are like, "Yes, I know exactly what you mean." How does one notice that you're building emotional debt and then how do you start to release this debt and pay off this debt?

Jonny Miller (00:39:38):
What I've seen with some of my founder clients and in the research that we did where we interviewed 260 leaders, what can often happen is that emotional debt will increase and increase and increase until it gets to a point where we are well outside what's known as a window of tolerance. And at that point there's like a crash. It's almost like the fuse switch blows and there's exhaustion. Maybe there's complete inability to get up off the couch. And for some people, people with large nervous system capacity, they can keep going for five years, maybe 10 years, and they can keep building this up, and it becomes normalized to live in a way where you are always on and never really relaxing or coming down. Or one really key sign actually is if you are not able to naturally downshift or down regulate your nervous system at the end of the day without something like wine or CBD or some kind of external substance, that's a sign that you kind of reached a certain threshold of emotional debt.

Lenny (00:40:47):
And then how does one start to pay off this debt if you've spent years just working way too hard, you've had a relationship that just isn't working great, I don't know. I imagine most people go to therapy and just talk through all these things and try to work through the challenges. What do you recommend if you're just like, "Man, I feel like I have this, what should I do?"

Jonny Miller (00:41:08):
Yeah, well, I mean that's a big question. I'll probably get some pushback for this, but I'm not a big fan of talk therapy alone or at least therapy that doesn't have a somatic or body-based component. And from my understanding of the nervous system and how we store this stress, just talking about things and keeping things on the level of the intellect doesn't actually address the root of the challenge. What we need to do is create a certain sense of safety to kind of go into those buffered emotional responses and feel them all the way through and allow that mobilization reflex to complete.

(00:41:48):
And so to kind of give a personal example, when I was living in Bali, I did several hundred breathwork journeys where you breathe in a certain way to get into an altered state, and then in that place, these memories would arise of these things that happened 5, 10 years ago. And my body, it would either move a certain way or the anger would come through. Sometimes there would be sadness or grief. Often there's a lot of stored emotion that's held in our body that just needs permission to kind of be felt through and be released. And so for me, it was a journey of coming into right relationship with my anger and my grief, and honestly my shame as well, giving myself permission to feel this gunk that had been stored in my pelvis.

(00:42:35):
So I'm not saying you have to go to Bali and do 200 breathwork journeys. That's definitely not... I mean, that's a path. But first it begins with, as I said, cultivating interoception and even being aware that there is this tension, there are these things in your body. Secondly, having the practices of self-regulation so that if these things come up, you don't get overwhelmed. You're able to downshift and ground. And then thirdly, it's the practice of what I call emotional fluidity, which is basically creating the conditions of welcoming the full spectrum of emotions as they arise. And often it's very helpful to have a guide or a somatic practitioner, I like somatic experiencing, hakomi, the two modalities I'm a big fan of. And yeah, that's the journey and a process and it depends how many years you've been operating in a slightly numbed way, and it's different for everyone. But it begins by tuning into and listening to the body and then having honestly curiosity about what is there and just following that curiosity and the body starts to show you what is ready to be seen.

Lenny (00:43:49):
I love that it always comes back to the original place we started which is that the way we feel is a very bottom up body-based system, it's not we feel something and our body gets nervous. It's our body gets nervous, and they're like, "Oh, here's why I'm nervous." And your advice is just focus a lot on helping your body release the stuff that you've built up this debt. And then also just when you're nervous in the moment, focus on getting your body to a state versus trying to convince your mind now everything's going to be okay.

Jonny Miller (00:44:17):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:44:17):
And specifically on the therapy route, just to touch on that, so your advice there is if you were to work with a therapist and you feel a lot of this stuff that we're talking about is focused on a somatic oriented therapy where it's body oriented, not just thinking about it and talking through stuff, it's actually convincing your body, "Here's a way to helping your body release this debt, essentially."

Jonny Miller (00:44:40):
Yeah. I mean, you can understand in precise detail about whatever the challenge was from 5, 10 and 15 years ago, but if you're unable to connect it to the correlating sensations in the body... Usually if say, I don't know, if I was to imagine someone shouted at me yesterday and I think about that, there's usually a correlating kind of sematic sensation. The neuroscientist Damasio calls it a somatic marker. So by tracking the somatic markers and then either on your own just kind of following that sensation and allowing whatever emotion was present at the time to complete that is the way that we kind of slowly pay off that emotional debt by one process at a time.

Lenny (00:45:26):
So maybe coming back to this question of say someone is listening and wondering, am I building emotional debt? Am I ignoring things that are these feathers? What are signs and just, I don't know, examples of emotional debt being built up of this trauma, whatever you want to call it, being built up in the body? I don't know, is it just like anytime you feel really nervous, that's emotional debt? Is it anytime you push something down that you are pretty sure you should deal with in the moment, that's emotional debt? What are just some examples of what that feels like and looks like?

Jonny Miller (00:45:58):
Yeah, so it's typically different forms of nervous system dysregulation and that shows up as it could be someone's breathing pattern if they're constantly in this sympathetic or hypervigilant state, if they're always tracking for things, looking for the worst case scenario. Another common one, and this is particularly true in the tech sector, is being very much in the head and living in the thoughts and the mind the entire time. And there's a form of disassociation that happens as a kind of protection mechanism essentially because it's uncomfortable to be with the sensations in the body. And because our society tends to reward people for solving problems and being in their mind, that is a pattern that continues for many, many years or even decades.

(00:46:43):
Other ones are, I think the most obvious one for people is emotional reactivity, where your response to a certain situation is disproportionate to what's happened. So for example, if you said something to me of that doesn't make any sense, and I was like, I freeze maybe... And this is another important point that most people have two versions of reactivity. Some people will freeze, withdraw, shut down and disconnect, and other people will become more aggressive, become bigger and attack and fight back. And knowing which way you tend to orient, for me, it's usually shrink and freeze and shut down, knowing what your pattern is and also knowing what the sensations are when this happens, it's really helpful for you to be like, "Oh, that thing's happening." My priority now is to downshift and kind of find a sense of safety basically in the body and then interact, then make the decision, then have the conversation. Because if you can keep going from that place of reactivity, nothing good happens from that place. No great decisions were made from that place. So again, that's a place where having the interoceptive awareness to know, "Oh, this is what's going on." Being able to then downshift your system, kind of access a sense of, "Oh, I'm okay, actually this isn't so bad." And then moving on from there is a profoundly practical and just useful skill.

Lenny (00:48:14):
Kind of along these same lines, you wrote somewhere this idea that you have a big competitive advantage if you feel the feels is the way you described it. Does that ring a bell? And if so, what can you share around that, just why this is so powerful, especially in the workplace?

Jonny Miller (00:48:28):
Yeah, so I think I wrote about this in one of the Every essays. I think the title was The Best Decision-Making Is Emotional. And I basically wanted to kind of poke at the phrase, I think I saw someone on Twitter say, "Fact over feelings, like don't let emotions ruin good decision making." And yeah, there's so much that I can say about this. But basically there was a landmark study by this guy, Damasio, this kind of famous neuroscientist, and he studied a patient called Elliot. And Elliot had a tumor in his brain that was removed and it basically meant that he was unable to feel emotions. So his entire emotional capacity was removed. And Elliot went from being a successful married businessman to divorced, broke and unable to choose what he could have for lunch. He was unable to make the most basic life decisions, and it's because he didn't have access to that emotional sense in his brain.

(00:49:22):
And so our brain is like a prediction making machine, and as I mentioned earlier, there's this highway of sensory data that's coming up through the body. And if we don't listen to that when we are making decisions, then we're losing out on a lot of information. And what tends to happen, I see this in clients that I work with, is if they are avoiding feeling a certain way, let's say, that they don't enjoy feeling conflict or anger, then they will make decisions subconsciously to avoid feeling that way. And it becomes a huge bias and a huge problem because people make decisions because they're afraid of feeling a certain way. And if you are on the other hand able to just welcome and be with whatever emotions would arise on the other side of a decision, you're able to decide clearly instead of being skewed one way or the other.

Lenny (00:50:16):
Easier said than done.

Jonny Miller (00:50:18):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:50:21):
Do you find there's ever a downside to being too in touch with what you're feeling? I actually not a feeler of what I'm feeling kind of person. I'm pretty stable, partly because I'm not super in tune with what I'm feeling a lot of times, and maybe this is a huge problem that I need to deal with. But I don't know, it's worked out okay so far. I guess, do you ever find that sometimes it's okay, sometimes you don't need to know exactly every moment anything that's hurting you or causing you pain?

Jonny Miller (00:50:49):
Yeah, it's a good question. And some people do have a very high interoceptive capacity, and that can be overwhelming. In which case I would recommend focusing on the breathing practices to build that capacity to downshift, so you're able to just function. And there's definitely people who are overwhelmed by the stimuli of day-to-day life being out in traffic, like they're very easily overwhelmed. And for those people working on increasing nervous system capacity to kind of hold that amount of stress, maybe it's through sauna and cold plunge, maybe it's through gentle titration of stresses and then downshifting, that's actually really valuable.

(00:51:28):
I'd also say that the ability to function well, this applies to a lot of high functioning people, which is probably honestly a lot of your audience. It's very helpful in the moment to, let's say something comes up, you want to be able to buffer intense emotions and say, get through the meeting, get through whatever it is. It's a very helpful skill. But if you don't, then give yourself spaciousness afterwards to downshift and allow yourself to feel whatever was brought up by that experience, you are going to be adding to this emotional debt over time. And as I mentioned, some people, it might be a year before there's some kind of breakdown, burnout. Other people, it might be longer. And usually it's more unfortunate in the longer case because it creates a long-term health crisis and then lower amount of money or time is able to repair the damage that's been done, which can be really tragic.

Lenny (00:52:24):
My chat with Andy Johns is a great example of that happening.

Jonny Miller (00:52:26):
Yeah. And Andy's a superb example, and I love his vulnerability and honesty in what he's been through.

Lenny (00:52:33):
Yeah, I think if you're interested in this topic, definitely watch that episode. Another exercise that you talk a lot about is this idea, it's called NSDR, I think. Talk about that and when that might be useful, how to go about using this tool.

Jonny Miller (00:52:49):
Yeah, so NSDR was a practice coined by Andrew Huberman, who you mentioned earlier. And it basically, it's a more scientific lens on the practice of yoga nidra, which is an ancient yoga practice. But I am a huge fan of it, and I do it myself most days for 15 to 20 minutes. Basically what it looks like is you lie down, put on an eye mask or a blindfold, and you listen to a guided audio. I've recorded some myself, so I can share these in the show note links.

Lenny (00:53:16):
Your voice would be so good for these, by the way. You found your calling.

Jonny Miller (00:53:22):
Nice, yeah. It's really fun for me to do. But basically what it involves is a guided body scan. So this is also a great way to practice interoception. It's something that I didn't mention earlier was that when there's cortisol present in our body, the cortisol basically acts as a numbing agent, so it's much harder to kind of tune into those sensations. But using this, I think it's a 14-minute guided NSDR practice, you're basically lying down, there's a guided body scan, there's relaxing music in the background. And by the end of it, you feel like you've had a two-hour nap. It feels incredible.

(00:54:00):
And particularly for people who myself tend to get tired in the afternoons, if you space this out, usually between 1 and 3:00 PM for me, that will give you a second wind in the afternoon and it'll mean you won't end the day collapse on the sofa. So I think it's great for improving interoception, it's good for allowing your body to downshift and relax instead of being in that kind of high tone sympathetic state all throughout the day. So it gives your body a break, and it just feels really good. Honestly, it's probably my most played practice of everything that I teach, just people listen to it every day. So I'll share that in the show notes as well.

Lenny (00:54:41):
And I imagine if you feel like you've built this emotional debt, this would be a really good exercise to start to do, is that right?

Jonny Miller (00:54:49):
Yeah, it is fantastic. I mean, there's some people who struggle with having enough energy to kind of get out of bed and function. But again, I imagine listeners to your show, people that live in Silicon Valley, their challenge is the downshifting without external substances. And so NSDR is a really great way of strengthening that ventral vagal tone, which is our body's capacity to go from on kind of go, go, go to then relaxing. There's a quote from Kevin Kelly that I interviewed recently, and he said, "If you have a great work ethic that needs to be matched with a great rest ethic." And I think that kind of piece of actually training our capacity to downshift after stress is just completely missing from most people's playbooks.

Lenny (00:55:38):
I think with a lot of the sort of advice, if you listen, Tim Ferriss and Huberman and everyone's got this stuff you should be doing every day list and it ends up being so long and there's so many things to do, cold plunge, sauna. What is it that you practice or come back to slash what would you recommend people try to do daily that is most impactful of all this stuff we've talked about?

Jonny Miller (00:56:05):
First experiment with a bunch of different practices and see which you enjoy and notice how you feel before and then how you feel afterwards. That's kind of the key because once you know that it feels good, you're not going to have to force yourself or motivate yourself to do it. You'll just do it naturally because you know you'll feel great afterwards. I would recommend starting really simple, so starting with the 4, 4, 8 breathing or humming, doing that in the morning for just two minutes, two minutes in the beginning is enough. And I would also recommend listening to the NSDR practice at least once or twice. If you work from home, it's pretty easy after a lunch break, something like that could also be in the evening when you get home as well. Some people use it to help fall asleep.

(00:56:52):
And then the final thing that I would recommend is if you have the resources and you have access, finding a somatic practitioner or somatic therapist is so [inaudible 00:57:03]. I mean, I emerged a completely different human on the other side of the 200 breathwork journeys. I have a different experience of life basically released so much time. Even my voice sounds different. If you listen to the podcast episodes I recorded four or five years ago, my voice is higher pitched. It just sounds different. It has a different resonant quality to it.

Lenny (00:57:27):
Wow. Okay, awesome. So you've kind of summarized, I was going to try to summarize all the advice you've given, but if you were to do the bare minimum next steps based on this advice, try this 4, 4, 8/3, 3, 6/2, 2, 4. Does 2, 2, 4 work too if you just go real fast I guess?

Jonny Miller (00:57:28):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:57:45):
Yeah.

Jonny Miller (00:57:46):
Okay.

Lenny (00:57:46):
Okay, perfect. Okay, so do that for a couple mornings. See how that does try this NSDR practice. We'll link to a recording of how to do that and then was there something else you recommended? Oh, somatic worker, basically maybe a therapist, maybe not someone that helps you with your body.

Jonny Miller (00:58:06):
Yeah, and I'd add in the eight practice for even 15 seconds before the breathing in the morning and after, just so that you notice the difference. And if you do the NSDR, that is basically a 15-minute interoception practice as well. So you're kind of getting two birds with one stone with that practice.

Lenny (00:58:24):
What's your perspective on meditation? Does that fit into this? Do you find the NSDR replaces the need for meditation?

Jonny Miller (00:58:29):
That is a big topic. I am an avid meditator as what I've done many 10 day silent retreats. I was in a dark room for 10 days.

Lenny (00:58:40):
Wow.

Jonny Miller (00:58:41):
With meditation, I think it really depends on what you are training. It's like saying what's your opinion on exercise? Well, are you training mobility or stamina or strength? It's the same with meditation. You could be training loving kindness. You could be training your focus and attention. You could be training spacious awareness. So I'm a big fan of embodied meditation practices. So this is often the classic vipassana body scan is a good example. Again, I mean that's basically interoceptive practice where you are just moving your attention through different parts of your body over and over and over again for days on end.

(00:59:17):
In the case of vipassana retreat, meditation is helpful for the specific skill of increasing the psychological space between a stimulus and your response. So if you have some degree of meditation practice instead of getting wrapped up in a certain emotion or we're even believing a certain thought pattern, there's usually an ability to kind of step back a little bit and see if what it's, so there definitely is a place for meditation. But my viewpoint is that we've kind of over-indexed for mindfulness and meditation in over the last 20 years. There's so many apps, there's so there's much talk about it and we've completely forgotten the body-based approaches. So I'm not saying don't meditate. I think meditation for sure has its place, especially if your goal is more of the traditional waking up and seeing through the nature of the self, that's a different kind of path in my opinion. But if you're looking to function more effectively and be more in tune with your body, then there's a whole different category of practices in this bottom up variety that we've touched on today.

Lenny (01:00:27):
On the topic of bottom up, I imagine you're a big fan of this book that everyone always talks about, The Body Keeps Score, I think it's called. Would you recommend that book? Is it connected in a large part to the stuff you talk about? What do you think of that book specifically? Because I hear about it all with him.

Jonny Miller (01:00:41):
Yeah, it's a good book. It's by Bessal van der Kolk and there's another writer I think Peter Levine says, "The issues are in the tissues." Is basically the concept. And this is the idea that we have these incomplete mobilization reflexes that are stored in our body and often held as tension. It's not strictly true to say that the trauma is in the body. It is actually a cortical map in the brain which kind of tracks these things. But for kind of practical purposes, it looks and feels as if there is stored grief in my right hip or anger in my solar plexus, that's the experience that we have. And the more that you become aware of these sensations and start to develop emotional fluidity essentially, the more that tension is released and the less reactive you become and the more emotional debt you pay off. So I think The Body Keeps The Score, I think a more accurate way would be the body is the scorecard in a way. I think that's kind a slight reframe. And if you're interested in this, the work of Peter Levine, Waking the Tiger is the seminal book on this mobilization reflex stuff that I'm describing.

Lenny (01:01:51):
I never need that part of it. And basically it's actually kept in the brain, but it comes across as somewhere in the body.

Jonny Miller (01:01:57):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny (01:01:58):
Fascinating. I want to spend a little time on a new segment that we have in this podcast that I call Contrarian Corner. So let's visit Contrarian Corner, I feel like you'll have something interesting here. So the question is there something that you have a very contrarian opinion about, something that you believe that a lot of other people really don't believe?

Jonny Miller (01:02:17):
We've already touched on I'm not a big fan of talk based meditation, which will probably get me some comments I would imagine. I'd say the other one that's worth mentioning is I think that we vastly underestimate the impact of burnout, particularly from a bottom line perspective. There was a research report that I did a couple of years ago where we interviewed these leaders and they'd all experienced burnout of some degree. And we said, if you were to estimate how much this costs your startup or business, what would you say? And the median response was a hundred thousand dollars, which I imagine is more than most people would think.

(01:02:57):
And most people aren't actively investing in burnout insurance. Like it's not something that's on many people's radar besides meditation practices and things like that. And I think part of the reason that the cost is higher is because there are these second and third order consequences of talent attrition, of opportunity costs, lost productivity, you lose great leaders, make shitty decisions in the run up to the burnout itself. There's also this idea of emotional contagion, which there's some research from Wharton I believe, and they show that the leader or the CEO has a disproportionate impact or their emotional state has a disproportionate impact on the people in their team. So something I'd like to say is the nervous system of an organization is a reflection of the nervous system of the CEO. And so I think that's just something which I would like to see talked about more.

Lenny (01:03:53):
Just on this idea of burnout, I don't think you're saying don't work really hard If you want to work really hard, it's that you need to maintain your body and mind and nervous system if you're working insanely hard. If you're working long hours, feel free, but just know there's debt you're building up and you need to be doing things to pay off that debt as you're doing that.

Jonny Miller (01:04:11):
Precisely. It is very much like building technical debt in the early days of a startup. It's worth doing, but just do it intentionally. Know that you're doing that and that. So let's say you work really hard for eight months, you give yourself a month or two off to really downshift. And it's also really worth building that nervous system capacity. It's great to be able to push it really hard and focus and then combine it with that rest ethic as well. So do NSDRs, kind of find a way to downshift so that way of working can be sustainable.

Lenny (01:04:44):
Jonny, we reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Jonny Miller (01:04:48):
Let's do it.

Lenny (01:04:49):
First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Jonny Miller (01:04:53):
I actually had a sense this question was coming and I have the books with me here. The first book is Constellations by David White. This is the book that I've gifted most to friends, I think more than any other book. And he basically has 52 definitions of words like ambition is I think the first word. And his writing, it just blows me away. I open this to a random page, read the definition, and it's probably affected me more than any other book. So that's one that I love. 15 Commitments of Conscious Leadership, which is I imagine has come up before in your podcast. This is by Jim Dethmer and Diana Chapman. They have the Conscious Leadership Group. And this is basically, in my opinion, it's the best leadership book that I've come across and it combines practicality with a lot of great theory. So this is awesome. And then finally, this is a bit out there, but Recapture the Rapture by Jamie Wheal, big fan of Jamie's work, Jamie's writing. This is kind of three books in one. The beginning is addressing the meta-crisis and a lot of the craziness that we're seeing in the world. The second chapter is very related to what we've been talking about, he calls it Hedonic Engineering and it's basically practices for shifting your state of consciousness. And the third is Ethical Cult Building, which I'll leave that there. [inaudible 01:06:22].

Lenny (01:06:22):
Do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show you really enjoyed?

Jonny Miller (01:06:28):
My wife and I love animations and we saw Kubo and the Two Strings recently, which was fantastic. Just so, so great. That and also Wolf Walkers, which was an Apple TV series. Yeah, those have been my two favorite movies I've seen recently.

Lenny (01:06:46):
If you like animated content, check out the Scavengers Reign on HBO. I've mentioned it on this podcast before, but it's incredible. It's a TV show on HBO. So I usually ask, do you have a favorite question you like to ask candidates you're interviewing? But I know you coach people, so to kind of turn this question a little bit around, do you have a favorite question you like to ask executive coaching clients that you work with?

Jonny Miller (01:07:08):
I stole this question from a guy Jerry Colonna who's here in Boulder, and the question is amazing. It is so good. It's basically, how are you complicit in creating the conditions that you say you don't want? And so the word complicit there is key because it's not saying in what ways is it your fault, but it's like in what ways were you complicit in creating the conditions for anxiety, for building up emotional debt? And just the question kind of opens up the door to ways in which you are an active participant in creating these challenges in your life. And it's a really rich journal question or a question to explore with a friend, co-founder colleague.

Lenny (01:07:53):
I remember him sharing that on the Tim Ferriss podcast many years ago and it stuck with me and I often think of it, but I never am complicit of anything that goes wrong. It's never my fault. He has nothing on me. Just kidding.

Jonny Miller (01:08:06):
Excellent.

Lenny (01:08:08):
Do you have a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really like?

Jonny Miller (01:08:11):
One is these blue blocking glasses. These are raw optics, blue blocker glasses. They block out a hundred percent of blue light and they are a lifesaver if I'm ever going out of the house basically after dark, I'll wear these to drive. I'll wear these to even dinners with friends sometimes. And it basically means that I'm able to then sleep well that evening. So that's one.

(01:08:38):
And then the other thing I'll briefly share, this came through the other day, you mentioned the vagus nerve earlier and that device, I have three devices here that are all vagus nerve stimulation devices. This one is called Neuro Sim. This one I believe is Pulsetto, and I think this is a Apollo Strap. I haven't used them that much yet, but they basically work by sending low level electrical stimulation directly to your vagus nerve. So this clips on your ear because the vagus nerve goes through the right side of the neck. Same with Pulsetto. And I'm really curious to compare the effect of these versus say breathwork, humming, the other body-based practices. Obviously, you can do both at the same time, but I am just interested in playing. So I wouldn't recommend them yet, but I think it's interesting that they exist.

Lenny (01:09:29):
How cool would that be? We just put these things on, we don't have to do anything else. We just get up, slap on our device and life is amazing. Don't have to meditate, don't have to breathe in a different way. I'm going to need to do this while I'm on the podcast just wear all these devices, see how that goes. Awesome. Well, I guess somehow report back to us how these go because that feels really great. Next question, do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to share with friends, either in work or in life?

Jonny Miller (01:10:00):
State over story would be one which we've touched on.

Lenny (01:10:02):
State over story.

Jonny Miller (01:10:04):
And then I think the other one, which I think about often is I like to say, "Make generous assumptions." And by that I mean in any situation, what is the most generous story that I can tell of this person, of this situation? Not kind of naively fabricating something, but usually there's a spectrum of I can assume that they're a bad person and they did this thing out of spite, or maybe they had a bad day, maybe they have a lot of emotional debt. There's there's many stories that can be told. And I usually try to have a practice of telling the most generous story that I can.

Lenny (01:10:47):
I like that a lot. Another way of describing that is just assume good intentions, which I often think about.

Jonny Miller (01:10:53):
Exactly.

Lenny (01:10:54):
Final question. You seem extremely calm always, and very centered and stable. What still gets you rilled up and unsettled, and what do you do when that happens?

Jonny Miller (01:11:07):
Well, I was nervous before this podcast, so I did some breathing practices and some stretching and some humming before jumping on here. I still at times notice ways in which I'm conflict avoidant. I've been working on it actively for a while, but there's a part of me that can sometimes avoid conflict. And so I've actually noticed how there's a relationship between that and having a healthy relationship to anger. So basically giving myself permission to express frustration, not at someone, but just allow it to be there. And then from that place set better boundaries with my time with what I'm doing, saying no to certain things. I think that's the practice that's most alive for me right now.

Lenny (01:11:53):
Jonny, you are awesome. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online and explore the things that you offer? I think you teach a course, whatever else you offer, talk about that and then how can listeners be useful to you?

Jonny Miller (01:12:06):
Yeah, well, this has been so much fun. I am very active on Twitter or X. My handle is Jonny Miller. It's J-O-N-N-Y-M-1-L-L-E-R. And yeah, if this was interesting or listeners would like to dive deeper, I teach a course. Our next cohort is running in the spring, the end of March. Applications are now open, and the website is nsmastery.com/lenny. I've created a custom page and there's a $250 juicy discount for listeners if they want to sign up.

Lenny (01:12:39):
I got to sign up for this myself. I didn't know you're going to do that. That's awesome. And NS Mastery stands for Nervous System Mastery.

Jonny Miller (01:12:47):
Exactly.

Lenny (01:12:48):
Amazing. Anything else? And then the second question of how listeners can be useful to you.

Jonny Miller (01:12:52):
Well, firstly, if any of this resonates, I'd love to hear from you on Twitter or email me as well. I can pass over my email and I would just love it if you experiment with this stuff. I love this idea of just being a scientist of life. So if anything that we've talked about resonates or any of the practices you want to try, just go out and try it and see how it feels and then tell me about it. That would be the greatest gift I think.

Lenny (01:13:23):
And the best way to tell you about it is tweet at you or is there something else?

Jonny Miller (01:13:26):
Tweet at me or my email is jonny@curioushumans.com. So feel free to email me as well.

Lenny (01:13:32):
All right, I'm going to use all these things. Jonny, thank you so much for being here. You're awesome. I am excited for the show notes we're going to have to give people actual tools to use to become less anxious and nervous in their work and life. Thank you again for being here.

Jonny Miller (01:13:46):
Amazing. Thanks so much, Lenny. This was super fun.

Lenny (01:13:48):
Same for me. Bye everyone.

(01:13:51):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:00:00):
When I was a kid and I was growing up in the Midwest, entertainment was like going to the dog tracks. The way that they motivated the dogs was they had these fake rabbits. These tails would go around faster than the dogs, which would then motivate the dogs to go around in circles. And what was interesting is the moment that the dogs, if they accidentally touched the rabbit, they would never run again because there was like, "Well, what's next? I've achieved what I was looking for." So I think this happens a ton, it's like your listeners are spending time focused on like, "Well, one day I will be X. I will be that vice president. I will have more money. I will have built something. I will have started a company." But they don't think about what happens next. What's the second thing? What's your career next look like? How do you ensure that you are always going to have something important and motivating to do with your career? Otherwise, you'll keep working because you know nothing else to do, but you'll be sadder or you'll find ways to create war when peace is needed.

Lenny (00:01:05):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard one experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Nikhyl Singhal. Nikhyl has worked on and led large teams on four different influential consumer products including Facebook, Credit Karma, Google Hangouts, and Google Photos. Currently, he leads product teams for the Facebook app at Meta, overseeing groups, stories, messaging, and the feed. Before that, he served as chief product officer at Credit Karma and held various leadership roles at Google. Nikhyl has also co-founded three different startups, and as you'll hear in this episode, is extremely passionate about coaching and mentoring, sharing his knowledge through his newsletter and podcast called The Skip.

Lenny (00:01:47):
In our conversation, we cover all aspects of the PM career and what it takes to be successful at every stage of the journey, including the dangers of thinking too short term, the importance of avoiding what he calls ex-growth companies, why you're probably not getting promoted, what to focus on if you're a new manager, the rise of the senior IC path, also why top leaders often have huge development areas they don't know about and how to catch them, and also why people who make it to the top often run into serious mental health challenges. As I say at the end of this episode, this might be my new favorite episode and I'm really excited to bring it to you. With that, I bring you Nikhyl Singhal after a short word from our sponsors.

Lenny (00:02:28):
This episode is brought to you by Superhuman. How much time do you spend in email each day? How about your team? You may not realize this, but your email tools are wasting your time. Superhuman is blazingly fast email for high-performing teams. Built to work with Gmail and Outlook, teams who use Superhuman spend half the time in their inboxes, respond to twice the number of emails, and save over four hours a week. That's over a month of saved time per year. With Superhuman, you can split your inbox into streams for VIPs, team members, and emails from your favorite products to reduce context switching and make sure you never miss an important email. You can start reminders if you don't hear back so that you can follow up and never drop the ball on an email thread. You can also work faster than ever before with powerful AI features like writing, editing, summarizing, and even translating. Join the ranks of the most productive teams and unleash the power of Superhuman. Try one month free at superhuman.com/lenny. That's superhuman.com/lenny.

Lenny (00:03:31):
This episode is brought to you by Microsoft Clarity, a free, easy-to-use tool that captures how real people are actually using your site. You can watch live session replays to discover where users are breezing through your flow and where they struggle. You can view instant heat maps to see what parts of your page users are engaging with and what content they're ignoring. You can also pinpoint what's bothering your users with really cool frustration metrics like rage clicks, and dead clicks, and much more.

Lenny (00:03:56):
If you listen to this podcast, you know how often we talk about the importance of knowing your users and by seeing how users truly experience your product, you can identify product opportunities, conversion wins, and find big gaps between how you imagine people using your product and how they actually use it. Microsoft Clarity makes it all possible with a simple yet incredibly powerful set of features. You'll be blown away by how easy Clarity is to use and it's completely free forever. You'll never run into traffic limits or be forced upgrade to a paid version. It also works across both apps and websites. Stop guessing, get clarity, check out Clarity at clarity.microsoft.com.

Lenny (00:04:40):
Nikhyl, welcome to the podcast.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:04:43):
Thank you, Lenny. I appreciate it. I'm happy to be here.

Lenny (00:04:45):
So I have a very simple question to start. How many product managers have you been a mentor to if you had to put a number on it?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:04:53):
Good question. I guess I haven't thought about it from that perspective. I would say hundreds is probably the way to sort of answer the question, and a little bit has to do with whether how we define being a mentor. I know that was supposed to be a simple question and I'm going to give you a complicated answer, but I think that I started out just helping people 10, 15 years ago, trying to help them through their careers. I find the whole area really interesting. And then what happened was just I started to scale because people were always like, "Hey, can you find time?"

Nikhyl Singhal (00:05:22):
So now what I do is I tend to help and coach hundreds of folks through transitions. So if they're in a moment where they're trying to decide between another job, if they're trying to decide to leave, if they're having sort of an alert at work, I call them 911 calls. I take a few 911 calls every week and from a relatively large group of people. So I find those are the most substantive times to help people, is when they're in moments of dilemma or forks in the road, and that's why the number is more closer to hundreds.

Lenny (00:05:54):
Okay. Follow-up question: How many of those people you've mentored have been on this podcast?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:05:58):
Probably half dozen to kind of close to a dozen at this point.

Lenny (00:06:02):
Oh, wow.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:06:03):
Yeah, easily half dozen.

Lenny (00:06:06):
Amazing. Okay. Is there any names you want to name or should we keep it anonymous?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:06:09):
Yeah. We'll keep it anonymous because I want people to feel they can always call me in and not feel like that. I don't tend to share the names of most people.

Lenny (00:06:17):
Okay. I know the one person that self-identified was Annie Pearl from Calendly, who is a big advocate of the stuff that you do. So we don't want-

Nikhyl Singhal (00:06:23):
Yeah. Annie is someone I learned from and helped talk with, and she's also part of a community that I also build on the side where we pulled a bunch of CPOs together and they've been building community. I'm a big fan of community and learning, and she's part of that as well.

Lenny (00:06:39):
Awesome. I definitely want to talk about that, but maybe just set a little context for our conversation. I feel like you're in the very high percentiles of people that have seen a variety of careers in product management, both good careers, bad careers, junior people, senior people. So I want to focus most of our time on talking about just the PM career path and what you've learned about what is important to have a successful, thriving, happy PM career. Does that sound good?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:07:07):
Perfect.

Lenny (00:07:08):
Okay. So I'm thinking we break up the chat into early career, mid-career, and late career. So within the early career section, you've talked about how people often make a mistake in their early career, specifically being very short-term focused in deciding where they're going to go. And that's a very dangerous way of thinking about it. So I'd love to hear just your take on exactly what does that mean, and why is that actually a bad idea?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:07:33):
Yeah. I tend to be long-term focused in most of my counsel, and maybe to give you an example of what a short-term focus career kind of framework looks like is, "I really dislike my boss. I feel like this company doesn't have it anymore. There's just too hard to ship things." Those are all maybe true statements, but they probably exist in many of the jobs that one would consider if they were to move for one to another. Lateral moves are by definition not forward moves. So what I try to tell people to think about is work backwards from your end state.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:08:12):
Almost think of career as a product. So if you're building a good product, you think about, "Well, here's what a great product would look like," and then you break it into version one, version two, version three. Well, in some ways the reason I called my newsletter, my podcast The Skip is because I always think about not the next job, but the one after it. Maybe think about not your boss's job but your boss's boss's job and what do I need to think about to get there. And in many ways you may think, "Well, okay, if I need to found a company one day and that's my job after next," then you want to look at maybe your current job and then maybe the next job in service of that. And that may lead you to saying, "Hey, maybe I need a grit of doubt and maybe I should stay and maybe I should learn how to deal with some of this ambiguity. That's why I want people to be a bit more longer term and not so short-term focused.

Lenny (00:09:07):
What are some other examples of that short-term thinking? You talked about "my manager sucks, things are moving really slowly." What other examples where people maybe like, "Oh, okay, I see, this is actually short term. Let me think longer term"?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:09:17):
I'd say the biggest one in workplace is focusing career and promotion together. I think that there's perhaps a light connection between promotion and career addition, but I feel like too many people are, the moment we talk about career, they're like, "Well, let me talk to you. I want to have a career talk with you." And I said, "Sure, why don't you find some time?" We sit down together and they're like, "Well, what do you think I need to do to get to promotion?" And then I said, "Well, promotion is our system at this company to see you moving forward. And it's pretty clear in terms of levels and what you're doing and what the process is and who makes the decision." And that's pretty short term because you can ask, "Hey, it's two years away, how do I make it 18 months?" It's a classic.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:10:09):
But in reality, if you're thinking career, you're thinking about the sort of long term arc and, as I said, maybe the job after next, and then you need to look at the promotion in service because how many people have you and I talked to who said, "Well then, as soon as I get promoted, I'm going to leave"? So then I'm like, "Well, okay, then what's the promotion in service of?" And you get into that conversation, which tends to be, again, very long-term focused.

Lenny (00:10:36):
This makes me think about this interesting two-sided challenge with thinking about your future career and where you want to go. On the one hand, it's valuable to think about getting more logos in your resume and working at Netflix and Meta and Airbnb and Uber, all these guys, there's power and value to that. On the other hand, you just keep doing that. And then what is your life turning into? You're just chasing more fancy logos and feeling better about better brands and your resume and stuff. This might be too big a question, but just how do you advise people to think about how important it's to get some of these companies in your resume and build that side of it versus just doing things you actually enjoy and having a fulfilling life and doing things that are meaningful to you?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:11:18):
Yeah. I mean I think collecting labels does feel shallow to most builders because if you're a product person, you probably got into the business because you like building stuff. And frankly, not just product people want to do that, a lot of technical people want to just build stuff. And then the question is, is the things that you're working on in service of building? And then when you ask people, "Were you happy?" as they always say, "Well, when I was able to build this thing," and oftentimes they don't care whether it worked or not, which is kind of ironic. So for me, when I see people chasing logos, I think about it as well. I'm actually really a big fan of a diverse set of experiences, that I think learning about pre-product market fit then seeing smoke turn into fire and witnessing and maybe shepherding that and then taking fire and turning it into something great and being an experience set where you can see the movie in these different frames makes you just a better builder.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:12:20):
So you can't really go wrong if you're looking at those experiences. And you're looking at inside the building problems and outside the building problems, those are maybe consumer problems and business-to-business problems. The more diverse career you have, the better builder you are. And that usually comes up being satisfied. But the idea of just doing that because you think it's going to make your chances better for the next job maybe scares me and it feels very much in service of some future dream that is not build oriented. And I think that can be leading to sadness.

Lenny (00:12:54):
I love that advice, and I say this often actually on this podcast, the power of a diversity of experiences for so many reasons. Maybe just to close this loop, would you agree there is a lot of value in having one of these FAANG ish companies on your resume? Like a lot of opportunity gets unlocked if you work at one of these companies that people are like, "Oh wow, okay, this person's interesting." Or not? Or do people maybe overthink that?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:13:17):
Generically, the answer is yes. I think it's especially important for executives. I think that many executives are hired because they are to bring expertise of the next phase of organization to this company. We're growing, we want to go after the next phase. We want someone who's has expertise. The MAGMA or FAANG companies, however you want to describe them, they really have challenges and expertise at how to build things at scale, how to manage millions or billions of users and customers. So the advantage is, to be successful at that is an endorsement. Having said that, those specific companies, experiences can be substituted for other later stage companies, but if you're coming in as an executive to bring someone to the next level and you've never experienced it, it's very difficult thing to get that executive experience and to be like a C-level for that growth company.

Lenny (00:14:26):
To point out, FAANG is no longer accurate because Facebook is now Meta. So MAGMA is the term that you prefer.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:14:33):
I prefer that. I think it unfortunately kicks out Netflix, but it also doesn't pay homage to Adobe and Salesforce and a number of other great companies. So I think-

Lenny (00:14:42):
FAANG doesn't. Okay, I like this. Okay, let's try to make MAGMA the new thing. MAGMA, make that the title of this episode. Just joking.

Lenny (00:14:50):
So the next area I want to touch on is, you wrote this kind of hot take on something you call ex-growth companies and how it's not good to be at an ex-growth company currently. So can you just talk about what is an ex-growth company and then why is that not a good place to be as a product manager for probably any kind of role?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:15:09):
I have a pretty strong opinion on this that I think that for 10 years we created the hypergrowth, blitzscaling type phenomenon, and there was a lot of good reasons for that, some of which were just distribution platforms just got so good. You could take out Facebook ads, you could grow with Google, and you could grow in 18 months that maybe took previous companies 10 years. So I think that the idea was that all of these companies could instantly grow when they found product market fit and that birthed all these unicorns. And then suddenly, 18 months ago, it almost like the music stopped. 0% interest rate went away, and it became a lot harder to find growth through just fueling it with capital. And I think that the sudden change meant that not only capital was harder to raise, but companies started to focus on their core products. You've talked about it on this podcast, just how many layoffs and restructuring and managers moving to ICs, and all of that work is happening.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:16:16):
Well, the one funny pocket was there's these large number of growth companies who have raised substantive dollars. So they're not going to run out of capital in 2022 or 2023. What's going to happen is, they actually have quite long periods of time, so you don't see them raising new rounds, you don't see them laying off, but in some ways they're still hiring or they're still seeking the next product. The sad truth is that many of their contemporary companies that went public are worth 10% or less than what they were worth back then, and these companies are privately held and so they're sort of sleeping in the shadows.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:17:07):
My fear is, from a career point of view, so many tech professionals are in these organizations or joining these organizations with the expectation that they'll make money on their equity, that they'll continue to do fine. And my sense is we're going to see, even in the second half of this year, lots of boards pulling back, taking their capital back, companies essentially saying, "Hey, we're capitalized. We're a scaled ocean liner, and now we need to go find product market fit." But doing that with 300 people and expectations of hitting a multi-billion dollar valuation just isn't going to happen. So that's the reason why I'm like, "Danger. This is not the company to join, this is the company to leave. Find another phase. Time's a wasting." And I worry very much that people aren't getting the message.

Lenny (00:18:00):
I know you probably don't want to name any names of companies, but what are some signs that may be you're at one of these companies?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:18:07):
I think that the moment that you are reframing the core product, trying to find that product market implies that this company's valuation needs to be a pre-product market fit valuation. So the two questions you ask yourself the day after we listen to this podcast is, "Hey, are we scaling a product? We have customers that love us and we have a tremendous sucking sound? Or are we trying to find that customer sucking sound?" And if the answer is, "We're still trying to find it," and then you're like, "Is your evaluation hundreds of millions or tens of millions?" and if the answer is hundreds or more and you're still trying to find that sucking sound, you're an ex-growth company.

Lenny (00:18:57):
As a founder listening to this, I bet you're like, "Damn, we don't want people leaving. This isn't the kind of message we want to hear." On the other hand, as an employee at a company, that is your advice, just generally recognize it and then you should probably leave as soon as possible because things are not going to work out for you.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:19:15):
As an employee, I think you have almost no recourse because you almost have to start over in terms of it's a new four-year investment. I think that as a founder, you can recap your company. You can reset your stock price, you could reissue. You can make those hard decisions and you can maybe return some of the money to the board and still continue, or you can pull the plug and restart the company that maybe you really wanted to. But I think the founder is in a better position, but they also have a lot more to lose and far more constraints. But employees, they're not... If you listen to this and come to this conclusion, a lot of times, the listeners here, half or more of their compensation is an equity and we just concluded that most of their equity may not be worth anything. In which case, are you willing to take a half pay cut or work for 20% of what you can get on the market? My question is, that seems to be quite concerning, the opportunity cost is just too rich.

Lenny (00:20:19):
An important variable in this framework/piece of advice is product market fit. This might be too big of a question, but just, what tells you that something might have not have product market fit when you're at a company like this? What are signs to you and smoke signals of like, "They may not have product market fit"?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:20:36):
For me, it's always around this pull that sort of how much work do you have to do to basically generate pull? So right now with OpenAI for example, we're seeing ridiculous pull, but we may not be seeing, for example, massive revenue or profitability. So that's the reason why I tend to feel like you can kind of tell by how hard it is to acquire your users. When companies are putting very little in marketing and there're people coming into the door or there's such an easy sale, you've got it. I think that this sucking pull kind of concept feels like the most appropriate way to define it as opposed to the sort of unit economics of acquisition and time to pay back. There are lots of mathy ways to do it, but early on you can tell how hard are you working to bring people in the door.

Lenny (00:21:32):
Is there any reason to consider staying at a company like this?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:21:35):
There are counter examples. I think the counterpoint is, this is the biggest role that you feel like you could get and you have an appetite to sort of learn like, "I'm on the executive team, I'm not going to get that somewhere else. That experience is career additive. I want that moment." Great. Sometimes I see loyalty come in, "This was my baby. I feel a commitment to the team, the team that I've made, et cetera."

Lenny (00:22:07):
Yeah.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:22:08):
I actually respect that. I think that you have to put bounds on that. I think that you should have that conversation. But the learning position, the loyalty tend to be the primary reasons to maybe delay the decision, but fear of finding another job is a bad reason, but is an often common reason as well.

Lenny (00:22:34):
Now that we've given many listeners an existential crisis, let me move on to another question within the early career phase and then I'm going to move on to mid-career. I guess the question is just, is there any other piece of advice, wisdom for early PMs? Maybe the question is, what do you think they should most get right in their early career?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:22:56):
There's probably two answers that I would share. One is, they want to build something that they as much as possible are world-class in. So if you think about the different types of product ambiguities that exist in industry, you can be a great crafter. You could be incredibly strong at market ambiguity. You could understand how to navigate markets and create something new that doesn't exist. You can be great at organizational ambiguity. I know how to take complex teams that have complex goals and solve an inside the building problem. You can be a domain expert. I'm an ML expert, I'm a really strong hardware PM. You can be a team expert. I just really thrive in managing managers and I just know how to get the balance right. So, being a product manager means you're confronted with maybe all five or maybe more of these. I want to know that you pick up one of these as early as possible.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:24:07):
So maybe you become an expert in domain, maybe you become a great crafter, maybe you really think through how to manage growth. Growth is another one that I would add to the list. But picking a lane is kind of goal number one. And then maybe goal number two is having a story to tell to that next employer and that next, next. What I worry about is, sometimes when I'm in an interview, and you and I have probably done hundreds, and you're talking to someone and then they talk about those early jobs and they just sort of said they were there, this happened and it's very hard to connect, tell me exactly what you learned and what you did, I want to know that story. So it's just like Amazon talks about building the press release before they start creating a product. Think about the story, think about the skill, then solve your day to day, your week to week, your month to month, your performance review. That's my biggest advice I seize.

Lenny (00:25:12):
I love that advice. It connects to your other earlier piece of advice, of just try to get a variety of experiences because that'll help you figure out which of these things is maybe best suited for what you're interested in, what you enjoy doing.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:25:24):
Yep, absolutely.

Lenny (00:25:25):
Awesome. So let's transition to mid-career. Let's talk about promotions. You mentioned getting promoted earlier. We chatted a bit about that. There's probably no one ever that didn't want to get promoted. It's a common topic in people's career, but a lot of times people don't understand why they're not getting promoted, they're not sure people are looking for to get promoted. You've promoted a lot of people and you've gone through a lot of promotions. What would be your advice to give people who are trying to get promoted and just haven't been promoted? What would you suggest people in that position generally do?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:25:57):
Yeah, it's a great question. I think that we want to kind of understand why, and oftentimes asking your manager won't reveal the answer. So then you'll start with that. I think that the answer of what you do is correlated with what's the real reason. And I think that there may be, I'll suggest four kind of common things I've seen that really hold people back. And then depending on your environment, you have to decide how many of these apply.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:26:25):
So I think the number one is that you just don't have advocacy. You need someone to see the magic in you to be promoted. There is many of your listeners who have that magic but maybe have a manager or a promotion team, it doesn't always have to be the manager itself, who doesn't see said magic. And in that case, if you have the magic, you're in a bad setting and you just need to change. That could be a shift within the project. You could find a manager who sees it. It could be leaving the company. I think the second that's very common now, Lenny, and I think it's coming up a ton, is the next role doesn't exist.

Lenny (00:27:10):
Mm-hmm.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:27:11):
So this is not as present in hypergrowth because the next role always did exist. There was always growth, there was always hiring, you're always hiring people above you, below you, et cetera. Now, I think there's lots of examples of people who are really qualified and working at the next level, but the job doesn't exist. So you can't really create that job and ask them to be working at that next job if their position is mostly the previous one. Again, I feel like it's not that satisfying because it means you're still being held back, but it's radically different than if you're unqualified. These two are sort of more, the system is not in a position to advocate.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:27:58):
The third is when you are being impatient. And I think the hardest ones that I think I've worked with is, the highest performers have succeeded because they have set their goals to be more aggressive than what was essentially average achievable. By default, we expect you to be two years in this role. They're like, "Great, I'll see you in a year." And then they get frustrated when they can't do that, and leadership takes longer to absorb. It's more soft skills, it's more subtle. Oftentimes it's based on impact, which is a lot of times lagging, and that tends to be frustrating. So if listeners are like, "I know I'm used to being promoted annually and now I'm a leader and I'm not moving as quickly, it's time for me to go," I'm like, well, maybe that's working as intended. So impatience is a number three.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:28:54):
And then the fourth one I think is about 50% of the cases where it's really, there is a development area but it isn't quite connected to the individual. The listener has a development area, it's substantive. The manager is poor at identifying it, perhaps even doesn't see it, but the promotion committee does, the individual refuses to hear it, which is a very common one. Or they hear it and they just don't want to change it. And they don't do it because they're arrogant, they do it because it's like, "This is who I am. You want me to be X and I'm Y, and that's what a Y is and I don't want to be X." This is the hardest one because this is where coaching and development and self-awareness come in.

Lenny (00:29:46):
Amazing. This super resonates. So just to summarize the four reasons you may not be getting promoted: One is, there's no advocate that sees your magic and understands that you're awesome. Two is, there's no actual role that's available and so there's nothing to get promoted to. And that's so true right now, there's just not. Everyone's laying people off, they're getting rid of manager layers. I totally see that all over the place. Three is, you're probably just not being patient. Four, you actually have some work to do and you shouldn't be promoted. Maybe to follow a thread on that first one, if someone doesn't see your magic, I see a lot of people just complaining that like, "Oh, I'm doing so well, I'm so great and nobody understands it. No one gives me credit. No one really appreciates me." I don't know if there is an answer to this, but is there a way to help people see that no, you're actually not doing great versus you are and people just don't see it? What's a sign maybe? Maybe you're not as great as you think you might be.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:30:41):
The cheap answer is you have to get real feedback, not formal feedback. I think that the more scaled the company is, the more they have these systems in place which provide formal feedback. But honestly, we've run experiments where we said let's ignore the formal feedback, let's have a real conversation with my peers on how our teams are doing. The signal that comes out are dramatically different than the formal feedback. So what you're looking for when you feel like you're in this situation where you're not being seen, and it might be because there's a real issue, what you really want to dial into is, "Let me get the ground truth as to what people are thinking," and you have to have very strong listener skills where we all have been in the discussion, where you're giving feedback to someone and the next thing that they tell you is they justify how you're wrong, that you missed this. "Let me tell you about exactly why that situation that you're using wasn't..."

Nikhyl Singhal (00:31:43):
You have to be great at pulling feedback, listening to it. You have to triangulate it from people that don't see you all the time, that do see you all the time, your peers. But you have to create an environment of safety where people feel like there is no worry about retaliation or concern, et cetera. And the more comfortable people are about giving feedback to you and the more you have the skills to pull it and you don't trust formal or you don't trust manager, the better shot you have of truly understanding what that real issue is and solving it.

Lenny (00:32:16):
This reminds me of Jules Walter who's on the podcast. He gave a bunch of advice. I don't know if you saw that. I've had to accept feedback and get people to give you feedback. And one of its pieces of advice is, ask people for real feedback. And no matter how much you're melting inside hearing it, just be like, "Thank you so much for that." Because then, people feel like, "All right, he's listening."

Nikhyl Singhal (00:32:34):
I think Jules is a great, probably one of the world's best people in pulling feedback in my experience. I think that the one that even ones up it is, when I talk to Jules, Jules will look for feedback, then he'll repeat it back to me better than even I presented it. And then I'd say, "Well, let me now feel safer to even provide." Because anyone who's explaining it to a place that they all not only internalize it but they can articulate clearly understands and values it. And that's the really powerful way is, "So what you're saying is I just interrupt far too often and some ways it's almost to a point that it's annoying. Is that a fair assessment?" "Oh, that's actually not the words I use," but that's what really gets people comfortable in sharing with you what's really going on.

Lenny (00:33:24):
Amazing. I think we're discovering some of these people that have worked with you that have been on the podcast slowly. Maybe while we're on this topic, I didn't expect to go here, but in terms of other tips for getting good feedback, is there anything else that just comes top of mind of how to get better feedback from people? Because it's hard to do. Most people talk about getting feedback and then don't, or they just don't know how. So one is just, you said repeat back exactly what they told you and be like very appreciative. Is there anything else?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:33:51):
I'd share out feedback. It's a little easier when you are a manager, but for example, most managers that are listening have a staff discussion. Maybe it's sort of awkward, but maybe you have a standup and you are giving notes to people. So as a manager, someone will come to me and they'll give me a piece of feedback. The next Monday when I have my staff meeting, I'll make a comment about something and I'll say, "Well, lot of this came because I got this great piece of feedback from..." and I'll name the person, and I'm like, "It really helped me see this challenge." Now, that feedback could be about me or about this project or about the team. And it might be positive, it might be constructive. People hear that and they're like, "Wow, I get recognized for giving this guy feedback. Sign me up." You're always trying to find way to break down that barrier.

Lenny (00:34:45):
I love that tip. You talked about managers and how often managers are not great at managers. Maybe they don't identify development areas, maybe they're bad in other areas. So maybe just a question here of just, why are managers often not great? And then two, if you're a new manager, I think a lot of listeners are maybe transitioning to management or about to transition, what's your advice for being successful as a new manager?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:35:12):
I'll start by saying that, in a hundred years when the archeologists look back and they see tech in the sort of early years of tech, the first 34 years, they'll say that the biggest surprise was how much we thought it was okay to not train managers. The military probably didn't make that mistake for very long before they corrected it. And most immature industries really train managers, but boy, if you're a good coder, you are ready to manage. That's the way the industry works. If you can talk, you are ready to product manage. If you can product manage and ship something out the door, you should definitely tell people what to do. I think that there's such a loose coupling between the skills to be successful at building things and teaching people how to build. It's the difference between if you can make a good car, you must know how to make the factory that makes the car. I don't think that's true at all.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:36:18):
I think that this is a massive epidemic, that I think there's the thousand challenges that stem from this, whether it's challenges around bias, challenges around enabling coaching and teaching and solving development areas. My hope is that one day as an industry we find ways to improve and fix it. But podcasts like yours are actually quite meaningful steps. I would say that your podcast might be more meaningful than most L&D departments in most organizations today. So that's powerful because you're having a tremendous amount of impact, and I think learning is essentially a lifelong opportunity and I think that is the type of resources that just didn't exist a decade ago.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:37:03):
I think to answer your question around what are the common pitfalls, if you're a first time manager listening or maybe someone who's considering it, I think there are probably two quick things that I would say you have to get bravely thoughtful about as you enter into this journey. One is, your challenge is going to be to share the steering wheel with the person or the set of people you are managing. And I think that there's this three modes that people have in their head. They're like, "Oh, management is divide and conquering. You go there, I go there, we meet up."

Nikhyl Singhal (00:37:39):
Or they'll say it's like riding a bike, or teaching to ride a bike, I should say. Someone starts out on the bicycle, I hold your hand, I let go, and then I hope that you fly. I think it's more like the sidecar on the motorcycle, where person's driving the motorcycle and I'm on the sidecar and whether I like it or not, I'm attached, but I have this relatively specific role of giving counsel. I think that that model of how do you share the steering wheel, not just say you got it or I got it or I got it for a while, and then I hand it to you is the key question.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:38:15):
And then I think that the second miss that people tend to have is they tend to, because they have power, by the way, organizational power, not because they've earned that power, they start managing whatever they define that to be. And what I find is that you're more like the vampire knocking on the door of someone. You have to be invited in. You just can't walk through the threshold. And I think that no matter how senior the person that is the manager, you have to earn the right to be the person's manager. So maybe to be specific, well, if I start managing someone, the thing I'd like to understand is like, "Hey, well, what can I help you with?" And they can invite me in. Oftentimes, the answer is, "I don't need you. I actually wasn't excited about you as a manager. I don't need another layer between you and the CEO. Get out." And I'm like, "That's cool," because anything I say after that is just going to be annoying and it's going to backfire.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:39:20):
Now, one day they will need help, and I will be in the sidecar waiting to say, "Perhaps I can assist." And then when you finally get to that moment where you're invited in, you pick an area or two, and then you really partner with that person on that area. I can give examples on that, but I generally think that it's this invitation picking specific and then making sure we're sharing the responsibility is the key set of notes that I would share with you.

Lenny (00:39:51):
What's your take on the IC path, senior IC path, something that a lot of companies talk about? I know Meta is big on this right now, the layering managers and things like that. I find a lot of times there's a lot of talk about it and there's not really a real career opportunity there. I guess, what's your just take on as that is a real option for most people trying to basically avoid the manager out and staying in IC, PM long term?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:40:17):
Yeah, I think that it's a little bit more acute now because of the backlash that we talked about between growth where management was perceived. So in this case, management was perceived as a way to drive expansion. So if you're in charge of expansion, you're managing the people that are doing the build and now we're doing a lot fewer things. So I think that's what's mandated this sort of growth in the IC track, for lack of a better term. I think it is one of the best things that happened to our industry because what's happened is, in the last 10 years, and you can tell I'm particularly hard on our managers here, they've basically been promising ICs that early promoted into management. They didn't get taught, and now they're sort of average managers and promising ICs. But now the story that they tell and what they've built is not awesome.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:41:22):
If I'm looking to hire, if I'm in a growth company and I'm the next hottest thing and I'm looking to hire someone and someone walks into the interview and said, "Look, I've managed two people before and then I was in the charge of this thing, but they really did the details. And then by the way before that, I was early in trying to get this thing out the door and then they picked me to be manager," I'm like, "Okay, that's an interesting set of experiences. I'm looking, for me, in my company to build something."

Nikhyl Singhal (00:41:47):
The next person walks in, it's like, "I've been an IC for that whole time. And during that time I went from learning something to demonstrating it to really being able to take it forward. And I got one of these ambiguities master. I'm an expert in domain. I'm an expert in managing organizations," I'm like, "I don't need a team ambiguous expert. That's not my hard part. My hard part is actually cracking the code on this complex market or this very complicated organization where we have two teams that have different goals. You're the type of person I want."

Nikhyl Singhal (00:42:19):
So I think Lenny, to your question, I think the IC track is one of the best things that's going to happen for people career. But to your point, those tracks, from a promotion and from a industry, how we perceive it, they're not in cement yet. They're tender. You wait six months, you wait nine months, they'll become very, very strong and solid. And I think then, we'll be able to lean very hard into them as a real promising crack for builders.

Lenny (00:42:54):
Your sense is, this is going to become more and more real as these layoffs have happened and kind of pullbacks on growth have happened.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:43:00):
Yeah, I mean, if you think about it, it's the reality in engineering and design. So in engineering, you can be the sort of VP of engineering or CTO, and in a design, a lot of designers become design managers, a lot of them stay as crafters. And then for whatever reason in product managers, maybe because they were managers in our title, we just all became managers. What about the product? What about the other side? So I actually think it's a bug that has existed for a long time that actually we're going to correct permanently now.

Lenny (00:43:33):
I wonder if part of it for PMs is, once you become a manager, this happens to me, I didn't want to be an IC anymore. It's like, "I'm done with that. I really enjoy this management layer." And I imagine with engineers, maybe they'll enjoy the coding. When I was an engineer I was like, "Oh, I don't want to just sit around and manage. I just want to code." So I wonder if there's any part of that.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:43:52):
But a lot of your listeners like to build. And actually, when they talk to their managers, they're like, "I don't know if that job is awesome. It feels like you spend all your time writing docs and telling your boss's boss what to justify resources and headcount. I just want to build stuff. You don't build stuff." So I think there might be some of that. I think that it's not perfect, but I think hopefully builder and IC will become more synonymous.

Lenny (00:44:19):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like DraftKings, Zapier, ClickUp, Twitch, and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern grow team stack. This leads to waste of time building internal tools or trying to run your own experiments through a clunky marketing tool.

Lenny (00:44:46):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most about working there was our experimentation platform where I was able to slice and dice data by device types, country, user stage. Eppo does all that and more, delivering results quickly, avoiding knowing prolonged analytic cycles, and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic, click-through metrics and instead use your North Star metrics like activation, retention, subscription, and payments. Eppo supports test on the front end, on the back end, email marketing, even machine learning claims. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com. That's get eppo.com. And 10X your experiment velocity.

Lenny (00:45:27):
Coming back to the manager life and how many managers are not great and also just how do you get better as a manager, what have you found actually is effective in helping new managers become better?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:45:37):
I think I may have come across kind of hard on managers and I think I kind of said, "Hey, your manager and your manager's manager isn't really doing much teaching. Find the right podcast, good luck." And I think that that's a pretty soulless answer. So maybe the way I describe it is, well, I think learning is changing, and there's the self-service tools that are getting better and then there's the structured teaching which I think is weak. And then there's community, which I think whether it's within your company or outside of company, I think is the answer that we'll see more and more. I think community as a way of creating safety, having authentic conversations, feeling that you're not alone, that others are going through the same thing, and then sharing best practices is so powerful. And what social software has done is it has really empowered community.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:46:46):
And now the tools are awesome. How many great communities have Slack channels or Discord channels or Zoom calls? And we do a lot of that in the CPO community that I created. Whether you're a new manager or whether you belong to a diverse group, whether you are new to a company, I think that all of your listeners should be part of an active community where they can be very authentic and very safe. Sometimes it's hard to do that with your coworkers, and so you need to find another community. Unfortunately, those communities are not the easiest to find today, but I believe that the notion of community as a powerful propellant for learning is the critical ingredient and hopefully many people are creating these communities so that new managers can find the right services.

Lenny (00:47:40):
Can you actually talk about this community that you've built? This could be a good time to talk about it. It's called The Skip. Is that right?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:47:45):
Yeah. It's funny, it's all kind of fun products. They were always a reaction to something. They weren't really intentional. I, as you opened the podcast, did really enjoy teaching and coaching. I learned just as much from coaching others as they learned, I think. And yet I couldn't really scale. So I had this summer where I had just come off of being a head of product, and more and more of my people I was talking to were also head of products. What would happen is, I would have these conversations and they would ask me a question. I would say, "Well, that's the same conversation I answered on Tuesday." What you realize is, it's a very lonely job. Being lonely at the top is not just an adage. Really, everyone's so busy now. It's like, how do you have time to connect? Everything's a single player, you don't really have community.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:48:39):
So I thought, "Well, what if I took the half a dozen people I talked to this month?" And I just said, "Hey, all of you are all interested in talking through how to navigate this crazy world of year one, year two, chief product officer. I think you would really gain. I know all of you and I think you can be safe with one another. Why don't we spend some time together?" So we did a WhatsApp channel and we brought a Zoom call. This was during the pandemic, so you really couldn't meet up. And we started talking. We started talking every month, and people were so empowered by the fact that the problem they were hitting was not just them. It was, "My crazy CEO is telling me this." And the next person is like, "Oh yeah? Let me tell you what my person said." And then they would say, "Oh my gosh, that sounds worse than my situation."

Nikhyl Singhal (00:49:33):
But then, we would sit down and say, "Hey, the third person said I actually kind of had this and now I figured out a way out, and here's what I did." And you're like, "Wow, that's amazing. I'm going to try it." The next day they come back, they're like, "It works." And we started to connect and we built this trust, and community building is interesting and powerful work. So six went to 12, and then 12 went to 15, and now we have 28 members. A lot of folks are interested in these types of communities, but I'm so worried about scaling it because it's the enemy of trust and authenticity. So for all of you that are building communities, it's like tree balancing act. But I do think that the goal is to find ways to take all of this sort of like-minded folks that are in these same situations and connect them together. Late stage chief product officer happened to be one of the ones that had some of the most substantial importance to me because of all the coaching I did for that group.

Lenny (00:50:35):
If someone's listening and they're like, "Oh, I need to join this thing," how do they find out about it? How do they potentially apply and try to join?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:50:41):
Well, we have enough members now. There's a LinkedIn area called The Skip CPO Community, and you should contact any of the members that you know and ask them to join. My request and my requirement is that they are, number one, product leaders in their organization and a company that's not early, but that's mid to late. And the reason being is, those sets of problems tend to be the most similar. To be honest, I think this is not the only community that I want to be part of and help create, but this one happens to be the preexisting one. I think there are lots of powerful communities that can be created, but this particular one is very much focused on The Skip CPOs.

Lenny (00:51:28):
Awesome. I'll mention the community around my newsletter just so folks are looking for a community join. I try not to promote these sorts of things, but it's a good time, may as well. If you're a paid subscriber to my newsletter, there's a Slack community you get access to. There's about 12, 13,000 people in there. There's meetups happening all over the world every month. It's amazing. Very proud of it. People are getting a lot of value of it, and it's basically open to any level of product manager. Other functions are in there too. So it's a very different sort of experience, but willing to add that also in the show notes if you want to check that.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:51:59):
I think that that would be my put, because so many of the managers will say, "Hey, I'm an IC," here's a greater one, "I am not being told I have the next job. I just was told to become an IC and I was a manager. I feel like my learning opportunities are stuck, but this is a bad time to look for a job." They should be in your community. They will learn more from that community than they will learn from managing one random person that they were attached to managing in some project that may or may not see the light of day, yet that's how our society is programmed. Our industry is like, "No, no, go manage that person because that's going to make you closer to the top. Forget learning." And I'm like, "Well, learning isn't happening. Learning's happening in your community. Learning is happening in our communities in general." That's why I'm pushing so hard on this.

Lenny (00:52:54):
This is a good segue to talking about the third bucket, which is kind of later career CPOs. That's the segue in my mind there. Something that I've heard you talk about is that a lot of really senior leaders have real development areas, but they're hiding behind these superpowers that they have. Plus, people don't like to give real feedback to senior people. So I'd love to hear just what you're seeing there and how maybe people can work through that and what we can learn about that issue that you've noticed.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:53:27):
This came from my notes as I was talking to a therapist on this. They talked about the shadows of superpowers. And I thought it was an incredibly powerful phrase that everyone focuses on your superpowers, but no one ever thinks about what shadows they create. Shadows of superpowers to me is the story of a lot of executives. There's an adage that's thrown around, which is, what gets you there isn't what got you here. It's sort of the tools that have made you successful today, you need to almost rebuild or relearn to get to the next phase. And I think both of these sort of speak to the same point, that oftentimes people have a great superpower. They go into a performance review, person says, "You're getting some feedback from your peers that you struggle in collaboration." And the manager even sometimes is puzzled, but the individual will say, "Are you kidding me? My last five performance reviews told me that I was one of the best collaborators in the company. How in the world is that possible?"

Nikhyl Singhal (00:54:42):
And then what you realize is that, "Well, you're collaborating as long as people agreed with your point of view. Now as a leader, we're asking you to be opinionated, and because you just think you're an amazing collaborator using the exact same tool set. And it turns out that when you're dealing with senior people, that may not even be in your function, they may not be product, they may not be tech, they recoil, but you're moving so fast because it's your superpower. You would never think that this needs to be rebuilt." Sometimes it could be more extreme. Great collaborators sometimes are very reticent to present their own opinions because they're so good at assimilating others. Or people that are amazing at growth struggle to be innovative. People that are world-class storytellers struggle to get in the details. People that are very taste maker, they are always the first to have point of view. They don't necessarily introduce change particularly often. You're strong politically, but your decisions are unprincipled. You're a structured thinker, but blue-sky innovations are very tough. You're an amazing listener, but you're very weak to be decisive. I can go on forever.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:56:10):
And what I would say to you is, sometimes even in a 30-minute conversation, walking into the room, just knowing what I know about the person, I can unlock their development area faster than anyone ever before, simply because my secret is, I'll bet you, because of this person's world-class here, these are the three things they're going to hit. And they don't even realize it because it's their identity. This is what got me here. If you make me work on that, you will make me change my superpower. And I'm like, "That's why you're stuck. That's why your career is plateauing." And then they get sad and then they take a long time to process, and then the work actually begins and then they solve and they go. Almost everyone, once they have the name and the face, they're able to solve. But facing the name is hard when it's sitting in the shadows of superpowers.

Lenny (00:57:08):
Wow. That is an incredibly important point. For someone to recognize this, do you find that they need someone like you that's like a coach, mentor, person to come in, and be like, "Here's what I see"? Or is there a way, I guess, as someone that's a peer or an employee to help them recognize this without them shutting down and being like, "No, shut up. No problem'?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:57:28):
No, you don't need a coach. What you do need is to listen to contradictory feedback. So what was the premise here is you're being told that something that you hold as your strength is actually in your way or a development area. Do not dismiss that. Recognize most likely you're doing it correctly. You just have gotten to the next level. So what I'm hoping the listener does is it goes back through all the feedback that they may even have and then looks at all the discard stuff. What's on the discard pile? Things that were discarded are anomalies because they're artifacts of my strength. And often, your managers are the ones that do the discarding, "Oh, that was just a weird... That person, they were just into it. They have it out for you. They got reorged or they were upset." I'm like, "No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Perception's reality. Talk to me about that one. That might be it." That's what I'm looking for.

Lenny (00:58:29):
Fascinating. This makes me think about companies that have the same issue, companies strengths, like say Meta for example, move fast and break things and then, "Oh, that ends up being the biggest Achilles' heel." Uber, similar. Airbnb has similar challenges like that.

Nikhyl Singhal (00:58:43):
Absolutely. This exact thing applies to relationships. This applies to companies, this applies to a lot. And I'm so happy that I was able to learn about it. Frankly, it was a critical unlock for me because I was stuck on something for years and I just could not understand how, for me, it was, I was very opinionated about something. And then I realized being loosely held on my opinions didn't mean that I became a weaker executive, but it was my opinions that got me to be so successful and it required me to rewire who I was as an executive. And that took a lot of time and a lot of energy. But it came from this realization and then I started to apply it for other strength areas. And now, every time I have a strength area of myself for those that I coach, I immediately talk through all the things that I bet you exist and most of the time were right.

Lenny (00:59:46):
So what is it for you that you said was your superpower and your shadow?

Nikhyl Singhal (00:59:50):
I think that I was, as an entrepreneur, very opinionated about using small amounts of information to make decisions. And then I was very good at driving those things. So when you become an entrepreneur, you're great at grit, you're great at opinion, you're great at being decisive. And then as an executive, you spend a lot of time making sure everyone has context, everyone is heard, your opinions are actually edited for good reason. And it's not just to placate, it's actually to improve. But as someone who's basically been right a lot, that requires almost a complete and you're like, "Well, that's not who I am." And I'm like, "Okay, you start with the sentence like that's not who I am." You're definitely doing it right when you hit your leadership.

Lenny (01:00:40):
What was the process like for you to work through that? You said it took a long time. What made it effective for you? Was there a coach involved? Something else?

Nikhyl Singhal (01:00:49):
I got a lot of setback. I get a lot of negative feedback. I had a lot of abrupt challenges at work where folks would say, "You're not collaborating well. Your peers don't have the same level of respect as they should." And I was like, "Are you kidding me? That's not who I am. These things that are being said about are completely ironic." I was very much struggling and that's when I said, "You know what? I can struggle and blame others, but what if they were right? I'm going to be doing this for 30 more years, it's kind of worth it to figure out if they're right. If they're wrong, then you don't lose." And that's what kind of forced it. And then the tooling starts, then you start talking through. My self-awareness was strong enough that I was able to say, "Okay, now I understand it." I had some peer feedback that helped bring it home from someone I trusted. So that was a kind of linchpin to this, but these are tough, tough things to break through. And oftentimes they don't come nicely, I guess, is the point.

Lenny (01:01:53):
I was going to ask what that turning point for you was, and it sounds like it was direct feedback from someone you really trusted that's like, "Oh, I really need to take this seriously."

Nikhyl Singhal (01:02:01):
You got it. You got it. Because I had a lot of feedback that I was dismissing and then I had feedback from someone, I'm like, "That person I should listen to because they're giving me the feedback for the right reasons and they have the right language."

Lenny (01:02:13):
Comes back to the power of getting feedback and getting good at that.

Nikhyl Singhal (01:02:17):
And making people feel safe and giving it.

Lenny (01:02:19):
Mm-hmm. That's a good segue to maybe the last question. You told me once that a lot of the people that you work with that have kind of made it have a lot of mental health challenges, that they didn't expect their life to be the way it is necessarily when they got there. Can you just talk about what you see there in that group?

Nikhyl Singhal (01:02:39):
Yeah. This is a story that I don't think is told very well right now, and partly because it's such a luxury problem, it's almost a little embarrassing to discuss it openly as so many people struggle with so many basic needs, going through layoffs, going through all these challenges. I mean, these are real issues. But I think that what I've noticed is that if you kind of break career as we've done in this podcast between sort of act one, act two and act three, if act one is sort of learning and being that sort of builder and then maybe building the car, and then act two is building the factory, act three is like, what's after that? What do you do after that? And I think that act three in the past wasn't as long as it is now. Before, people would proverbially retire in their 60s when they used to actually physically work.

Nikhyl Singhal (01:03:35):
Now almost all your listeners sit at a desk all day, so they don't need to retire by any means. And health is getting better. You might see folks work until their 70s or 80s. So that means that their careers are potentially 60 years long. So even if you're 20 years or 30 years in your career, you're only halfway through. So this act three could be a thing. And I don't think we talk about act three enough. What often happens is, and this is what I've been watching for people that are at my age, is they sort of succeed and then they become lost. They almost goes hand in hand.

Nikhyl Singhal (01:04:14):
So when I was a kid and I was growing up in the Midwest, entertainment was going to the dog tracks, and not even the horse tracks, we didn't have horses. So it was the greyhound dog tracks. So people would bet on a dog and greyhound would go around the ring and then you would see. I bet on number three and I'll make a buck or something. The way that they motivated the dogs was they had these fake rabbits, which sounds kind of cruel and horrible, so I don't want the SPCA to come after you. But the point is that they'd have these fake rabbits. And what was interesting is, the moment that the dogs, if they accidentally touched the rabbit, the sort of the tail because the machine broke, because these tails would go around faster than the dogs, which would then motivate the dogs to go around in circles. Sometimes the machines would break, the dogs would actually catch the rabbit, they would never run again.

Nikhyl Singhal (01:05:17):
The reason why they wouldn't run again is because there was like, "Well, what's next? I've achieved what I was looking for." So I think this happens a ton. It's like, your listeners are spending time focused on like, "Well, one day I will be X. I will be that vice president. I will have more money. I will have built something. I will have started a company." But they don't think about what happens next, and when it happens, when they succeed, their North Star, their entire way of wiring their career, themselves, it has been around getting to that place. And I think that if you're going to get there 30 years in and you have a 60-year career, a lot of the discussion I've been having with myself and with others has been, you probably need to start working on that North Star now.

Nikhyl Singhal (01:06:08):
What's the second thing? What's your career next look like? How do you ensure that you are always going to have something important and motivating to do with your career? Otherwise, you'll keep working because you had no nothing else to do, but you'll be sadder, or you'll find ways to create war when peace is needed, or you'll spend money in an attempt to earn more, or you'll find habits that are bad. And I really want us to have long 60-year, 70-year careers, not just 30-year or 10-year, which is why I enter this into the vocabulary out there.

Lenny (01:06:51):
That is really resonating with me. I had a similar experience. I had a startup, and my whole goal was just like, "I just want to start a company." That's my goal. That's all I got in life. I want to start a company and then maybe sell it, maybe go somewhere with it. So I did and then we sold it to Airbnb and then I got to Airbnb and I was just like, "What the hell do I do now? I don't have any other goals." And it was pretty sad. Exactly how you're describing. It was just like, "I guess I'll just work here and I don't know, maybe I'll start another company, but I already did the thing I wanted to do."

Nikhyl Singhal (01:07:21):
Your story is I think very inspiring because what you did is you said, "I think the thing that I want to do is give, but I want to do it in my own way and I want to create something, but I want to do something that I think I can do for 30 years and I want to do it." It has lots and lots of spokes to it. So you reinvented yourself professionally, but you created a new North Star.

Nikhyl Singhal (01:07:48):
My sense is, for every one of you, Lenny, there's a hundred that could do that, that could do giving, that could do things that could scale, but that end up falling into what got them to be successful in act two and they get stuck. So this is the reason why when you hit your skip, keep looking for the next skip, is the point I'm trying to make. And I think you're an inspiration for a lot of folks who have seen you transition and realizes life after just being a tech professional entrepreneur, there's got to be ways to do more of this for all of your listeners. And I think it's never too early to start thinking through. It's actually quite powering to think that you have such a long career. You can make mistakes and you can do some amazing things down the road.

Lenny (01:08:34):
Yeah. This is my fourth career, is what I realized. I was a engineer, then a founder, then a product manager, and now whatever this is.

Nikhyl Singhal (01:08:43):
Whatever this is.

Lenny (01:08:45):
Whatever this is. I guess, just to give people something inspiring, productive, what are maybe some examples of North Stars you've seen that people can evolve into? I guess one path is this path of content creation, helping people learn stuff. What else have you seen that might work out for people?

Nikhyl Singhal (01:09:00):
I think that all variations here come into two categories. One categories are ways to drive more scaled economics. I've made millions. My North Star is to now make it tens. I've made tens. My North star is to do hundreds. That's what drives people from, it's not entrepreneurship, it's investing; it's not investing, it's private equity, et cetera. Whether we describe that as a bad quest or a good quest is a decision for your listener. The other arc is around giving. Eastern philosophies that have been around for thousands of years talk about this as the sort of end state of happiness. I think that maybe to be provocative, I think that it's okay for you in act one and act two to not predicate yourself around the notion of giving to others because this is maybe the time on the planet where you need to take and you need to create.

Nikhyl Singhal (01:10:11):
But boy, if you're going to work on an act three and you have 30 years, regardless of where you are economically, if you feel like you can take that off the table, if you can find ways to give, whatever that means to you, however that translates to you, is that content, is that volunteer, is that starting a company that is more mission based, that is not my role, but I think that if you are able to do that for 30 years and be giving, not only is that going to be more fulfilling than your act one and act two, but it's tremendous for society, very empowering. And that's where I commend you because you're giving through your passion but also making a livelihood. And I think that that's a very powerful blend that is hard to achieve in act one and act two given constraints. And that's the liberation that act three provides.

Lenny (01:11:08):
What do you think your act three plus ends up being?

Nikhyl Singhal (01:11:12):
Many have asked me about this. I would say that I'll use the word, and then I'll tell you I won't use that word. So it is around my passion around coaching and giving to others. But because I'm a product person, because I've seen success in building products, thinking about scale, thinking about community, I definitively plan to devote my act three towards coaching and giving to others and lifting up those that with the right advice at the right time can change their trajectory. But scaling that and doing that in a way that is very authentic is really the hardest part and it's product problem. So that's what I'll devote 30 years to and I look forward to that every day.

Lenny (01:11:59):
That is beautiful. That feels like an exactly correct fit for you, and I'm here to help you on that journey any way I can.

Nikhyl Singhal (01:12:05):
Thank you, my friend.

Lenny (01:12:06):
Absolutely. Is there anything else you wanted to touch on before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Nikhyl Singhal (01:12:11):
No, I just appreciate your genuine offer to have me attend and participate in this wonderful podcast that you created.

Lenny (01:12:18):
It's absolutely my pleasure. And it's not over yet. We've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions for you. Are you ready?

Nikhyl Singhal (01:12:25):
I am ready.

Lenny (01:12:26):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Nikhyl Singhal (01:12:30):
So two, and both business books. Sorry, I'm going to come across boring. But one is this sort of little bit of an old school book called Crossing the Chasm by Geoffrey Moore. I don't know if other speakers have spoken about this, but it's a book that Geoffrey Moore wrote, and it's a book that really talks about how to get your first product on base. So it's this concept of creating a beachhead. I like that concept. Marketing is something that we don't talk about in enough and product.

Nikhyl Singhal (01:13:02):
And then the second one is a book that none of your listeners have actually probably heard of called Leadership and Self-Deception. It's a six-hour audio that I highly recommend. It's a story about a person who has hit a wall and who's getting all this feedback that they don't know what to make of, and it's around their mindset being stuck in a box. That was very powerful when I listened to it in my late 20s. So I encourage all of your listeners to grab that one. It's not one that anyone normally would hit, but it's a fun story. It's a good ride, and I think maybe you'll get something out of it.

Lenny (01:13:41):
I have not heard of that second one. I'm excited to check it out. I have Crossing the Chasm back behind me on that shelf somewhere. And you talk about how marketing isn't something product leaders and managers think about enough, and I have many marketing-oriented guests on this podcast and those episodes do the least well, but I'm just going to keep doing it because I totally agree with you. I think there's so much to learn from marketing. It's connected to growth, which is connected to product. So I agree.

Nikhyl Singhal (01:14:07):
Yeah, and I think that marketing is a language of connecting products with people. That is what a product manager does, but we often lack the language. We lack the thinking around how to explain it, and yet we spend all our time on data and features for that. The diversity of having both playbooks can make one of just a much more powerful builder. So I agree with you. Marketing folks is probably some of the best content and the least listen to. So maybe that's a plug for people to go back to those episodes.

Lenny (01:14:39):
100%. That's what everyone should do. I don't know if you know this, but actually, at Airbnb, the product manager function has been renamed to product marketing. So all the product managers are product marketers because Brian is so big on, you're not just building product, your job is also to make sure people use it. We'll see how that experiment goes, but that's a bold move I thought.

Nikhyl Singhal (01:14:59):
Very much so. Very much. But it's an homage to this concept.

Lenny (01:15:02):
Exactly. Okay, back to landing ground. What is a favorite recent movie or TV show?

Nikhyl Singhal (01:15:08):
I'm a huge sports fan, so I have tickets to the Warriors and 49ers, and I am a big Bay Area sports fan. Giannis is my son's favorite player. He's a basketball player for the Milwaukee Bucks, and they have this Disney+ story called the Rise story, and it's a story about his childhood and how he struggled to find notoriety and how he made it into the professional leagues. It's a great Disney+ family show and it's a great kind of zero to hero type thing. So I love that story.

Lenny (01:15:41):
I feel like you're going to have a really good answer to this next one. What is a favorite interview question that you like to ask?

Nikhyl Singhal (01:15:47):
I like the format of, what's something that everyone takes for granted that you think is essentially hogwash or inaccurate? Sometimes I'll ask a manager, "Look, you've managed hundreds of people in your career, what's conventional wisdom that you bet against that you have found is actually inaccurate?" And you can do that for what do people think about AI, that's inaccurate, that everyone believes you could do that for domains, you can do all kinds of things.

Lenny (01:16:18):
I love it. Is there something you specifically look for there, or is it just depends on what you hear?

Nikhyl Singhal (01:16:25):
I'm always looking for people to break this sort of interview mindset. Everyone always prepares for interviews and then their entire conversation is predicting what you think you want me to say. And as a result, you can have high-quality people that you dismiss because they weren't genuine. There's no way to answer that question without being genuinely opinionated because it starts with, "What is the thing that you think I want to say here? And then tell me why it's inaccurate." So when I break that wall, I'm testing, is this person authentic? Because sometimes I'm dismissing them because they told me nothing new, but I don't want the interview process to penalize them. And this was my save question, but I can't use it now that I've told everyone.

Lenny (01:17:27):
It's going to be all over TikTok soon. Everyone's going to know this. Next question, what's a favorite recent product that you've discovered that you love?

Nikhyl Singhal (01:17:35):
The geeky answer in me is the Arc Browser, which I think probably a lot of folks are starting to use and your listeners. Part of the reason is, I think it's just great for folks that have hundreds of tabs, and if you work at a scaled organization, you just have lots of tabs. But I think it's also, as a product guy, I thought Chrome was pretty good. They've got gajillions of people using it and billions of installs. So at some point, you kind of come to the conclusion that this is probably good enough. And then you see a product obviously built with a much smaller team and you're like, "Huh, there actually is opportunities to innovate." And any time you see a innovation on something that's mature, as a product person, I think that's just fascinating. And I was just blown away at how they created something that's better than something I hold as a true set.

Lenny (01:18:33):
Yeah. We had Josh on the podcast, we talked about a lot of their philosophies. And on the tab thing, I think the key there is it closes your tabs after 24 hours unless you put them in a specific place, which I love because I was like, you think you would do that, but you don't. And then it's broke so beautiful, you wake up in the morning, everything's gone, but you can save stuff that you want. The other thing I'll mention with Arc, by the way, also huge fan, that's all I use, and I'm not an investor, just a fan, is the onboarding experience is the best onboarding experience I've seen. I was just like, I did it and I got a tweet about this. This is so good. And actually, if you go to that episode, there's a link to get past the wait list and just-

Nikhyl Singhal (01:19:11):
Oh, that's right. Yeah.

Lenny (01:19:12):
Yeah. You gave me many thousands of invites. Okay, keep going. What is something relatively minor you've changed in the way you develop products and your team that's had a big impact on the team's ability to execute?

Nikhyl Singhal (01:19:26):
A little bit of this is just because of scale, but oftentimes we think a lot about the products and the features and the decisions that we're working on, and then we think that meetings are a nuisance or a must-have necessary evil to be able to deliver. Sometimes I realize that at a scaled organization, the meeting operating system is as important as the products that we're building because it sort of speaks to how we scale and how we ensure we have the right degree of delegation, the right conversations, and then the right acceleration on the right decisions.

Nikhyl Singhal (01:20:11):
So what's interesting is every quarter, in my current teams, even in my past teams, I talk about our meetings like a product. We're on version seven in my team, and so we're like, "Hey, version seven, every 90 days, these are the meetings, these are the discussions, this is how we organize, these are the attendees, and then here's how we make decisions. This is the cadence of the week. This is when people can work from home, hybrid, whatever it might be." And then I take feedback two months in and then every three months we make another route.

Nikhyl Singhal (01:20:44):
What it finds is that people then can plan and they can make meeting time effective. And meeting time is such precious time. It's the most expensive time in a company. So when I was in a startup, I couldn't imagine doing this, but now this is like my bread and butter as a leader. It's the process part. And frankly, for new folks that are new in leadership positions in a new company, it's the one thing you can do when you have low context. When you don't know how the product works, you can look at things with fresh eyes and see inefficiencies when everyone that's been in the system can't see it. I'm a huge fan of rebooting meetings first. So process first, then people, then product, then strategy is sort of the notion I make, and this is this first thing I always do.

Lenny (01:21:29):
Final question, what is one thing every PM listening should do to help their career?

Nikhyl Singhal (01:21:35):
Ensure that the story you will tell about the work you're doing today is meaningful for your skip job. So if you sit down and you write down, "In six months, in 12 months, in 24 months, when I achieve or finish this role, here's the paragraph I'll write. Here's a problem I solved. Here's the skill I built. Here's the headwind I faced. Here's what I did to overcome it." Use I in the sentence, do not use we. We will do good things. You are who we are thinking about, your career. We're not looking for we. Master the story now. Understand the story. If the story sucks, you probably should be thinking through how to make the story not suck. But that to me is a very good career decision and I think everyone is building their story today. I want to know that story. I want that story to be incredibly compelling because whether you promote it or not, that story's compelling. You'll be promoted in career. And that's what we're here for.

Lenny (01:22:48):
Nikhyl, this is the first time we've ever met. I'm such a fan instantly. This might be my new favorite episode. I'm so excited for people to listen to this. There's so much value here. Two final questions before we wrap up. Where can folks find you online if they want to learn more? And also, talk about maybe various community, The Skip, and all that stuff that people can check out. And then how can listeners be useful to you?

Nikhyl Singhal (01:23:09):
I'm building this brand around The Skip because I'm so passionate. There's two outlets that people can easily connect. One is the podcast, which much like yourselves is available on Apple and Spotify and others. So I'd love for people to join my podcast and hear. What I'm now moving my podcast to is almost like coaching calls. Because I have so many of them, I'm saying like, "Hey, 30 minutes, let me walk you through a problem and hear how I'm thinking about it, whether that's a transition discussion or compensation discussion, et cetera." And then the other one is this sort of newsletter that I have on Substack, which is a bit of a mirror of the podcast. It's different forms of the same topic areas. So, would love for your listeners to connect with that.

Nikhyl Singhal (01:23:54):
I think as far as getting in touch with me, LinkedIn is where I spend most of my time professionally. So between Twitter and LinkedIn, my presence is relatively easy to find. And then how listeners can help me, I mean, one, you can build the most fulfilling career story and be your best, but also give back and pull others forward. Whether that's through your act three or whether that's just helping others, I mean, I think that would be the most fulfilling to me. I think feedback from your listeners to me on things they wish I would spend time talking about is incredibly empowering for my content because then I can deliver more meaningful content. It's very different from yours, but I think it's all around the arc of trying to help people gain forward and be more effective tech professionals. So I would love to hear from your listeners.

Lenny (01:24:48):
Just to make sure people know where to go to do this. For feedback, do you recommend LinkedIn?

Nikhyl Singhal (01:24:53):
Yeah, LinkedIn is the ideal, but you can also find me on Twitter if you are just trying to add a quick... If you're trying to follow me, follow me on LinkedIn. If you're looking for feedback, just tweet me.

Lenny (01:25:03):
And then for The Skip newsletter, what is the URL to go check that out?

Nikhyl Singhal (01:25:06):
It's theskip.substack.com.

Lenny (01:25:09):
Amazing. And you don't publish often, but each issue is incredibly valuable, so we'll definitely link to that all in the show notes. Nikhyl, thank you again so much for being here. I will let you go now. This was amazing.

Nikhyl Singhal (01:25:21):
Yeah, thank you, Lenny. Appreciate it.

Lenny (01:25:23):
Bye, everyone.

Lenny (01:25:25):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Nir Eyal (00:00:00):
I went to Alibaba and I bought myself one of these flip phones from China like we used to have in the 1990s with no apps, no internet connection. And then I got myself a word processor off of eBay so that I could just sit down and write and do the important stuff. And even when I stopped using all the technology, even when I got rid of all the apps, I would sit down on my desk and I'd say, "Oh, you know what? There's that book that I've been meaning what to do some research in," or, "Let me just clean off my desk real quick," or, "You know what? I should take out the trash." And I kept getting distracted because the problem is not our technology. The problem is our inability to deal with discomfort. So, what I have adopted for myself and what I'd advise anyone who finds themselves in this situation is to always identify what is that internal trigger, what is that itch that you are looking to escape when you get distracted, because that is the source of 90% of our distractions.

(00:00:51):
It's not the pings, dings, and rings. It's the feelings. But to me, that's incredibly empowering because once you realize, "Wait a minute, it's just a feeling." It's all it is, it's just an emotion. Then you can have tools ready to go. You can have arrows in your quiver ready to take out as soon as you feel that discomfort.

Lenny (00:01:10):
Today, my guest is Nir Eyal. Nir is the author of two bestselling books, Hooked: How to Build Habit-Forming Products and Indistractable: How to Control Your Attention and Choose Your Life. Nir spends his time teaching and consulting at the intersection of psychology, technology, and business. His books have sold over 1 million copies in over 30 languages. In our conversation, we get very tactical about how to become less distractable and how to get better at focusing on doing the work that you know need to do. Nir shares at least a dozen tools and tricks that you can put into place today to help you stay focused and avoid getting distracted. After this conversation, I've already implemented some of these tactics and they're actually working. If you find these helpful or you want to go deeper, definitely check out Nir's book Indistractable. With that, here is Nir Eyal after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:03):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate your growth. Thousands of fast-growing companies like Gusto, Comm, Quora, and Modern Treasury, trust Vanta to help build, scale, manage, and demonstrate their security and compliance programs and get ready for audits in weeks, not months by offering the most in-demand security and privacy frameworks such as SOC 2, ISO 27001, GDPR, HIPAA, and many more. Vanta helps companies obtain the reports they need to accelerate growth, build efficient compliance processes, mitigate risks to their businesses, and build trust with external stakeholders. Over 5,000 fast-growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2 and these other frameworks. For a limited time, Lenny's podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Go to vanta.com/lenny. That's vanta.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discounts. Get started today.

(00:03:01):
You fell in love with building products for a reason, but sometimes, the day-to-day reality is a little different than you imagined. Instead of dreaming up big ideas, talking to customers, and crafting a strategy, you're drowning in spreadsheets and roadmap updates and you're spending your days basically putting out fires. A better way is possible. Introducing Jira Product Discovery, the new prioritization and roadmapping tool built for product teams by Atlassian. With Jira Product Discovery, you can gather all your product ideas and insights in one place and prioritize confidently, finally replacing those endless spreadsheets.

(00:03:37):
Create and share custom product roadmaps with any stakeholder in seconds, and it's all built on Jira, where your engineering team's already working, so true collaboration is finally possible. Great products are built by great teams, not just engineers, sales, support, leadership, even Greg from finance. Anyone that you want can contribute ideas, feedback, and insights in Jira Product Discovery for free. No catch and it's only $10 a month for you. Say goodbye to your spreadsheets and the never-ending alignment efforts. The old way of doing product management is over. Rediscover what's possible with Jira Product Discovery. Try for free at atlassian.com/lenny. That's atlassian.com/lenny.

(00:04:24):
Nir, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Nir Eyal (00:04:27):
Thanks so much, Lenny. Great to be here.

Lenny (00:04:29):
I feel like we have a chance to record the most valuable hour in podcast history because it could give people more time to do the things they want to do. And this is based on a book that you wrote. It's called Indistractable, which is all about helping people become less distracted, become better at focus, and it might be the most essential skill in the workplace today. And so, what I'm hoping to do today in our chat is just basically give people as many tactical skills and pieces of advice and tools to become less distractable and to get better at focus. How does that sound?

Nir Eyal (00:04:59):
That sounds great. I love that you're setting the expectations high. I'll try and meet them.

Lenny (00:05:03):
Well now, we got to hit them. Okay, so here's the question. I'll just start really broad and let's just see where this goes. My question is just how does one become less distractable, slash how do I become less distractable?

Nir Eyal (00:05:15):
Okay, so there's a deeper motivation here. It's like, "I need help," which is great. That's my favorite thing to do, is to actually get concrete with people about what their specific challenges are. But let me back up here. So, this is what I spent five years writing a book about, because why did it take me five years to write a book? Because I was so distracted. So, I wrote this book for me more than anyone else. That's the only reason I write books. It's not because of what I know, but because of what I want to know. And I discovered that there were so many myths and tropes and just flat out harmful things that I was doing to hurt my own productivity. And when I really went down to first principles and looked at the research, I found that there were so many things that I was doing wrong.

(00:05:56):
But since I've changed my ways and adopted what the research literature says about distraction, it's improved my life in inconceivable ways. I'm in the best shape of my life at 45 years old. I have a better relationship with my family than ever. I'm more productive at work than ever before, not because I didn't know what to do. That's what I find is really emblematic of people today is not that we don't know what to do. It used to be maybe, okay, our grandparents, they didn't know what to do because the information was scarce. They had to go to the library and look things up. Well, today, with the internet, we all basically know what to do. And if you don't know what to do, Google it. You can find the answer out there. But we all basically know common-sense stuff like if you want to get in shape, you have to exercise and eat right, okay?

(00:06:38):
You don't need a diet book to tell you that. If you want to have better relationships with your family, you have to be fully present with people. If you want to do better at work, you have to do the hard work that other people don't want to do. We already know these things. What we don't know is how to get out of our own way, how to stop getting distracted. And so, that was certainly my problem. And so, what I wanted to do was really dive into the problem because the conventional solutions didn't work for me. When I have a problem in my life, I'll think about it, I'll write about it, I'll talk to friends, I'll talk to my wife about it. If I still can't figure it out, I'll read books about it. And what the conventional wisdom out there written by a lot of college professors that are all tenured is stop using technology, stop checking email, get off social media. It's melting your brain, but that's not very helpful, right?

(00:07:23):
Maybe if you have tenure, that's okay, but I can't stop using technology. My career will plummet. I have to use these tools. So, I wanted much more practical advice, and what I discovered was that the root cause of distraction is much more interesting and the solution is far more empowering than stop using technology, technology's evil, it's melting your brain. So, where do we begin? Maybe the best place to start is by first, before we dive into the tactics around how do we become indistractable, the first place to start is what is distraction? Understanding the term really, really matters. And the best way to understand what distraction is, is to understand what distraction is not. What's the opposite of distraction? So, if you ask most people, what's the opposite of distraction?

(00:08:06):
They'll tell you focus, right? I don't want to be distracted, I want to be focused. That's not exactly right. Then in fact, the opposite of distraction is not focus. The opposite of distraction is traction. Becomes pretty easy when you look at both words, traction, distraction. They're opposites because both words come from the same Latin root, trahare, which means to pull, and they both end in the same six letters, A-C-T-I-O-N that spells action, reminding us that distraction is not something that happens to us. It is an action that we ourselves take. So, traction, by definition, is any action that pulls you towards what you say you were going to do, things you do with intent, things that move you closer to your values, and help you become the kind of person you want to become. Those are acts of traction. Now, the opposite of traction, distraction, is any action that pulls you away from what you plan to do, further away from your goals, further away from becoming the kind of person you want to become.

(00:09:01):
And what separates traction from distraction is one word, and that one word is intent. I love this Dorothy Parker. She said, "The time you plan to waste is not wasted time." So, I think we need to stop medicalizing and moralizing what people do with their time. Why is it that someone going on Reddit or on social media or watching a YouTube video that's somehow morally inferior to watching a football game on TV? It's not. Anything you want to do with your time and attention is fine as long as it's done with intent, as long as you're doing it on your schedule, and not someone else's, certainly not the tech company's schedule. So, anything you do with intent is traction, anything else is distraction. So, what I discovered, for me, was that I was getting tricked by distraction in that the most pernicious form of distraction I discovered was the kind I didn't even realize was distracting me.

(00:09:53):
So, let me know if this sounds familiar to you, Lenny. I would sit down at my desk. I would look at my to-do list. By the way, we can talk about why to-do lists are one of the worst things you can do for your personal productivity. We can get back to that later. But I would sit down at my desk and I'd say, "Okay, I've got that big important project. That's what I'm going to do this morning. I'm not going to get distracted, nothing's going to get in my way. Here I go, I'm going to get started, but first let me check some email."

Lenny (00:10:17):
Are you watching me because this happens to me every morning. You got to stop.

Nir Eyal (00:10:21):
This is totally autobiographical. This is what I used to do all the... "Oh, let me just scroll that Slack channel. What's everybody at the office doing? Oh, let me just catch up on industry news." That's important. That's part of my job. I'm being productive, right? And what I didn't realize is that distraction was tricking me into prioritizing the urgent and the easy stuff at the expense of the hard and important work I had to do to move my life and career forward. So, just because it's a work-related task, doesn't mean it's not a distraction. In fact, that's the worst kind of distraction. Far worse than playing Candy Crush or whatever because then you're putzing around, then at least it's obvious that you're distracted. But if you're just checking work email, you feel productive even though that's a distraction because it's not what you said you want to do with your time and attention. So now, we have this framework. We have traction, we have distraction.

(00:11:08):
Now, there's one more thing that's super important, then we'll have the entire picture so that we can stop thinking about the model and actually get to a brass tacks of what do we actually do. Now that we have traction distraction the other thing we have to consider are triggers. We have two kinds of triggers. We have external triggers. These are things in our outside environment, the usual suspects, the pings, the dings, the rings, all this stuff in our outside environment, which we tend to blame for distraction, but studies find, that's only 10% of the reason we get distracted, 10% of the time it's because of something outside of us. What's the other 90%? Turns out 90% of the time that we get distracted, it's not because of what's happening outside of us, but that most distraction begins from within boredom, loneliness, fatigue, uncertainty, anxiety. That is the cause of 90% of our distractions. So, whether it's too much news, too much booze, too much football, too much Facebook, you are always going to get distracted from one thing or another unless you understand the root cause of the problem.

(00:12:09):
So, step number one to becoming indistractable is to master those internal triggers or they will become your master. Now, we're working around those four points. Step number two, make time for traction. We can talk about that. Hack back the external triggers and step number four, prevent distraction with pacts. So, you asked a big question, I gave you a big answer. That's the overall framework. That's a strategy. Tactics are what you do. Strategy is why you do it. So, I wanted to explain the strategy before we got into the tactics.

Lenny (00:12:36):
Amazing. I love this word traction because it relates to kind of the other side of this podcast of growth, product market fit, building products people want, getting traction with users. So, I really like that there's this additional way of thinking about traction, which is basically not being distracted. Can you just repeat the four steps again for people to have this in mind?

Nir Eyal (00:12:55):
Step number one, master internal triggers. Step number two, make time for traction. So, this is where we're turning our values into time. We can talk about how to do that. Step number three is hack back the external triggers. This is where we get into the pings, dings, and rings, not just the obvious stuff like your phone, your computer. I take about a page and a half to talk about that. That's kind of kindergarten stuff. But what about all the non-obvious external triggers? What about stupid meetings that didn't need to be called? What about emails that didn't need to be sent and received? What about our kids? Our kids are wonderful. I know you're a new dad, they're fantastic to have kids, but they can also be a source of distraction. So, how do we deal with all those external triggers, and then finally prevent distraction with pacts and pacts are this firewall, this last resort against distraction that we can use to keep distraction at bay and it's really about these four steps in concert in this order that anyone can use to become indistractable.

Lenny (00:13:47):
Awesome. Does this spell something clever, by the way?

Nir Eyal (00:13:49):
No, I didn't have an acronym, but I do have a pretty picture.

Lenny (00:13:53):
Awesome. So, let's go through this and I'd love specifically example you shared, I think many people run into this. There's a hard thing I need to do and I'm just going to go check my email and Twitter instead. I feel like that's a very common distraction, and so sharing, getting into that at some point would be awesome, but otherwise let's get into these four steps.

Nir Eyal (00:14:09):
Yeah, well, we can absolutely do that. So, is that something you encounter? It sounds like a...

Lenny (00:14:13):
100%. Every time. I have my to-do list, work on next week's post, and then I'm like, "Oh, let me just go check Twitter or maybe tweet something and that'll be fun," and then totally check my email. "Oh, inbox zero. Let's get all the way to zero. Oh, that's cool. Okay, now the days are over."

Nir Eyal (00:14:28):
Exactly. And by the way, we are cut from the same cloth. This is exactly the pattern I used to get into and I knew I wasn't doing my best because I wasn't putting in the time to the things that were most important. I was doing just what was easy and what was urgent and that's not good enough. So, if we use this model, step number one is master the internal triggers. So, for you, Lenny, so when you say, "Okay, I know I've got to do this big important thing, but now I'm going to go check email," I would guess that there's some kind of underlying emotion that you're trying to escape. Let's put yourself in the shoes that you were in when you said, "I was going to do that big important thing, but now I'm going to check email instead." Do you remember the last time that happened, by the way?

Lenny (00:15:11):
Every morning.

Nir Eyal (00:15:13):
Every morning. This morning?

Lenny (00:15:15):
Yeah, this morning.

Nir Eyal (00:15:16):
Okay, perfect. Do you recall what you were feeling right before you went to Twitter or checked email or did the thing that you didn't want to do as opposed to the thing you said you were going to do?

Lenny (00:15:27):
I don't know if this is an emotion or feeling, but there's just this, I need to get serious and start using my brain and there's going to be this deep work moment where I just get real deep and it takes a lot of effort to push me into that. Sometimes easier, sometimes harder. So, maybe it's avoiding this, "Oh, okay, I'm going to really have to think." It's like, I guess, it's the fear of the brain starting to really have to work.

Nir Eyal (00:15:51):
Yeah, that's hard work. So maybe, it's a bit of laziness. Maybe, it's a bit of momentum. There's this uncomfortable feeling of this cold start problem. "Oh, I don't really want to do it right now." So, this is incredibly important and I appreciate your candor here around what you feel because all of us experience it and we don't want to talk about it. We want to think that it's, "Oh, I'll just grayscale my phone," or, "I'll just turn off notifications and that's going to solve the problem," and it never does. And let me tell you, I tried all of it. I went to Alibaba and I bought myself one of these flip phones from China like we used to have in the 1990s with no apps, no internet connection, and then I got myself a word processor off of eBay, so that I could just sit down and write and do the important stuff.

(00:16:33):
And even when I stopped using all the technology, even when I got rid of all the apps, I would sit down on my desk and I'd say, "Oh, you know what? There's that book that I've been meaning what to do some research in," or, "Let me just clean off my desk real quick," or, "You know what? I should take out the trash." And I kept getting distracted because the problem is not our technology. The problem is our inability to deal with discomfort. So, what I have adopted for myself and what I'd advise anyone who finds themselves in this situation is to always identify what is that internal trigger, what is that itch that you are looking to escape when you get distracted, because that is the source of 90% of our distractions. It's not the pings, dings, and rings. It's the feelings. But to me, that's incredibly empowering because once you realize, "Wait a minute, it's just a feeling." It's all it is, it's just an emotion. Then you can have tools ready to go. You can have arrows in your quiver ready to take out as soon as you feel that discomfort.

(00:17:27):
So, let me give you one tool that I use every single day. Feel free to use it next time you feel this same problem. It's called the 10-minute rule, and this is just one of a dozen different techniques that you can use that I put in the book, but this is one that I use almost every single day. So, for me, I've been a professional writer now for over a decade, and writing is never easy. I hear people say like, "Oh, just form a writing habit." I think that's ridiculous. I don't know what they're talking about. A habit is defined as a behavior done with little or no conscious thought. I don't know how to write out of habit. Writing is always hard. Fricking work. I've written two bestsellers, thousands of articles and let me tell you, it's always difficult. It's hard, and all I want to do when I write is just Google this one thing or let me just check the news real quick or let me just do anything but the actual writing. So, here's what I do.

Lenny (00:18:15):
By the way, there's a great quote that I'll share real quick about this that I think I share often on this podcast that I think it's falsely attributed to Hemingway, but it's that, "Writing is easy. Just sit down at the keyboard and bleed."

Nir Eyal (00:18:27):
Oh my God, that's so true. It's so true, and I've not figured out how to make it suddenly easy. Every single word is hard to type out, but I got to do it right and I love doing it. I love having done it. In the process, it's very difficult. But after I make the discovery, after I create something that I think is useful, then it's a lot of fun. But doing the work is really difficult. So, here's what I do. Every time that I am tempted to go do something else, which is all the time, what I will do is I will take out a timer, I'll take out my phone and I'll say, "Set a timer for 10 minutes." I'll put the phone down and my job is for those 10 minutes, whenever I'm ready, get back to the task at hand or do what's called surf the urge.

(00:19:12):
Surfing the urge acknowledges that these emotions are like waves. They crest and then they subside. But that's not how we think about emotions. Most of us think about emotions as always being there. If I feel bored, I feel like I'm always going to be bored. If I'm frustrated, it feels like I'm always going to be frustrated, but that's never the case. Emotions are like waves. So, your job is to set that timer for 10 minutes and realize you can do just about anything for just 10 minutes. So, the idea is not to say don't do it. We know that this technique that a lot of people use of abstinence, telling yourself, "Don't do that, that's bad," actually can backfire. And we can talk about the psychology if that's interesting of why abstinence backfires. But a much healthier technique is not to tell yourself no. It's to tell yourself not yet.

(00:19:57):
You're not saying no, you're saying not yet. And so, you can do just about anything for 10 minutes. So, what I tell myself is, "Okay, I'm just going to wait 10 minutes before I check email, before I scroll social media, before I Google something that is just trying to procrastinate doing the work." I can do that. I'm a grown man. I can do whatever I want. I can do that in 10 minutes. And so, for those 10 minutes, all I have to do is either get back to the task at hand, get back to writing, or surf the urge, which is simply experiencing that sensation, acknowledging, "You know what? This is hard work. That's okay. That's why I'm feeling frustrated. That's why I'm feeling bored. That's why I'm feeling anxious. That's why I have this cold start around I don't really want to do this work because it's difficult."

(00:20:34):
So, what I do is I take a deep breath and I repeat a mantra that I made up for myself. You can make up your own mantra. My personal mantra whenever I feel this internal trigger is I remind myself this. I say, "This is what it feels like to get better. This is what it feels like to get better." And just saying that for as long as I need to until that emotion crests and subsides and then get back to work. What you'll find nine times out of 10 is that by the time those 10 minutes are up, you will have forgotten about that sensation. You'll be right back at the task at hand. And so, that's what's called the 10-minute rule. And of course what you're doing over time is that the 10-minute rule can become the 12-minute rule, can become the 20-minute rule, and most importantly, you are proving to yourself that you have agency that you said you were going to focus on a task and you did. That's the most important part.

(00:21:22):
The flip that we need to change in people's minds is this ridiculous belief that technology is hijacking our brains. There's nothing we can do about distraction that our focus is being stolen. It's not being stolen, we're giving it away. And so, what we need to do is to empower ourselves by showing ourselves in practice as well as in theory that we can postpone that distraction when we say we will.

Lenny (00:21:46):
What I like about this is one, it's kind of like the Pomodoro technique, but it's shorter. The 10 minutes I think is a really clever tweak versus 20 minutes, which a lot of people recommend. And then I guess a couple of follow-up questions. Do you do this one time in the morning and then not come back to it? Is this like a jump start for the day and then you start... If I start a thing like this, it won't be 10 minutes, it'll be like an hour because I'm like, "Okay, I did the hard thing, I'm into it. I'm just going to keep working." So, is this like a jump start for the morning or do you come back to this throughout the day?

Nir Eyal (00:22:13):
So, you can do it whenever you find yourself slipping off track. And so, the Pomodoro is a version of this. I don't think it's complete enough because Pomodoro just said, "Set the timer, do it." Okay, fine. And that's great if it works for you. By the way, anything I'm saying right now, if the thing is working for you, if your life is awesome and you're doing what you said you're going to do, maybe this isn't the podcast. Maybe my book isn't the book for you, right? I'm talking to the people who, for whatever reason, you know you're capable of more, you know you're drifting off track. Maybe if like me, you said you were going to exercise but you didn't or you said you're going to eat right, but you don't. You said you were going to work on that big task, but you procrastinate. That's really who I was and that's who I wrote this book for.

(00:22:49):
And so, you can use that technique whenever you get distracted. It's not the whole picture. So, it's super important. Remember we talked about those four steps. This is just step number one. There's about a dozen different things you can do. Maybe this particular 10-minute rule doesn't work for you, doesn't work for everyone. There might be other techniques you use. So, there's dozens of different techniques just about this step around mastering internal triggers. But the next step to answer your question of well, how long do I go for? Do I do it for an hour? If now, I'm in the zone? And my answer is emphatically no. You don't go as long as you think you can. What you want to do, and this is step number two, is you're making time for traction by turning your values into time, which means you are going to make a time box schedule because you cannot call something a distraction unless you know what it distracted you from.

(00:23:39):
I'll say that again. You can't call something a distraction unless you know what it distracted you from. So, for me, at least, when I would succumb to, "Oh, let me just check email for a quick minute, let me just see what's happening on Twitter for a quick minute," part of that was because I would justify to myself, "Well, this is a work-related task. I got to do it sometime," and there wasn't a specific time to do it on my calendar, so I would keep thinking, "Well, I got to do it sometime. Might as well just do it now." And that's a huge mistake because if you can't look at your calendar and say, "Oh, that's traction." Okay, check email, write the blog post, post the podcast, go on social media. If that's not what's written in your calendar, if it's not there, it's a distraction. And so, it's not just work-related stuff. I literally have time in my calendar, spend time with my daughter, go on social media, watch Netflix. It's in my calendar. So now, I took what was previously distraction and I turned it into traction by putting it on my schedule.

Lenny (00:24:37):
So, you actually do this through the day you have, "I'm going to check Twitter during this time of the day, I'm going to hang out with my daughter during this time of the day."

Nir Eyal (00:24:44):
Exactly. And you're adjusting it never in the day. So, you never want to do that. You always want to make sure you're doing it the day before. And so, what I do once a week, Sunday evenings, it takes me maybe 10 minutes a week. 8:00 P.M., I sit down, I look at my schedule for the week ahead and I ask myself, "Does this schedule reflect my values?" What are values? Values are attributes of the person you want to become. I'll say it again. Values are attributes of the person you want to become. So, there's three life domains, you, your relationships, and finally your work. So, what you got to do is you look at your calendar for the week ahead and you ask yourself, "How would the person I want to become spend time taking care of themselves?" That's the you domain. If you can't take care of yourself, you can't take care of others, you can't make the world a better place.

(00:25:26):
So then, you put in your calendar how you want to take care of yourself. What might that include? Well, time for rest. We all know how important sleep is, but I used to yell at my daughter and say, "Oh, it's your bedtime. You got to get to bed." And then one day she said to me, "Daddy, do you have a bedtime?" She was absolutely right. I was a hypocrite because I know how important sleep is and I didn't have a bedtime. Now, I have a bedtime. It's in my schedule. Then put in time for whatever else is important to you. Is reading important to you? Is prayer important to you? Is meditation, is exercise, is video games, is that important to you? Great. Whatever's important to you according to your values, put it in your schedule. Then you're going to put your relationships in. So, don't let the relationships in your life get whatever scraps of time are left over.

(00:26:08):
Put time in your schedule for your significant other, for your kids, for your buddies. How many of us are trapped in this loneliness epidemic because we don't make time for our closest relationships, including adult friendships? Don't let those wither away. Put time in your schedule for those, as well. We know that most friendships, they don't die in some big blowout. Relationships starve to death because we don't invest in them. Put time in your schedule for those relationships. We can talk about how to do that, as well. Then finally, the work domain involves two kinds of work. We have what's called reactive work and reflective work. Reactive work, reacting to notifications, reacting to emails, reacting to taps on the shoulder from your colleagues. That's going to be part of everybody's day. I get that, but don't let that be your entire day because what most people do, they habituate into not wanting to think.

(00:26:56):
They don't want to think what's important. "So, just let me look at my email inbox. My email inbox will tell me what to do. What's really important for my business? That's really hard. I don't really want to think about that. I'll look at my to-do list and I'll start ticking off easy tasks to do that make me feel productive." That's terrible. What you want to do instead is to book time in your schedule for this reflective work time, which is where you do the kind of work that requires you to work without distraction. Planning, strategizing, thinking, for god's sakes, can only be done without distraction. So, that fills up your calendar, as well. And what you're going to find, that there's never enough time for everything, which is good because what this forces you to do, and this is one of the main reasons why to-do lists suck, is because to-do lists have no constraints.

(00:27:38):
You can always add more to a to-do list. You can always add more, but here's what happens. This is what happened to me. I would get home from work. I have a very busy day and I'd look at my to-do list and it's a hundred items long and I think, "Wow, I've been working real hard all day and look at all this stuff I still didn't do. Loser." And so, day after day, week after week, month after month, I was reinforcing this self-image as someone who doesn't know how to manage their time. And then I started saying stupid stuff like, "Oh, maybe I'm no good at time management. Maybe I have undiagnosed ADHD. Maybe there's something wrong with me." There's nothing wrong with me. There's something wrong with this very stupid to-do list method, which doesn't force you to understand that there are trade-offs that you have to prioritize properly and that can only be done with constraints and that constraints come from your calendar.

(00:28:23):
So, you're turning your values into time by making time for traction and having this calendar and then, only then you can look at your calendar and say, "Ah, whatever it is I plan to do, that's traction. Everything else is distraction."

Lenny (00:28:36):
I want to share a couple things that worked for me that are very much along these lines. One is booking. I call it deep work time within the day. This was the only thing I had in the calendar, so I didn't do the other things, which I think would've been really helpful, but I had a, I called it deep work time. I will slap you if you book anything over this meeting.

Nir Eyal (00:28:36):
I love it.

Lenny (00:28:55):
And I did that every Monday morning, Wednesday morning, and Friday sometime, and on that...

Nir Eyal (00:28:59):
Who was slapping you?

Lenny (00:29:01):
I would be slapping the person that booked time over that slot and nobody can...

Nir Eyal (00:29:05):
Okay, got it.

Lenny (00:29:06):
And I don't know if that's allowed these days. I don't know how this...

Nir Eyal (00:29:10):
Depends who you're booking with, I guess.

Lenny (00:29:11):
Yeah, make it a little less aggressive maybe. But that worked a ton. It was like a two- or three-hour block of deep work time and that made a big dent in my ability to have time to focus because people weren't booking me as a PM.

Nir Eyal (00:29:23):
Yeah, I love it. And by the way, I want to hear more of these, but that illustrates a really good point that when the stakes are high enough, I hear people a lot of times saying, "I just can't find the time to focus and I can't get this done and it's impossible these days." And then I say, "Well, let's make a little wager here." Let's say, I get this around physical fitness a lot or somebody says, "Oh, I want to be an author. How do I do that? How do I write the book? I can't seem to find the time." And they constantly say why They can't, they can't, they can't. "There's this constraint. My boss wants this. My kids want that." They have every kind of excuse. And then I say, "Okay, let's say that if you don't work out, 8:00 A.M. Monday morning, if you don't work out, you're going to have to pay me $10,000. Are you going to do it? Are you going to work out?"

(00:30:03):
"Well, of course, I'm going to work out. Easily. Yes, of course." Okay, so we've established you can. Now, we're just negotiating the price. So, this has to do with step four around making pacts, making what's called a pre-commitment, and one of them is a price pact. This is how I got in shape. I used to be clinically obese. Today, I'm in the best shape of my life, partially because I use these pacts. Now, the important thing is you have to do this last. If you don't figure out the internal triggers, most importantly, if you don't make time for traction in your schedule, if you don't hack back the external triggers, this fourth step won't work. But as the last line of defense, it's incredibly impactful and we can talk about how to do that, as well.

Lenny (00:30:39):
I heard the all-in guys did this to lose weight. I think Sax and Jason did a pact, too. I think it was a lot of money, a hundred thousand dollars or something wild for...

Nir Eyal (00:30:49):
Oh, that's awesome. Actually, that's what I used to finish this book, as well. Maybe they read my book, I wonder, because I talked about this exact situation.

Lenny (00:30:55):
You hit it. It sounds like. You made it.

Nir Eyal (00:30:57):
I did? Yeah.

Lenny (00:31:00):
Another trick I'll share that I found useful around the to-do list. So, I used to-do lists, but I've learned that I can't just let them grow is when I had a regular job. I wrote it down in a notebook and every morning, I rewrote the to-do list so that it reminded me like, "Okay, I've copied this thing 10 times now. I'm not going to do it. I'm just going to push it out." So, that act of just rethinking about it every day was really impactful. But that works for people that are okay with an analog to-do list. If it's digital, that doesn't go away.

Nir Eyal (00:31:29):
So, I just want to clarify, there's nothing wrong with taking things out of your brain and putting them on a piece of paper. That's wonderful, but that's step one. And so, the big mistake that people make is they put stuff on their to-do list and then they wake up in the morning and what are they supposed to do? "Well, I'll do whatever's on my to-do list." And so, what they tend to do is the easy stuff. I've known people, I hate to tell you, I used to do this myself, too. I would do a task and then forget to put it on my to-do list. So, I would go back in and write it on my to-do list just so I could check off the box. How messed up is that? It's ridiculous. And I think this is something that I think really does need to change is that we have this culture where checking stuff off your list is our little emotional reward, right?

(00:32:12):
But that's ridiculous. We need to stop measuring ourselves by how many cute little boxes we check off. And rather, a much more important metric is not, "Did I finish the task?" I don't want you to track, "Did I finish?" That's not the important part, but people are probably scratching their heads. What do you mean? Isn't it all about finishing what I have to do? No, the important part is figuring out your productivity. It's figuring out how efficient you are at using your time. So, a much more beneficial metric to track is not, "Did I check off the box? Did I finish?" Rather, it's, "Did I do what I said I was going to do for as long as I said I would without distraction?" I'll say it again. "Did I do what I said I was going to do for as long as I said I would without distraction?"

(00:32:53):
Because that is the only way to understand how long things take you. The problem with to-do lists is that there is no feedback loop, there's no feedback mechanism. How long do things take you? So, this is why you have what's called the planning fallacy with people who use to-do lists, which says that on average, studies have found that tasks take people three times longer to finish than they estimate. Why does that happen? Because when you say, "Okay, here's that thing on the to-do list. I'm going to work on that and see how long it takes me to get it done." So, you work on it for five minutes and then you get an email and then you get a notification and then you start talking to one of your colleagues and you never actually track how long that thing took you to finish, as opposed to when you say, "Look, I'm going to work on that task for as long as I said I would, but without distraction. That's it. That's all I'm going to do."

(00:33:39):
What you now have is a metric of how far you got. So, I worked on that presentation, it needs to be 30 slides long, and I worked on it for 30 minutes and I finished two slides. Okay, great. Well now, I know that I need 10 more of those time boxes to finish the entire task. And this is why it turns out that people who measure themselves the way I espouse of people who say, "I'm just going to measure myself based on, did I do what I said I was going to do for as long as I said I would without distraction regardless of whether I finished," the kicker here is they actually finish more. They get more done than the to-do list people because now, they understand how long things take them to finish and they can appropriately time that as opposed to what most of us did.

(00:34:20):
What I used to do before I wrote Indistractable was procrastinate, procrastinate, procrastinate. "Oh crap, I got to get this done. The deadline's here, so I'm going to work all night to finish it," and of course, that's not when you do your best work and it's very stressful.

Lenny (00:34:31):
Since you mentioned deadlines, do you have any advice lessons on that as a tool to get things done?

Nir Eyal (00:34:36):
What we find is that people who are very deadline motivated, they do finish what they say they're going to do, but of course, the quality is crap. They're typically getting by by the skin of their teeth, and I did this all the time. This is my entire college career and my MBA at Stanford career was waiting, waiting, waiting, and then finishing at the last moment. And I could do well enough, but of course, I could do so much better if I worked without distraction. And so, it wasn't until, and we all know this basically, right? We know that putting in a little bit of diligent effort, a little bit at a time with plenty of lead time is going to give us a much better result than cramming at the last minute. But the reason people don't do this is because they don't understand how important it is, one, to manage those internal triggers.

(00:35:22):
If you're constantly thinking, "Ugh, that project is going to suck. I don't really want to work on it. I don't want to make those sales calls. I don't want to make that presentation. I don't want to do that thing that feels uncomfortable," and you don't have the tools to deal with that discomfort, you're always going to procrastinate because fundamentally, procrastination is an emotion regulation problem. It's not a character flaw. There's nothing wrong with you, you're not broken. It's just that you don't have the tools to deal with emotional discomfort and that's the part that everybody skips over. So, we don't want to talk about these uncomfortable feelings, but that's where it has to start. And then, the part that people don't do is actually planning out not the task itself, but the time to work on the task without distraction. That's the part that if you can implement that step two that I talked about of making time for traction, that becomes a game changer.

Lenny (00:36:08):
So, I've tried things like this where it's here throughout the day, I'm going to try this, I'm going to do this and this, and I just don't end up doing it. Things come up or I just get distracted. I'm like, whatever. I guess one question is how often do you find yourself doing the things you set out in your calendar? And then two, any other advice for actually staying on track and doing things you set out to?

Nir Eyal (00:36:28):
Okay, so number one, did you have tools in place to deal with the discomfort? What did you do when you didn't feel it?

Lenny (00:36:32):
I did not. I did not have that surfing the wave and the ten-minute trick, and I'm curious if there's other tricks in that bucket actually, but no, I did not.

Nir Eyal (00:36:39):
Absolutely. Yeah. So, that's the most important thing and that is the most important section. That's why I put it at the front of the book because again, procrastination is an emotion regulation problem, and I think this is fascinating. Personally, I really wanted to dive deep and not only understand why do we not do what we say we're going to do, but why do we do anything and everything? What is the seat of human motivation? And I think I didn't understand it properly. I think most people don't understand motivation properly. Doesn't that blow your mind? If you think about it, "I know what to do. I agree, this is what needs to get done. I just don't do it." Isn't that ridiculous? And by the way, this is not a new problem. Plato, 2500 years ago, the Greek philosopher talked about this very same problem. 2500 years before the internet, before social media, before all these things that we think are so distracting online, the Greek philosopher has had the same exact problem.

(00:37:27):
This is part of the human condition. It is part of our DNA that we constantly get distracted. But to me, that's a fascinating mystery. Why is that? Well, if you look at the deeper question of why do we do anything and everything, the seat of human motivation most people think is about carrots and sticks. If you ask people, why do we do what we do? It's about the pursuit of pleasure and the avoidance of pain. Jeremy Bentham said something similar to this. Sigmund Freud called it the pleasure principle. Neurologically speaking, it's not true. It's not true. It's not about the pursuit of pleasure and the avoidance of pain. It's not about carrots and sticks, but in fact, the carrot is the stick, okay? This is where I want to give you that matrix-like... Remember that scene, the Matrix, where there's that kid with a spoon and the spoon starts bending and the kid says, "Imagine there is no spoon," right?

Lenny (00:38:14):
Absolutely.

Nir Eyal (00:38:14):
Well, the carrot is the stick. What do I mean by that? We know that the only reason we do everything in anything from a neurological perspective is not about the pursuit of pleasure. It is all about the desire to escape discomfort. Everything you do, even the pursuit of pleasurable sensations, the carrot is the stick, because even wanting to feel good, craving, lusting, desire, hunger, that desire for something that feels good is itself psychologically destabilizing. The carrot is the stick. So, what that means, I think that's incredibly empowering because what that means is that whenever we don't do something, whenever we procrastinate, it's just a feeling. It's all it is. It's just a feeling. And so, when we learn those tools, it doesn't mean where I think people start intellectualizing it and thinking, "There must be something broken with me. Maybe you need a pill, maybe you need a treatment."

(00:39:07):
Chances are there's a ninety-nine percent chance, there's nothing wrong with you. It's simply that you don't have these tools. So, that's where we have to start, is absolutely understanding and applying these techniques so that when you feel that discomfort, you use that discomfort. What I found in my research writing this book is that high performers in every industry, business, the arts, sports, high performers, they feel the same internal triggers. They also feel lonely. They also feel bored. They also feel stressed. They also feel anxious, but they use that discomfort like a rocket fuel to propel them towards traction. Whereas what distractable people do, as soon as they feel uncomfortable, as soon as they feel bored, as soon as they feel lonesome, as soon as soon as they feel indecisive or stressed, boom, they're escaping it with a drink, with a click, with something to take their mind off of that discomfort. So, that has to be step number one.

Lenny (00:39:55):
That is fascinating. Basically, distraction is an emotional regulation problem. It's the way you put it. What else works in helping you manage that discomfort? We've talked about this ten-minute trick, the timer, the surfing of the urge. What else is in that bucket of things I could try when I'm just like, "Nah, I'm just going to go check Twitter. I need to work on this thing, right now."

Nir Eyal (00:40:13):
Yeah, so there's a bunch of different techniques you can use there in terms of the internal triggers. We can get into some of the more nitty-gritty techniques. There's lots and lots of them. The most important thing here though is that once you have some in your toolkit that you want to try, let's say it's a ten-minute rule, it's surfing the urge, there's re-imagining the task, the temperament, all kinds of things that you can do. The next thing is to put it on your calendar, which we talked about briefly. So, let's say you say, "Okay, I've got that time when I..." What did you say that you want to do, that you check email instead?

Lenny (00:40:40):
Start on my newsletter post for the next week, or just continue.

Nir Eyal (00:40:43):
To write it?

Lenny (00:40:44):
Yeah, write it.

Nir Eyal (00:40:46):
Okay. And did you have that in your calendar? That was part of the time punch-me-in-the-face-if-I-don't-do-it kind of thing?

Lenny (00:40:50):
That was back when I had a regular job. These days, it's just, what I used to do is my first half of the day until 3:00 is just deep work time. I called it it's-time-to-build time, and then 3:00 beyond is meetings. So, it was actually a huge block of time of focus time, but it was not subdivided by the things I wanted to do throughout the day.

Nir Eyal (00:41:10):
I see. Okay. So, step two would be putting on your calendar, "I'm going to work on writing this newsletter for 30 minutes, 45 minutes, whatever amount of time." Make it whatever is reasonable for you based on how long you think you can do it. Put that on your schedule. Okay? Step number three is hack back the external triggers. So, did you find that when you said I was going to work on writing this newsletter, was there anything in your external environment that was pinging, dinging, kids, pets, spouse, anything like that?

Lenny (00:41:38):
It's interesting that now that you say that, just that fact that only 10% of distractions are from that. So, it makes me, on the one hand, I recognize that most of the time, there's not a thing pulling me to Twitter, LinkedIn, or whatever. Most of the time, it's just like, that's probably something interesting going on. But there's definitely times when I see a little badge or my little phone gets a little push or yeah, my wife's with a kid in the distance. I'm like, "Oh, let's go check out what's happening there."

Nir Eyal (00:42:02):
Yeah. So, that's where we want to hack back. So, the reason I use the term hack. To hack something is to gain unauthorized access. Someone hacks into your bank account or hacks into your database. We know that these technologies are gaining unauthorized access to our attention span when they're constantly pinging and dinging us. So, there's some very simple things you can do. Setting a schedule in advance so that your device turns off as it goes to do-not-disturb during certain times of the day or before you begin this task, before you start writing, you make sure to turn on do-not-disturb, so that there's nothing in your way. On my desktop, I have a do-not-disturb set from midnight to 11:59 all the time. It's constantly on do-not-disturb because I don't want these constant notifications disturbing me when I'm doing focus work.

(00:42:52):
So, making sure that that's on. When it comes to, many of us work from home today, so making sure that your family knows when the time is that you are indistractable. And I'll give you one tip. I know you have a baby at home, but soon, that baby is going to be a toddler. And so, one thing that we did in my household is that my wife went to Amazon and she got what we call the concentration crown. And the concentration crown is just this little wreath thing that she wears. It looks like a little princess thing. It has little LED lights. It lights up. There's a picture of it in the book. And when my daughter was only six years old, we told her, "Look, whenever mommy is wearing the concentration crown, that means that she can't be interrupted and she will be with you within 30 minutes."

(00:43:37):
So, her time block was always no more than 30 minutes. So, we said, "We will be with you within 30 minutes. Please don't interrupt unless you're bleeding. Okay? If you're bleeding, you can interrupt us, but unless you're bleeding," this is when my daughter was only six years old. She could find something to do. It's okay for kids to be bored time to time, but as long as mommy was wearing the concentration crown that told her, and by the way, me, as her significant other, as her husband, worked really, really well because I would always interrupt her and say, "Hey Julie, can I ask you this one thing?" And she was working on her computer, but I didn't know whether she was listening to a podcast or a video or doing work that needed concentration. So, hacking back those external triggers, making sure that they don't gain unauthorized access by interrupting the interruption, whether it's with your kids, your colleagues.

(00:44:24):
So, every copy of indistractable has this little pull-out piece of paper, this piece of card stock that you fold into thirds and you put on your computer monitor. Okay, it's this big red sign on your computer monitor that says, "I'm indistractable at the moment. Please come back later." Now you can say, "Well, why don't I just put on headphones and my colleagues will know I'm not to be interrupted?" Yeah, but then they think you're putzing around, playing video games or something on your machine, as opposed to if you say, "No, I'm doing focused work right now, please come back later," you're making it acceptable to not constantly be interrupted. You're making it okay culturally appropriate to work without distractions. So, those are just some ways that you can hack back those external triggers.

Lenny (00:45:03):
I love that crown idea. I think a lot of people are going to use that. This time of year is prime for career reflection and setting goals for professional growth. I always like to spend this time reflecting on what I accomplished the previous year, what I hope to accomplish the next year, and whether this is the year, I look for a new opportunity. That's where today's sponsor, Teal comes in. Teal provides you with the tools to run an amazing job search. With an AI-powered resume builder, job tracker, cover letter generator, and Chrome extension that integrates with over 40 job boards, Teal is the all-in-one platform you need to run a more streamlined and efficient job search and stand out in this competitive market. There's a reason nearly 1 million people have trusted Teal to run their job search. If you're thinking of making a change in the new year, leverage Teal to grow your career on your own terms. Get started for free at tealhq.com/lenny. That's teal hq.com/lenny.

(00:45:58):
For avoiding distractions, triggers, pushes, all that stuff, is there any tools you recommend? I imagine, this is a lot of people are thinking. Is there like a way to block Twitter?

Nir Eyal (00:46:07):
Yeah, absolutely. So, that's a perfect lead-in to step number four. So, we talked about step one, master internal triggers, make time for traction, hack back the external triggers. We just talked about step number three. Step number four is preventing distraction with pacts. So with pacts, there's three kinds of pacts. We have a price pact, where there's some kind of financial disincentive to go off track. So, this is where we talked about earlier. You're making some kind of bet. We could talk about how I got into shape for the first time in my life using something like this. How I finished the book using something like this. That's a price pact. There's an identity pact, which is very, very impactful, which is what you're doing is you're forming a personal identity. So, this comes out of the psychology of religion where we know that people who call themselves a certain moniker. For example, if you say you're a devout Muslim, you're not debating whether you should have a gin and tonic because devout Muslims don't drink.

(00:46:58):
If you say I'm a vegan or vegetarian, a vegetarian doesn't wake up in the morning and say, "Hmm, I wonder if I should have a bacon sandwich for breakfast." No, they are vegetarian. That is who they are. So, that's why the book is called Indistractable. Indistractable Is meant to sound like indestructible. It is your identity, it is who you are. And so, is it any different for someone to say, "You know what? I'm sorry I don't check every ping and ding every 30 seconds. I'm Indistractable. Or, "You know what? If we're going to have a meal together, if we're going to sit down and have lunch together, I want to have that lunch free of distractions. So, can we put away our phones?" Is that any different from someone who says, "I have particular dietary preferences," or, "I have a particular religious garb?"

(00:47:35):
No, maybe it's not the norm. Maybe it's a minority of people who do that. But that's what I think it's going to take for the world to become indistractable, is that more of us show how great of a life we can have when we have some of these principles and make it part of our identity. And then the third pact is what's called an effort pact. And this gets into your question around what kind of tools we can use. An effort pact is where there's some kind of friction, some kind of effort that you need to take in order to get distracted. So, as the last line of defense, that's why this is the fourth step, the last line of defense, the firewall against distraction is making sure that you keep yourself in just as much as we keep distractions out. So, I'll give you a personal story here. I don't don't know if this is a family show. Is it okay if I talk about my sex life a little bit?

Lenny (00:48:22):
Absolutely. Let's talk and get into it.

Nir Eyal (00:48:25):
It's not as exciting as it might sound. I've been married for twenty-two years now. My wife and I found that we weren't being as intimate as we used to be. And this was when I first started writing the book. And part of the problem was that every night, we would go to bed and she would be fondling her iPhone and I would be caressing my iPad. And we weren't being intimate because we were busy playing with our devices as opposed to each other. And so, I started doing this research around Indistractable and I learned about this technique around making an effort pact. And so, what we did, I went to the hardware store and I bought us this $10 outlet timer and this outlet timer, anything you plug into it will turn on or off at a particular time of day or night, whatever you set.

(00:49:15):
And so, in my household, until this very day, every night at 10:00 P.M., my internet router shuts off. So, what does that do? We know that every night, 10:00 P.M., the internet router's going to shut off. So, my daughter knows, my wife knows, I know. I got to get everything done that I need to do online because the internet's going to shut off. Now, could I turn the internet back on? Of course, I could. I could tether, I could go pull out the router and replug it in, but that takes effort. And so, what I've done is if all else fails, if the internal triggers, making time for traction, hacking back, if all else fails, I've inserted a bit of mindfulness in something that I used to be mindless about. Now, I have to ask myself, "Wait a minute. Do I really need to go all that trouble of replugging and unplugging my router or should I do what I said I was going to do, which is get to bed on time and maybe be intimate with my wife?"

(00:50:05):
It's made a world of difference and I'll tell you honestly, Lenny. Now after a few years of doing this, it's become part of our routine. We all know bedtime's at 10:00 P.M. That's when we need to start getting ready for bed. The internet router's going to shut off. We actually don't even need this anymore because it's become part of our routine. So, that's one very cheap tool anyone can use as part of this effort pact. Another thing that I use almost every day, my daughter uses it as well, is this wonderful app called Forest. Do you know Forest?

Lenny (00:50:32):
No.

Nir Eyal (00:50:33):
It's awesome. So, here's the way Forest works. So, it's this cute little app here. I can show it to you. I'll pull it up. And the way Forest works is when you say you're going to do focused work time, you plug in how much work time you want. So, let's say I'm going to do 40 minutes of focused work time. There's that cute little virtual tree that's planted on my screen as soon as I hit go and if I pick up my phone and I do anything with it, that cute little virtual tree gets cut down. It's just a small reminder to say, "Yep, that's not what you said you were going to do right now. You said you were going to work with that distraction. Here, you are picking up your phone." It reminds you, this is not what you said you were going to do. So, it inserts that bit of friction, that bit of effort. Another, you asked for more tools. Another product I love is called Focusmate. Have you tried Focusmate?

Lenny (00:51:22):
Is that the one where they match you with somebody and you're kind of working, watching each other work?

Nir Eyal (00:51:25):
Yes, exactly. It's like a chat roulette without the dirty bits. So, I love this company so much, I actually invested in it. So basically, what you do is you go online, you look at this calendar and you pick a time when you want to do focused work. So, one of my issues used to be getting started. Once I got started, I was good, but getting started 8:00 A.M., I kind of like what you were saying with this cold start problem. So, what it does is it gives you this pact, again, this pre-commitment you're making with another person, "Okay, 8:00 A.M., I'm going to be there. And if you don't show up, you're going to get a bad review." So, it binds you to another person to build this effort pact to say, "I will be here at that time." You say, "Okay, what are you working on? What am I working on? All right, go." And for that entire time box, you work without distraction. And just seeing that other person who's also working without distraction is a wonderful way to bind you into what you said you were going to do.

(00:52:17):
So, those are just a few tools. There's many, many others.

Lenny (00:52:20):
Amazing. Okay, so let me actually try to just list out all the things you've shared so far and it's going to be across all the four steps and then I'm going to follow up on a couple things here. So, here's my notes. One is this idea of just set a ten-minute timer and just tell yourself, "I am going to work on something that I really want to work on right now for 10 minutes and that's all I'm going to do." And while you're doing that, surf the urge, you're going to feel like you don't, but just surf it and feel it and be aware that this is difficult. The calendaring of your day, that feels like a fundamental part of your approach is just figure out what you want to do during the day. Ahead of time, put it on the calendar. So, your to-do list is your calendar, essentially.

(00:53:02):
There's this whole idea of pacts. You shared a bunch of different pact ideas, there's like I'll pay you a lot of money if I don't do this. There's this Wi-Fi. Okay. And then I guess that translates into some of these other things. The Wi-Fi killer device, the Forest app, the Focusmate app and product. And then there's a few other things you shared. Just do not disturb, like set a timer so that during the day, you have do-not-disturb on during set times. For you, it's all the time, which I try to do, too. And then obviously, let your wife through important contacts and then make your family aware of when you're going to be working so that they know not to bother you. Maybe this concentration crown.

Nir Eyal (00:53:41):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:53:42):
Okay. Before we move on to a different topic, I'd love to spend a little more time in that first bucket because it feels like your point is so important that most of our distraction is this emotional regulation and we just don't like discomfort. And so, I'm curious what else you could teach me and teach people about getting better at managing that emotion. Are there any other tactics in that bucket that might be useful?

Nir Eyal (00:54:02):
Absolutely. So, there's three big buckets in terms of mastering these internal triggers. We can reimagine the task, reimagine the trigger, and reimagine our temperament. And so, maybe I can give you one big tip I think that I discovered when it came to reimagining our temperament. If we think about our temperament as these immutable qualities, as the attributes of our personality, we have to be very careful about what kind of identity and what kind of limitations we let in to our psyche. And I'll give you a good example of this. So, a few years ago, there was this line of research around what's called ego depletion. Ego depletion is this idea that willpower is a depletable resource. And you saw some researchers doing studies that seem to suggest that willpower was something that you run out of, that for me, I would come home after a long day of work and I'd say, "Oh, I'm out of willpower. I'm 'spent', there's nothing else I can do. Give me that pint of Ben and Jerry's. I'm going to sit in front of the TV because I'm spent. There's no more willpower left."

(00:55:03):
And some of these studies seem to suggest there was this phenomenon except the problem became that in the social sciences when something sounds a little fishy, when it sounds too good to be true, the scientific process dictates that we should rerun those studies. And it turns out that these studies around ego depletion could not replicate. We couldn't find the effect. And so, there was one exception to this and that exception was in a study done by Carol Dweck, she's one of my research heroes. She wrote the book Mindset, you're probably familiar with, and she did a fascinating study where she found that ego depletion does actually exist, but only for one group of people.

(00:55:42):
Who was that group of people? It turns out that the only people who really did run out of willpower the way you would run out of charge in a battery were people who believed that willpower was a limited resource. And so, this is super, super important to not let ourselves be influenced by these ridiculous notions, these beliefs that somehow we are impaired, that we are limited, that we're addicted. That's a really popular one, that we're all addicted, we're all unable to control these behaviors. That is not true. And in fact, it's only true if you believe it is true. So, it should be part of our practice to tell ourselves we are indistractable. Indistractable is meant to sound like indestructible. It's meant to sound like a superpower. So, repeating to yourself that you're not limited, it's just about your actions. It's not a moral failing. It's not something wrong with you. It's not that technologies are doing it to you. It's simply a series of behaviors that we have to practice.

Lenny (00:56:37):
I really like that. That's a theme that comes up a lot on this podcast is people that feel like they're responsible for their situation, they didn't cause it, but they're still responsible. It is their responsibility to deal with it, end up being more successful. And there's this idea of just being high agency.

Nir Eyal (00:56:52):
So, one of the things that I think is important to remember here is that there's a lot of things that the individual can do. I think there's a lot of things that we can do within a company or an organization, as well, that we can make our workplace indestructible. But then I think there's some things that we can do on a societal level, and these are called social antibodies. That social antibodies are when society spreads norms or manners that help us overcome otherwise antisocial or destructive behaviors. And so, the good news is that we have been here before with something far more harmful and far more addictive than social media or technology distractions. If you think back to the 1980s, I was a child of the '80s. I remember the '80s very well, and I remember when I was growing up, we had ashtrays in our living room.

(00:57:41):
In fact, everyone I knew had ashtrays in their living room. And today, that sounds crazy. You couldn't imagine walking into someone's home and lighting up a cigarette. If someone did that to you, that would be crazy. No one would do that today. Well, why? Why did that happen? Why would it be so incredibly rude to just walk into someone's home and light up a cigarette? Well, because there wasn't a law that said that that was illegal, someone's private residence. What changed was that we have new norms, new manners around how to behave when it comes to these destructive behaviors. So, I remember when my mom took away those ashtrays in our living room and she threw them away, and one day, one of her friends came over and took out a pact of cigarettes and was about to light a cigarette. My mom said, "No, no, no, no, I'm sorry. We are nonsmokers."

(00:58:26):
You see, she had this now and that she used to describe herself. She described herself as a nonsmoker. If you'd like to smoke, if you'd kindly go outside. And of course, that's the norm today. But it took great people like my mom to go against the trend for these antisocial behaviors. So, I think the same thing is going to happen when it comes to becoming indistractable. Frankly, with or without my book, my book was intended to accelerate this process, but we're going to do this naturally because what humans do throughout history when it comes to figuring out how to use a technology well is that we adapt and we adopt. We adapt to the technology by forming new behaviors, new norms. So, just like my mom said, "Hey, we are nonsmokers. That's my identity. I'm a nonsmoker. If you'd like to smoke, you're going to have to go outside."

(00:59:09):
We need to be comfortable with saying, "Hey, we are indistractable." If someone sits down with you across the table and you're having a nice conversation, they take out their funny, say, "Hey, hey, if we're going to have a conversation, let's be here both in body and mind." That means putting these devices outside of meetings. If we're going to have a business meeting or a personal meeting, we're going to declare these no-phone zones because that's who we are. We want to be indistractable. So, we adopt these new behaviors and we see that happening already. And then we adapt to these behaviors, I should say, with these new norms. And then we adopt new technologies that help us fight the bad aspects of the last generation of technology, and that's what we have always done.

(00:59:48):
In fact, right now, there's an explosion of tech companies that are making a lot of money. A lot of these apps and startups are making money with tools to help fix the last generation of technology. And so, there's all kinds of tools listed in my book from Forest and Focusmate, all kinds of tools that can help us put technology in its place, ironically enough, with new and better technology.

Lenny (01:00:09):
You've touched on this point that I want to come back to around how you're not as confident that we're as addicted to technology and apps as we think, and I think that's really important. I'm excited to chat about it. Before we get there, I wanted to chat and follow this thread essentially of becoming Indistractable at work and building a company essentially that helps your teammates become less distractable. What advice would you give to leaders at companies to help employees at the company have better focus, essentially?

Nir Eyal (01:00:37):
A lot of folks that I've worked with in the past have said, "Look, I can become indistractable. I follow these four steps, fantastic. I'm indistractable. But what if my company's not indistractable? How do I help other people become indistractable? Or what if my boss is not indistractable and they're constantly asking me and pinging and dinging me for stuff and I'm not able to do my best work? So, what do I do about that?" So, there's a whole section in the book on how to build an indistractable workplace. And what I discovered was in the research in writing this book is that indistractable companies have three traits. And so, the first trait is that Indistractable companies provide employees with what's called psychological safety. This comes out of the research from Amy Edmondson at the Harvard Business School. And what she discovered was truly that companies have to provide employees with psychological safety.

(01:01:23):
Meaning, if you can't talk about a problem, if you can't raise your hand and say, "Hey, you know what? I'm just not able to do my best work when I'm constantly expected to reply to every email, to every notification, every 30 seconds. I can't do my best work." If you can't talk about this problem, that is the problem. As I like to say, distraction is a symptom of dysfunction. Distraction is a symptom of dysfunction. And when it comes to the workplace, if you don't give employees that psychological safety to say, "Hey, how do we deal with this problem just like any other problem?" That in fact is a problem. It's not the technology, it's the fact that you can't get together and talk about this problem without fear of somebody thinking, "Oh, you're lazy," or, "You don't want to be on call," or, "You're expecting other people to work for you."

(01:02:04):
No, that's not the issue at all. It's simply that we need to formulate how to fix this problem just like any other business challenge. The second trait is employees need a forum to talk about this problem. So, in researching this book, I ask people, what's the most distracting technology? What technology in the workplace do you find to be most distracting? The number two was some kind of group messaging service, and Slack was mentioned the most number of times. By the way, number one was email. Number two was some kind of group messaging platform, and Slack was mentioned the most often. And so, I went to visit Slack headquarters. I went to go see my friend Amir, who used to work there at the time, and I knocked on the door and I expected to see a company that was incredibly distracted because if it was the technology that was the source of the problem, nobody uses Slack more than Slack.

(01:02:52):
They should be the most distracted company on earth. But that's not what I found at all because Slack, in fact, embodied these three attributes. They gave people psychological safety. They gave people a forum to talk about these problems. How did they do that? They actually created Slack channels at Slack. They had one Slack channel called Beef Tweets, and Beef Tweets was a channel where people could talk about their beef with a company. And it wasn't that necessarily management had to fix every problem. That's not the point. It's that they had to acknowledge that employee's voices were being heard. And how did they do that? Surprisingly enough, they did it with emoji. So, when a problem that an employee mentioned was fixed, they sent the green check mark emoji, but if it was a problem that maybe couldn't be fixed, but what they wanted to acknowledge that management had seen it, they would send the eyes emoji.

(01:03:38):
And so, the important thing here is to give employees some kind of forum. It could be a Slack channel, it could be another case study in the book is the Boston Consulting Group, which I used to work at. They've gone from one of the most distractable companies to today. They're ranked as one of the best places to work in America. They have these meetings where they talk about PTO, predictable time off. And so, they completely changed that organizational culture by following these steps, as well. The last, the third attribute, which is the most important of the three, is that management must exemplify what it means to be indistractable because culture is like water. It flows downhill. And so, people will look to management to see how they behave, and they will act in accordance with those expectations. So, at Slack Company headquarters, in the company canteen, it says in bright pink letters, it says, "Work hard and go home."

(01:04:31):
Work hard and go home. That is not something you would expect to see at a hard charging Silicon Valley startup, but that's what you see there because everybody in the company, this was before the acquisition. I don't know what it's like now, but when I wrote the book, this was certainly the case that everybody from Stewart Butterfield on down, the CEO on down, believed that to do people's best work, they had to work without distraction. So, if you use Slack on nights and weekends, you were told, "That's not what we do here." You were reprimanded because that was not part of the company culture. So, it's really those three traits, psychological safety, a form to talk about these problems, and management has to exemplify what it means to be indistractable.

Lenny (01:05:04):
I want to move to a different topic, but before we do, is there one thing or maybe two things that a listener can do, say today or tomorrow or this week, that would make it significant dent on their ability to focus and avoid distraction?

Nir Eyal (01:05:18):
I would say understanding these four steps of master the internal triggers, make time for traction, hack back the external triggers, and preventing distraction with pacts. If you can do one small thing in each of those four strategies, one small thing, that's a wonderful, wonderful first step. You don't have to do everything in the book. I'm giving you many of different options, but one small thing in each of those categories is huge. Now, when it comes to the workplace, one of the benefits of making a time box calendar is that you have a physical artifact. You have something that you can print out and show to other people. And so, I hear this a lot when it comes to people who say, "Okay, I'm indistractable but my boss isn't, what do I do? I'm constantly ping and ding from my boss. How do I get control over my time?"

(01:06:02):
Here's what you do. This is called schedule syncing or managing your manager. Here's what happens. You print out your calendar or you show it to them on your screen, and you say, "Hey boss, I need 10 minutes with you, Monday morning. Is that okay? Can I get 10 minutes with you?" And now, what you're going to do is you're going to show them your time box calendar for your working hours. You're going to say, "Okay, boss, you see here's my time for email. Here's my time for that meeting you asked me to go to. Here's time for that big project I'm working on. Now, you see this other piece of paper? Okay, you see this other list here? This is a list of things you've asked me to do that I'm having trouble fitting into my calendar." So, what I'm helping you do here is avoiding the worst piece of personal productivity advice.

(01:06:40):
The worst piece of personal productivity advice is if you want to be better at time management, you need to learn how to say no. What kind of stupid advice is that? Only a tenured professor who can't get fired would give you that kind of stupid advice. If you tell your boss no, you're going to get fired, that's dumb. You don't tell your boss no, you ask your boss to help you prioritize. That is your boss' most important job is to prioritize. So, you're not saying no. You're saying, "Here's my calendar. Here's this list of stuff you've asked me to do. Help me prioritize." And here's what's going to happen. Your boss is going to look at your calendar and say, "You know what? That meeting, you really don't need to be at that meeting. But that thing on that piece of paper that you listed over here, that's way more important. Can you swap that out?"

(01:07:23):
And let me tell you, I've started three companies. I've sold two so far, and bosses, your manager will worship the ground you walk on because we're all wondering, "What is it that you're doing?" And I know we have to trust our employees, et cetera, et cetera. Yes. But we're still wondering, "Hey, that thing that you said was going to be done isn't done. Why not? How are you spending your time?" So, if you can proactively sit down with your boss so that they understand how you are spending your time, and again, this takes maybe 10 minutes, you do this schedule sync process that not only works really well in the workplace, it also works really well at home. So, my wife and I used to have conflicts over who's going to pick up our daughter, and why didn't you take out the trash? And we would have these conflicts because we didn't synchronize our schedules.

(01:08:07):
Well, now, we take maybe five minutes a week. Sunday evening, we sit down together. Let me look at your schedule. Let me look at my schedule. "Okay, now we're synchronized. It's amazing." We prevent so many conflicts just by doing this simple schedule sync process.

Lenny (01:08:20):
I love that advice. I recommend a very similar approach to people to align with their managers. Basically, I call it managing up. And the way I describe it, manager taught me this is, I call it prioritizing and communicating. You could prioritize and not communicate, and your manager would be like, "What the hell? Why didn't you do this thing?" It's, "I prioritized. I never told you. Here's where I put it on my list." Or you could just communicate like, "No," and that doesn't work as you said. The best combination is just like, "Here's what I'm doing, here's why I will prioritize this and let me know what you think. Would you agree? You want to move it up? You want to move it down?"

Nir Eyal (01:08:51):
Exactly. And how much input. We always talk about one of the reasons I hate to-do lists is because to-do lists are just a register of output. It's the stuff you want to have done, but you can't have output without input. If you go to a baker, let's say it's your kid's birthday party and say, "Hey, I want two dozen cupcakes." Well, the baker's going to say, "Okay, I need flour, I need sugar, I need butter. I need all these inputs in order to make the output." But somehow when it comes to knowledge work, we just add more and more outputs without considering the input. What is the input for knowledge work? It's only two things. It's your time and your attention. That's it. Your time and your attention. So, in order to get the output, we have to think about the input, which is why the schedule syncing and time boxing is so important. Again, that's something that a to-do list can never give you.

Lenny (01:09:36):
Awesome. Okay. For our last topic, I wanted to spend some time on Hooked, which I think could be its own podcast. That could be a whole other episode of your first book that did really well. And essentially, this book, Hooked, is about teaching people how to get people hooked on their product. I know that you have this very contrarian perspective on, are we actually addicted to technology? Is it hurting mental health? All these things. So, this is contrarian corner. I'd love to hear your perspective on just, why is it that we're not as hooked on social media and technology as people think?

Nir Eyal (01:10:08):
Yeah. Okay, so there's a lot there. So, let me explain what Hooked was for compared to Indistractable. So, Hooked is about how do we build habit-forming products for good. And so, the idea there was that I think we need to use more of these techniques when it comes to healthy behaviors. We want people to get hooked to a language learning app. Duolingo, one of my former clients. That's a great thing that they found ways to get people hooked to learning a new language compared to the way we used to learn languages. Getting people hooked to exercise. One of the case studies in Hooked is Fitbot, which is an app that helps people form these habits around exercise. Getting hooked to a personal finance app to help you save money, getting hooked to enterprise software. That's all great, right? If it helps you become more productive, helps you live a happier, healthier life, that's wonderful.

(01:10:53):
So, nobody's worried about people getting addicted to enterprise SaaS. That's not an issue. So, the vast majority of products out there, they're not worried about addicting anyone. The real problem the vast majority of businesses out there have is that nobody cares. They have a wonderful product that could really improve people's lives, but people aren't using it. And so, it's really about how do you get people to keep coming back to your product or service, not because they have to, but because they want to. And so, what essentially I do at Hooked is steal the secrets of these Silicon Valley giants. I literally ripped out their psychology to understand what makes their products work so well, so that everybody in every conceivable industry that is devoted to improving people's lives can use those habits for good. So, that's what Hooked is for. So, if Hooked is about good habits, Indistractable is about how do we break bad habits, but for different products, we want to build a good habit with the exercise app, with these SaaS app, with the good habits, and we also want to break the bad habits.

(01:11:49):
So, that's the two sides of the same coin. They're not negations, they're complements. And I think I am uniquely qualified to write both these books because I know these techniques work and I know where they don't work. And I can tell you, having written Hooked, these techniques are very good. They're very effective. They're not that good. This isn't mind control. We're not hijacking people's brains. And there's a lot of people out there, a lot of tech critics have made a lot of money and gotten a lot of speaking gigs over scaring the crap out of people because people love that stuff. I was a journalism co-major in college, and the first rule of journalism is if it bleeds, it leads. So, you can get a lot more attention and a lot more press, a lot more invites to Ted Talks if you tell people, "Technology is melting your brain, it's super evil. Let's shut it all down."

(01:12:40):
This is the classic chicken little story. People love that stuff. The truth is much more nuanced, but nobody likes nuance. Nobody likes the answer to every complex question, which is always the same. "It depends. It depends." For some people, overusing technology is a real problem. So, for people who are pathologically addicted, that can be very harmful because, what is the definition of addiction? An addiction is a compulsive dependency on a behavior or substance that harms the user. Now, that's about 3% to 5% of the population is pathologically addicted, but we toss out this word addiction all the time. Everything's addictive. My wife ordered a shoes from DSW, and on the box it says, "Danger, addictive contents inside." It's shoes, people. Shoes. And so, what we have done by pathologizing, by medicalizing this behavior is that now, everything's an addiction. "Oh, you like playing Candy Crush? It's addictive. You like social media. It's addictive."

(01:13:37):
No, it's not addictive to everyone. No more than saying, "Hey, a lot of people have a glass of wine with dinner, but not everyone's an alcoholic. So, why do we think everyone who uses social media is addicted?" They're not. But we love that terminology. We love it. Why? Because even the word addiction comes from the Latin addictio, which means slave. So, it's much easier to tell ourselves, "I'm enslaved. My brain is being hijacked. My focus is being stolen. It's all Silicon Valley's fault." As opposed to saying, "Wait a minute, this isn't really a distraction." I'm sorry. "It's not really an addiction, it's a distraction," because then now I have personal responsibility. Now, I have to do something about it. That's no fun. Can I just blame somebody? But for the vast majority of people, save the people who are actually pathologically addicted, which by the way, I do think we need special protections for. If you're not a child who I do think we need special protections for, and you're not pathologically addicted, this is a personal responsibility issue that thankfully, all of us can overcome if we have the right tools.

Lenny (01:14:33):
Wow, this is quite the contrarian juicy corner. I wish we had more time to dig into all this stuff. So, basically, I checked Twitter a lot. I checked my phone a lot. You're saying that essentially, don't call it addiction. I'm just finding more things to get distracted by to push away from all these uncomfortable emotions that I'm feeling doing hard work.

Nir Eyal (01:14:52):
That's exactly right. And again, it doesn't mean it's your fault, but it is your responsibility as we talked about earlier, because who else's responsibility is it? We love these simple narratives. We love these simple stories of something bad is happening, so this is the bad guy. Well, sometimes the bad guy is also us, or at least we have a role to play in taking responsibility for this stuff. And so, if it was something that is insurmountable, if something you can't do anything about, for example, children, I think children are a protected class. My fifteen-year-old can't walk into a bar and order a gin and tonic. She can't walk into a casino and start playing blackjack. She's not ready for that. So, I do think we need regulations to protect children. I think we also need protections around people who are actually pathologically addicted.

(01:15:35):
If you know people are getting addicted to your product, you do have an ethical responsibility. And I've written about this for the past 10 years now about specific legislation that I think we need around what's called a use and abuse policy for people who are pathologically addicted. But for 95% of us, it's not an addiction. It's something we can absolutely take control over if we want to and if we have the right tools.

Lenny (01:15:58):
Very interesting food for thoughts. Before we get to our very exciting lightning round, is there anything else that you want to share or leave listeners with?

Nir Eyal (01:16:06):
There's a wonderful quote that I really love from Paulo Coelho who said that, "A mistake repeated more than once is a decision." A mistake repeated more than once is a decision, such a great quote. And I think it's time that we realize that if we are not doing something about this problem, we are deciding to be distractable. The difference between an indistractable person and a distractable person is that an indistractable person says, "Ah, okay, I see what you did to me there. I see I got distracted. I'm not going to let it happen again." How many times can we get distracted by social media, by whatever, before we say, "Okay, I'm going to take steps today to prevent getting distracted tomorrow"? That's what defines an indistractable person. So, if you really want to summarize my work in Indistractable into one Mantra, it's that the antidote for impulsiveness is forethought. The antidote for impulsiveness is forethought. Fundamentally, distraction is an impulse control issue. That's all it is, and it's a skill like any other.

(01:17:04):
We learn skills. Why do we expect that we should just be born with this innate skill to fight distraction? It's a skill like any other. And so, the antidote for impulsiveness is forethought. If we plan ahead, if we know that we're going to take steps a day to prevent getting distracted tomorrow, there's no distraction we can't overcome.

Lenny (01:17:22):
I love it. I love the message of empowerment and agency. I feel like that's so applicable to product management and a lot of the people that listen to this podcast. And just another example of that even though the world is making life more difficult for us, potentially, you could still do something about it. And I really like just the general message that you can do something about it. With that, we've reached a very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Nir Eyal (01:17:44):
I am ready.

Lenny (01:17:45):
All right. What are two or three books you've recommended most to other people?

Nir Eyal (01:17:48):
There's this book called Alchemy by Rory Sutherland that I love. It's a fantastic book. It delves into the psychology of various experiences. So, highly recommend that. And I'm reading a book right now, actually. It's all myself right here called The Experience Machine by Andy Clark, which I'm really enjoying.

Lenny (01:18:04):
What is a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Nir Eyal (01:18:08):
Okay, so it's not very recent, but it's one of my all time favorite movies that nobody's seen, which is Empire of the Sun. Have you ever seen Empire of the Sun?

Lenny (01:18:16):
Nope.

Nir Eyal (01:18:17):
Okay, you got to see it. So, one of my favorite movies, it has Christian Bale in it when he was only, I think, 12 or 13 years old. Steven Spielberg was the director, John Malkovich stars in it. Unbelievable movie that for some reason nobody saw. So, if you're a Christian Bale fan, which I am, I think he's a fantastic actor, Empire of the Sun, classic, awesome movie.

Lenny (01:18:38):
Do you have a favorite interview question that you like to ask people when you're hiring them for a job?

Nir Eyal (01:18:43):
I'm not a big fan of interviews in general. I'm a huge fan of small projects. So, what I'll oftentimes do is pay people to do a small project and then I can see their work output. I find that that works much, much better than any question I can come up with.

Lenny (01:18:59):
Awesome. A few other people have mentioned that exact idea, especially at a company. I think about Linea, where they pay people to do a little project within their company. They're kind of like contractors for the company for a little bit.

Nir Eyal (01:19:09):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:19:10):
Is there a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love, whether it's an app or something physical?

Nir Eyal (01:19:15):
I went to Japan a few months ago and I just became obsessed with all things Japanese, and so I bought a hundred different little gadgets that helped me make Japanese food at home. So, I had this little sesame grinder thing. The Japanese are so good at making devices for everything, so I would just put this under the general bucket of everything Japanese.

Lenny (01:19:36):
I use Muji pens, which is an amazing Japanese brand. They're just like...

Nir Eyal (01:19:43):
Yes, we have Muji. Yes, exactly. I have some of those, as well. They're great.

Lenny (01:19:44):
Go Japan. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to or share with friends, either at work or life, that you find really useful?

Nir Eyal (01:19:52):
So, I do have several mantras that I repeat to myself daily. One of those is my life purpose. My purpose in life is to explain the world so that it can be made better. Now, that might not apply to everyone. That's my personal life motto. It kind of just helps me recenter and refocus my purpose for living, which is to serve others, to make the world a better place. And the way I do that is to explain the world so that it can be made better. So, of course, that's not going to apply to everyone, but I do think there is something very useful about sitting down and saying, "Wait, what is the purpose of my life?" And so, for me, having that mantra, which I literally repeat every single day as like a little prayer, I'm very secular. I don't believe in anything supernatural, but I think there's a lot of wisdom to be adopted from the practices of organized religion, and one of those is this secular prayer reminding me of my purpose.

Lenny (01:20:36):
I love that. Final question. You wrote a book about building habits. What's your best and worst habit these days?

Nir Eyal (01:20:45):
This is tricky. So, I think the reason I'm struggling answering this is because there's a difference between habits and routines and a lot of things that people think are habits are not really habits. So, I was going to say exercise. I used to be clinically obese and now I exercise. But that's not technically a habit because it's not done with little or no conscious thought. It's a routine, but I think that's probably one of my best routines is that I've finally, for the first time in my life, really gotten into physical fitness. I have maybe not quite a six-pack, but maybe like a four-pack at forty-five years old. I'm pretty proud of that and I'm not saying that to brag. I'm saying it as a testimony to the fact that when you say you're going to do something and actually do it, how wonderful that feels.

(01:21:29):
Just live your life with intent. I'm not athletic. I never was athletic. I still don't really like exercise, but I do it and I eat right because I say I will. So, I think that's probably my best routine and probably my worst habit is that I still feel these impulses. If the definition of a habit is an impulse to do or behavior with little or no conscious thought, you better well damn believe that I feel the impulse to check Instagram for a quick minute or to look at this. I still feel that. I think the difference is that now, I know I'm going to feel those. I know that's part of my daily experience, and I have those practices in place so that they don't get the best of me.

Lenny (01:22:04):
Just along those lines, something I was going to ask but I forgot is, how often do you not do the things you had in your calendar? What percentage of the things don't get done the way you planned?

Nir Eyal (01:22:12):
So, when things change dramatically, then I tend to fall off track. So, the first time, if I make a big change in my calendar, I'm much more likely to fall off track. The more I can go from week to week with small parts of my calendar changing, the more I'll get to a hundred percent doing what I say I'm going to do. But I would say on average, once I have, I pretty much have my more or less calendar set for the week. I would say maybe 10% of the tasks I'll go a little too late on or I'll start, but then of course the idea is to make sure that doesn't happen again next time.

(01:22:41):
But there is, of course, some wiggle room. So, when that might happen, let's say it's 10% of the time I go off track, well then I'll say, "You know what? I put in too much time for writing. An hour of writing is too much. Maybe I should just start with 45 minutes. Let's see if I can do that block. I'll adjust it a little bit because I got other stuff that I want to take care of." So, it's those small adjustments within day-to-day, whereas before I wrote Indistractable, it was all kinds of stuff. It was half the day that I would go off track.

Lenny (01:23:07):
Amazing. I was going to ask what it was like beforehand. Nir, I think we delivered on our promise. There's at least a dozen very tactical things you can do to become more indistractable and to focus better. Thank you so much for being here. Two final questions. Where can folks learn more about the stuff you're doing? Where do they buy your book? Where they learn more about the things you can do for them? And then finally, how can listeners be sold to you?

Nir Eyal (01:23:28):
I appreciate it. Thanks. So, my website is nirandfar.com. That's spelled like my first name, nirandfar.com. And my two books, Hooked: How to Build Habit-Forming Products and Indistractable: How to Control Your Attention and Choose Your Life, and they're available wherever books are sold and what you can do for me, become indistractable. Honestly, I don't care if you buy the book. If you can adopt some of these practices and help change this mindset that we're all victims, that we're being hijacked because of the tech companies. If you can start putting the word out there that this is something that has improved your life in some small way and tell others about it, this is how we start spreading those social antibodies, just like my mom did around smoking. I think we should all do the same.

Lenny (01:24:09):
I am going to be working on that as soon as we get off. Nir, thank you so much for being here.

Nir Eyal (01:24:14):
Thank you.

Lenny (01:24:15):
Bye everyone.

(01:24:18):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Paul Millerd (00:00:00):
Take three hours during a workday. Has to be during a workday. Block off your schedule, sneak out. People can pull this off. Go for a walk without a destination or do something from your childhood that you used to do all the time. Did you use to play basketball? Did you use to paint? Did you use to play an instrument? And just pay attention. What is emerging? Do you feel bad for sneaking out of work? Where does that bad feeling come from? What does that mean about your definition of work and what work means to you?

(00:00:30):
A lot of people have never really thought about, why do you work? People say money. Okay, that's fine. But what else? Why? Are you trying to be a good person? Do you see a good person as somebody that works every day? Maybe. These are a lot of scripts people grow up with. You're really just creating this space to get in touch with, how do I actually feel about work? How do I get to know myself more? Are there things that I've lost touch with that really bring me alive?

Lenny (00:00:59):
Today my guest is Paul Millerd. Paul is the author of The Pathless Path: Imagining a New Story for Work and Life. His book is getting a lot of traction within the tech community, because it explores a different way of living, essentially breaking free of the default path for your work and your life that we all basically start on. What Paul describes in his book is almost exactly the path I took to figure out this very weird and wonderful work that I do now with the newsletter and podcast. And because of that, I think this is an important conversation to have, because it may inspire you to explore a different path in your own life.

(00:01:33):
In our conversation, Paul explains what the pathless path is, how to go about exploring your own pathless path, how to address fears we all have around money, and prestige, and safety that keep us on the default path, plus tons of stories and examples, and very tactical advice for thinking about exploring a new direction in your own life. With that, I bring you Paul Millerd after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:01:58):
This episode is brought to you by Sanity. Your website is the heart of your growth engine. For that engine to drive big results, you need to be able to move super fast, ship new content, experiment, learn, and iterate. But most content management systems just aren't built for this. Your content teams wrestle with rigid interfaces as they build new pages. You spend endless time copying and pasting across pages, and recreating content for other channels and applications. And their ideas for new experiments are squashed when developers can't build them within the constraints of outdated tech.

(00:02:30):
Forward-thinking companies like Figma, Amplitude, Loom, Riot Games, Linear, and more use sanity to build content growth engines that scale, drive innovation, and accelerate customer acquisition. With Sanity, your team can dream bigger and move faster. 

(00:02:44):
As the most powerful headless CMS on the market, you can tailor editorial workflows to match your business. Reuse content seamlessly across any pager channel and bring your ideas to market without developer friction. Sanity makes life better for your whole team. It's fast for developers to build with, intuitive for content managers, and it integrates seamlessly with the rest of your tech stack. Get started with Sanity's generous free plan. And as a Lenny's Podcast listener, you can get a boosted plan with double the monthly usage. Head over to sanity.io/lenny to get started for free. That's sanity.io/lenny.

(00:03:21):
This episode is brought to you by Maui Nui Venison, a mission-based food company bringing the healthiest red meat on the planet directly to your door. I actually joined Maui Nui Venison earlier this year, after hearing their ad on the Tim Ferriss podcast, and I'm excited to be spreading the message further. Not only does this company provide the most nutrient dense and protein dense red meat available. Their operation produces the only stress-free, 100% wild harvested red meat on the market, that is the only one of its kind in the world, actively managing Maui's invasive axis deer populations, helping to restore balance to vulnerable ecosystems, food systems, and communities in Hawaii. Also, it is seriously delicious, not at all gamey, and easy to cook. My wife and I made stew, and steaks, and all kinds of grilled goodies with the meat. 

(00:04:07):
We also feel great about it as a protein from an ethical standpoint. I highly recommend trying their all natural venison jerky sticks for an optimal protein snack, as well as a wide variety of fresh cuts all available in their online butcher shop. There are limited memberships available, but you can sign up and get 20% off your first order at mauinuivenison.com/lenny. That's mauinuivenison.com/lenny.

(00:04:34):
Paul, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast. 

Paul Millerd (00:04:38):
Excited to be here Lenny.

Lenny (00:04:40):
I'm more excited to have you on. You published a book called The Pathless Path, which I have right here. Last I heard you've sold over 40,000 copies of this book, which I know puts it in the top 1% of books sold, possibly in the top 0.1% of books sold. It's an absurdly high number for books sold. People don't really know this. And especially for a self-published book, it's a huge success.

(00:05:02):
And I thought it would be good to start with a concept that you call the default path. What is the default path?

Paul Millerd (00:05:08):
Yeah, I think the default path is different for everyone and slightly different in every different culture. It's really the story in your head about what you should do. And most of us have some sort of script that we're living out. This is especially powerful when we're in our late teens and early twenties, right? We're trying to execute a script.

(00:05:31):
And it can be different in every country. In the US it's sort of like go to college, get good grades, get a good job, make a good salary, buy a house, get married, have a family, things like that. And when it comes to work, the default path is get a job and work continuously for all of adulthood.

(00:05:50):
And when you opt out of the default path, there aren't really offerings. People have a hard time even contemplating it. You'll trigger insecurities in other people by just existing outside the frame of the default path. And it's the default path in their head of their conception of how the world should work and does work, right?

(00:06:15):
So a lot of what I explore is what is life beyond the default path, and what are the stories we can use to one, at minimum, feel better about what we're doing? And two, what are the stories we can adopt to thrive?

Lenny (00:06:32):
I imagine many people listening to this are feeling like, "No way I'm on the default path. I'm doing so many interesting things. I'm doing what I want," but they probably still are on this default path. What are some signs that might tell you that you actually still are on this path, and there's such a new direction you could explore that you haven't explored?

Paul Millerd (00:06:50):
Yeah, I think there's nothing wrong with the default path. The difference I would make is, are you conscious about what you're actually doing? What are the costs of your game? What are the trade-offs? What are the implicit contracts are you creating with yourself? A lot of times when people quit their jobs, they forget to fire the manager in their head. They don't realize they can take the afternoon off to spend it with their kids. They've created this implicit contract that Monday through Friday, eight to 10 hours a week you have to work. And that may work for people, but are you actually opting into that, or are you just sort of accepting the default? 

Lenny (00:07:35):
I think it's a really important point. It's totally fine to stay on this default path. It's not for everyone to try something totally different. Can you talk a little bit about just how to think about the benefits of that and the trade-offs of, "Okay, this is great, I'm going to stay where I am"?

Paul Millerd (00:07:48):
It's interesting. I did not think my book would resonate with people that were firmly in the traditional work role. Full-time jobs, big companies, things like that. But I've had many people reach out that say, "Wow, this sort of loosened the tightness between my identity and my work reality, and loosened it up a little bit. And I'm able to play with it a little more." I had one friend, he said, "From your book, I made a list of the four priorities. Right now I'm getting three of them. And it's helped me become more aware that I'm actually getting these three things that I prioritize. I'm missing the fourth. I'm probably going to have to make a change two years from now. Maybe another role, because I do want to lean into that fourth thing." I think it's really just about remixing your path. My hot take is that we're all on a pathless path. You were at Airbnb. Airbnb, every two years were there was a different company.

Lenny (00:08:53):
Absolutely true.

Paul Millerd (00:08:54):
Right? And so we're constantly needing to reinvent and reevaluate. And I think thinking of our lives as this smooth trajectory up this corporate ascent sort of limits the possibilities of our own life. So just acknowledging that we are being disrupted. We all have personal lives where we have relationship challenges, health challenges, external shocks, inflation, things like this, that are changing our reality all the time.

(00:09:25):
And it sort of sucks that there aren't these comfortable middle class jobs that are growing and abundant. They're shrinking. David Autor, a economist from MIT, has pretty good research on this, and it's just making people a little more unsettled. It sucks, but this is the reality we're living in, especially places like the US becoming super tech heavy. And how do you navigate that? It's hard. Everyone's struggling with their relationship to work.

Lenny (00:09:58):
Let's actually talk about the pathless path. You've been kind of touching on various ways of thinking about it. What's the simplest way of thinking about this concept of the pathless path?

Paul Millerd (00:10:07):
I really shied away from trying to define it super clearly. I think I have this passage at the beginning of the book that it's like the pathless path is basically a shift away from the default. It's a shift away from not knowing what you're doing as a problem to be solved toward an embrace of uncomfort, discomfort, and uncertainty. 

(00:10:32):
And it's sort of a personal journey of shifting away from operating around scarcity towards operating from a sense of abundance, having faith that things might be okay. And on a path like yours, this is a necessary condition. You have no idea what comes next, because nobody has been on the Lenny path before. 

Lenny (00:10:57):
True. 

Paul Millerd (00:10:59):
Right? And a lot of us are in this situation. Now if you're an accountant at an accounting firm in your early twenties, maybe there is a track, and you can sort of plan it, and it's pretty legible. But even still, I would argue that developing a relationship with uncertainty, not knowing what's happening, experimenting a little more, it's all of these things in one. And it's sort of my attempt to come up with a better narrative around work.

(00:11:27):
And it's been pretty cool, because a lot of people are embracing this and now using the term like, "I'm on my pathless path." And it allows people to sort of name it and gives them comfort. 

(00:11:40):
I've had people email me that have been on a path for seven years, and they're like, "This is the first time I actually felt okay about my path," because a lot of what my book is, is an exploration of, why does it feel so weird to do your own thing? Why does it actually feel shameful to leave a full-time job? Which is an aberration in the history of the world.

Lenny (00:12:06):
I imagine a big question everyone's mind right now is, "This sounds amazing. I would love to just do the work I love and break out of this path. How do I do that?" And I want to talk about that. But before we do that, what are some examples of pathless paths people have ended up doing? Something just to make it a little more real of, here's what people have ended up doing with their life. 

Paul Millerd (00:12:29):
So I think it ranges from a short sabbatical. And to someone like you or me who are sort of on this path and committed to this creator path, and things like that, there's a huge component of their creator economy. Not the creator economy from a VC perspective of all these startups that are going to save creators, but creators that are actually betting on themselves, finding some deeper satisfaction, a better relationship with work and committing to it. But it also encompasses people that are independent freelancers, that have a stable path, more predictable income than creator economy stuff. And it also includes people that are jumping from job to job.

(00:13:16):
I also have examples of people that are older. I talk to a lot of people in their fifties. They've solved their financial problems, but they've lost that sense of aliveness. And they're looking to re-inject that, and they need maps of how to approach that, how to think about that, what are the models, things like that. 

(00:13:37):
So yeah, it's a pretty big umbrella. It's a nice way to claim everyone's path, but I think the shared ethic is really a sense of possibility, and opportunity, and optimism. 

Lenny (00:13:54):
So just to kind of list out some of these end, and I think what's interesting is there's no end to this. It's an endless path to continue discovering. There's actually this quote that I wrote down here that I'll read that I think is a really nice way of thinking about this pathless path. "The goal is not to find a job, make money, build a business, or achieve any other metric. It's to actively and consciously search for the work that you want to keep doing."

Paul Millerd (00:14:15):
The big shift there, the big shift for me actually, when I left my job, I wanted to run away. I wanted to escape work. I wanted to not work. And I more or less accomplished that. I basically lowered my cost of living in Asia to about 1,000 per month. 

(00:14:34):
But then I started developing this relationship with writing, and creating, and all these things I actually really enjoyed. And I wasn't doing them to be famous or grow a following. I just really liked them and I liked doing it in public, because I was meeting others that were engaging on these ideas. 

(00:14:52):
So the big aha for me was, "Oh, you can design around liking work." The hidden assumption I had around work for the first 32, 33 years of my life was work sucks. You have to figure out how to tolerate it.

(00:15:13):
And within that frame, try to do your best to enjoy some of it. But ultimately, it's a trade-off of your time. You have to suffer through it. A lot of it is going to suck, and you have to put up with that.

(00:15:26):
Now, I think I'm very protective of what I do and don't do. This is why it was very easy for me to say no to Penguin. I didn't want to write a second book for them. I want to write a second book the way I did, which was super fun process. Writing a book was one of the most fun things I've ever done in my life. And so I sort of think about protecting them. 

(00:15:48):
And a lot of people are looking for meaning through work in a job shaped container. And I think that's just really hard to find. You can find it for short bursts, but maybe after seven or 10 years, it's just not doing it anymore. 

Lenny (00:16:05):
So let's talk about how to go about finding your pathless path and create the space and opportunity to do this. Because again, a lot of people listening are like, "I have bills to pay. I got kids to take care of. I got a home, I got a mortgage. I can't just go on a sabbatical, explore, travel, and find here I'm going to start a newsletter." So what have you found are ways to enable this exploration without risking everything? 

Paul Millerd (00:16:31):
A three month sabbatical is much more attainable than people think. Companies are desperate to keep people and are much more open to things like this these days. And the way I frame it is if you're assuming you're going to work continuously in adulthood, that's about 500 months. Try to find three months of that where you can create space and reconnect with yourself, explore things, just see what emerges, see how you feel. I think this is so vital for people in their thirties or forties who've worked for 10 years just to reconnect with themselves. 

(00:17:11):
And three months in a total of 500 months, people accomplish much more impressive things than that, like saving for their dream home. That is such a powerful thing people aim for that they make it happen. Even people that don't have a ton are able to make that happen, because it is such an important priority. And for me, I think creating this space was more important than owning a house, getting married. It was the most important thing for me.

(00:17:42):
And I actually quoted your piece. I pulled up the quote. It said, "Lenny Rachitsky took a sabbatical after a long career in product management, thought he would return to work. But by the end of the break, it was crystal clear to me that I was ready to move on to a new adventure." And then you said several weeks into your sabbatical, you stopped checking your email. "My heart was no longer in the work. I didn't yet know what I wanted to do next, but I knew it was time to shake things up." And you probably weren't in that state when you were still at Airbnb. 

Lenny (00:18:16):
That's right. I was super into the work. And I think the way I thought about it is the Kool-Aid kind of exited my bloodstream, and taking that time off kind of created separation. And then I started thinking, "Man, is this really what I want to be doing?" And that visceral feeling of getting excited about the work disappeared, which was crazy and scary. 

Paul Millerd (00:18:35):
Yeah. And so you have smart listeners, and smart people are great at excuses. So they'll say, "I can't do it because of this." I always think these things are much more possible if they really are the main priority. 

(00:18:48):
So what I tell people is fine, don't take a sabbatical. Take an afternoon. Take three hours during a workday. Has to be during a workday. Block off your schedule, sneak out. People can pull this off. Go for a walk without a destination, or do something from your childhood that you used to do all the time. Did you use to play basketball? Did you use to paint? Did you use to play an instrument? Do one of those two things, even better if you do both.

(00:19:19):
And just pay attention. It's a sort of form of work mindfulness. What is emerging? Do you feel bad for sneaking out of work? Where does that bad feeling come from? What does that mean about your definition of work and what work means to you?

(00:19:38):
A lot of people have never really thought about, why do you work? People say money. Okay, that's fine. But what else? Why do you work? Are you trying to be a good person? Do you see a good person as somebody that works every day? Maybe. These are a lot of scripts people grow up with. Or people that don't have a full-time job, are they bad people? 

(00:20:04):
And so you're really just creating this space to get in touch with, how do I actually feel about work? How do I get to know myself more? Are there things that I've lost touch with that really bring me alive?

Lenny (00:20:19):
It's interesting how much of what you described, we didn't know each other before we met for this podcast episode, but so much of what you say is exactly what happened in my path. I took three months off exactly. I took a sabbatical. I started poking around, exploring, doing a little writing. And basically led to what I do now, which is a crazy thing I never imagined in my wildest dreams. And so clearly this works.

Paul Millerd (00:20:43):
Yeah, and I think people will say, "You can do that because you worked at Airbnb," or, "Oh, you can do that because you"... I've talked to hundreds of people. So what I did before the pandemic for years was I opened up my calendar every Wednesday and I said, anyone that wants to talk to me about work can talk to me about work.

(00:21:02):
So at this point, I've probably talked to 500 plus people about their relationship to work. And the reason that's not surprising about what happened to you is it happens to almost everyone. The sabbatical almost has a 99.9% approval rating. 

(00:21:22):
I talked to one person. She was like, "I took a sabbatical, I stayed at home. My husband was still working for two months. I couldn't wait to go back to work." I was like, "Cool. You're the first person I met that didn't get anything out of a sabbatical."

Lenny (00:21:37):
That's hilarious. I haven't met that person. So your advice is try to take a sabbatical, and you're also encouraging people to, you can actually probably do this at some point, but maybe it takes a bit of time to set people up for the fact that you're going to do this. Maybe you need to work at the company for a while, but in your thirties or forties, it sounds like try to find time to take three months. And is three months important? Is that what you find, that large of a block of time?

Paul Millerd (00:22:03):
I've found it takes six to eight weeks just to unwind.

Lenny (00:22:09):
Yeah, that's exactly what I found.

Paul Millerd (00:22:11):
I think for me, there was the initial unwinding after six to eight weeks, and then a deeper unwinding after probably two to three years, where you start to trust yourself a little more, if you stay on the uncertain path that is. But yeah.

Lenny (00:22:28):
If founders are listening to this and feeling like, "Shit, why would I give people sabbaticals? They're going to leave, start their own companies, find some other catalyst path. I want them on my default path." Is there anything you could say to a founder thinking about offering sabbatical?

Paul Millerd (00:22:43):
I would say if that's their reaction, it sounds like they have an insecurity around work. So I would interrogate that first. What is the implicit story they have about how much people are supposed to work and such?

(00:23:00):
Yeah, I don't know if it's a good employer strategy. I think a decent amount of people would leave. I know Intel, I have friends that have done the sabbatical at Intel. You get six weeks after seven years. Maybe after seven years, they're a bit burnt out that they don't have enough time in those six weeks to unwind. 

(00:23:22):
But I think getting creative, especially now that remote work is so much more common about these opportunities, to let people become the people they want to be. People leave companies because they don't see a path to be the person they want to be. 

Lenny (00:23:40):
Okay, so you take a sabbatical, or you take an afternoon, or you take a walk. You talked about be mindful for what comes up. What are you feeling about work? What is a thing you want to do? Do you want to go play basketball? Do you want to go draw? What else do you encourage people to do, to try to discover a potential new path?

Paul Millerd (00:24:00):
I think meeting others. So in exercise, I'll have people do if they're curious about this... And for the most part, I don't want to convert people that like what they're doing and like traditional jobs. But a lot of people are curious, and I say have a path expert conversation. Reach out to somebody, sort of like a podcast, that's ahead of you on a similar path, and just send them a message and say, really thoughtful message. Say, "Hey, you're on a path a few years ahead of me. I'm really curious about this. I don't have people in my life that have done things like this. Can I just pick your brain? If we can't jump on a call, can I send you a list of questions?"

(00:24:42):
Most people will agree to that, especially the latter if they're a writer, because writing just enables them to come up with new ideas. So I'll always agree to do the written questions. I don't do the open calendar anymore now that I have a daughter. She wins my time over random stranger's booking. But if people want to send me questions, I'll always answer them in text form.

Lenny (00:25:07):
And again, this path doesn't have to lead to creator, artist, writer person. It could lead to starting a new business. It could probably lead to a new career. It could shift in careers. Is there anything else, again, of just where this could lead to people so they're like, "Oh, wow, that's interesting."

Paul Millerd (00:25:23):
Somebody sent me an article today about this guy. I think he was a performing artist. He became a therapist. I forget his name. But I think just the possibilities for reinventing yourself and taking different paths, working online, working flexibly, it's way more possible than 25 years ago. It's also going to continue to be more possible. All the tools and technology to enable these kinds of lives are just getting better and easier. And especially this week, ChatGPT just released their new GPT. I was playing with that today and I'm like, "Oh my gosh."

Lenny (00:26:04):
This episode is brought to you by Wix Studio. Your agency has just landed a dream client, and you already have big ideas for the website, but do you have the tools to bring your ambitious vision to life? Let me tell you about Wix Studio, the new platform that lets agencies deliver exceptional client sites with maximum efficiency. How?

(00:26:22):
First, let's talk about advanced design capabilities. With Wix Studio, you can build unique layouts with a revolutionary grid experience, and watches elements scale proportionally by default. No-code animations at sparks of delight, while adding custom CSS gives total design control. Bring ambitious client projects to life with any industry, with a fully integrated suite of business solutions. From e-commerce to events, bookings, and more. And extend the capabilities even further with hundreds of APIs and integrations. 

(00:26:50):
You know what else? The workflows just make sense. There's the built-in AI tools, the on canvas collaborating, a centralized workspace, the reuse of assets across sites, the seamless client handover, and that's not all. Find out more at wix.com/studio.

(00:27:08):
I think when people might hear some of these professions like, "Maybe I'll become a therapist, maybe I'll become an online writer person. Maybe I'll start a business." It may feel like that assumes you'll make less money doing these things. But in my case, and I'm curious if it's in your case, I make significantly more doing what I do now. I try not to talk about the income of this stuff, but it's significantly more than I made at Airbnb as a very senior product leader. And I feel like that often happens. You discover a way to do something you love and also make a lot more money.

Paul Millerd (00:27:39):
I think it's easier to make money in a sustainable, long-term way doing stuff you actually like doing. That sounds so simple, but it actually would've been really hard for me to stay on my previous path. 

(00:27:53):
Now, in my case, it was not until my fifth year that I came close to the salary I left. For the first three years, I really optimized for exploration, creativity, just getting to know myself again. I made 50 grand the first year, because I was freelancing. Then I made 30 grand, 24 grand, and then 30 grand. So I was really optimizing for getting to know myself. I dramatically lowered my cost of living, and that is one path. 

(00:28:26):
But this year, I'll make more than I ever made. And that is mind-blowing to me, because every single day of this year has been absolutely delightful. I've spent abundant time with my wife and my daughter. And it's so crazy.

(00:28:44):
Now, if I had stayed in my previous path, I'd be making a lot more than I make now. But that path was not viable for me for becoming... I'd be so frustrated right now if I had to go back to work. An eight-month-old, I know you have a four-month-old. Wait till eight months old. They're so fun to hang out with.

Lenny (00:29:12):
I can't wait. You talked about this lower spend, lower expense life. What other tips and tricks do you have for people to create this space where they can continue living and paying the rent, while exploring, and wandering, and exploring these things? Is it cut down on expenses? Is there anything else that one can do? 

Paul Millerd (00:29:33):
I've talked to so many people at this point. I've seen all sorts of things. I've seen people move abroad. I've seen families with kids and a mortgage sell their house and decide to live in an RV. I've seen people dip into their retirement. I've seen people apply for grants and get those. I've seen people apply for loans.

(00:29:55):
A big move that a lot of people do is turn their current job into a contract job, which a lot of employers are a lot more open than people would think. Because a contractor's very easy to fire. You can fire a contractor in a day. So if the company's struggling, boom, you're gone, right? 

(00:30:14):
And so there is more risk, but if you're known in the company, it can actually be a somewhat stable path to create more space in your life. You say, "Hey, I want to work three days a week. I want to be a contractor. Here's exactly what I want to do. Are you open to this?"

(00:30:30):
And as soon as you're a contractor, they can't tell you where to work. You can develop a relationship and they can ask you to work in a certain place, but they don't have control over where you work. 

Lenny (00:30:42):
A trick that I found really useful actually for helping me feel comfortable about taking time off, I ended up taking six months off, and then it ended up being a year off because I kept trying to figure out what is the thing I wanted to do. The way that I felt good about that is I set a budget of, "Here's the runway that I'm going to give myself. Here's how much it's going to cost to do this for six months. Here's the runway I'm going to give myself. I'm just going to burn through this money, just with the bet that it'll lead to something interesting." And that made me and my wife also just feel like, okay, we were going to lose all that money probably, but the bet is it's going to lead to something really great.

Paul Millerd (00:31:15):
Yeah, I love this. I think this is something I've been thinking about a lot lately, and I've actually been trying to write something around this, which is that naming what you're spending money on or coming up with agreements like that, you're sort of saying, "This is money I'm investing in my life MBA." Because if somebody says, "I'm going to Stanford Business School," generally you'll receive positive praise. "Oh, that's awesome." But what they're really doing is not working for two years and spending 150 to $200,000, and not earning a salary.

(00:31:55):
And then to me, it was really interesting to look back at my path. Now, the first three years of my path, I broke even. But compared to being in business school, people thought business school was way better of a path for me. People were judgmental in my path, critical of my path, insulted me, projected their insecurities on me. "How could you do this? This is so crazy. What's your plan?" So coming up with these reframes is super powerful. 

(00:32:26):
One powerful one that worked for me was consider it a gift from your former self. So on the consulting path, I did like it for a while, but at the end I didn't like it. I was sort of just grinding through, going through the motions. I was good at it, but I really didn't want to be doing it if I had choice. And so I earned a decent income doing it. So would I gift that to my future self to be happier? Yeah. So now that I'm in the present, receive that gift and be like, "Thank you former self for working that job."

Lenny (00:33:08):
It's interesting. I could also flip it from the other way of your future self is returning to, "Hey, here's some money to spend to help become who I've become."

Paul Millerd (00:33:17):
Yeah, exactly. 

Lenny (00:33:19):
So I imagine not everyone ends up on a beautiful, amazing new life. They go down this route, they spend a bunch of money, and then they're like, "God damn, I don't have anything to show for it. I've spent all this cash." Imagine there are stories of that. Is there anything you could share around those stories and how to maybe either avoid them or be okay with them? 

Paul Millerd (00:33:38):
I think there are surprisingly few stories of that. I think that is people's fear of what might happen. What I've seen in reality, as soon as people are without an income or without a job, they spur into action. People, we're far more creative than we give ourselves credit for. Having a child, we have no idea what we're doing when they come out.

(00:34:03):
But it makes perfect sense that you're going to figure everything out, because you have to. You have no choice. And so the ingenuity and creativity of people as soon as they bet on themselves and go off into the wilderness, is far more than people expect. 

(00:34:24):
And it also has to do with regrets. People do not regret the things they do. They regret the things they didn't do. And the reason for this is if you've made a mistake, you can actually take action to correct it. But if you didn't do the thing that you're regretting, there's nothing you can do except do the thing. 

Lenny (00:34:46):
And it reminds me of a quote that you have in your book that I have here. The secret to doing good research, and I think it's related to this of finding a new path, a pathless path, is always to be a little underemployed. You waste years by not being able to waste hours.

Paul Millerd (00:35:00):
Yeah. And I wonder if you've found this too. Sometimes, the best way for me to write is to go for a walk, or to take a couple days off and just sort of reset. Creative work can't be forced a lot of time.

(00:35:20):
And increasingly, a lot of work is creative work. Your work at Airbnb was ultimately creative work. You're creating new products and offerings, in a whole new conception of an industry. You're making stuff up. A lot of times, I think people get fried in these companies because they're not actually given the schedules and the support systems around what actually enables creativity. 

Lenny (00:35:53):
Yeah, absolutely. Although I find with writing also, there's the benefit of the opposite of, "I'm just going to sit here and write, and I'm not going to give myself a chance to go walk around. I'm just going to keep writing, even if it's terrible, because it'll maybe lead to something."

Paul Millerd (00:36:07):
Yeah. And even that though, a lot of times, what ends up on the page surprises you. Right? So you do need a certain sense of openness to let that emerge.

Lenny (00:36:20):
So kind of along the same lines, another important concept that you talk about in your book for finding this pathless path is just this idea that it's not ever like this all or nothing. I'm just going to leap into this new thing. It's kind of this, the way you put it is people quit jobs after years of awakening and safely testing changes, kind of eliminating risks along the way. 

Paul Millerd (00:36:40):
So years before I left, and I'm curious if you had a similar experience, I was starting to read personal development books. I was reading Tim Ferriss. I was doing these small experiments like coaching on the side, helping people with their resumes, volunteering, helping people with careers. 

(00:37:00):
And so I was writing too. I was writing for fun on Quora with no goals. And all these things make perfect sense now. And even looking back further, I was always tinkering on the internet, and all these things fit my story perfectly now.

(00:37:16):
But I didn't know why I was doing them at the time. But each one gave me the confidence to be like, "Okay, I don't love my day job, but all these random things I'm doing on the side, like writing an article and posting it on Medium and LinkedIn, and the people I'm meeting, this is really interesting and energizing. I'm going to pay attention to that energy. Something is there."

(00:37:41):
And when I quit my job, I didn't really have a plan for how to deal with that, but I had experienced enough of this positive energy. I was like, "I want to chase that. I want to go after that."

Lenny (00:37:53):
That's exactly what I found. So I'll tell my story briefly on this. Some advice I got when I went on my sabbatical that ended up being incredibly powerful is essentially what you just said, which is when you're doing stuff during some period of time off, pay really close attention to what gives you energy after you do the thing. Say you have a call. Did that give you energy or did that sap you of energy? Do you feel more energized or you feel like, "I'm tired now"?

(00:38:19):
So it's like after calls you make, after things you do with friends, after some kind of hobby you're trying to do, after you write some stuff, just pay really close attention to what energizes you, what saps you energy. And then my whole strategy was just do more of the things that energize me and do less of the things that de-energize me. 

(00:38:37):
So in my case, I thought I'd want to do some advising or consulting. I found after every advising call, I was de-energized. I was just like, "No, I do not enjoy this as much as I thought." But after writing and putting a piece out, I was like, "Wow, this is really cool." Even though writing's very hard and there's a lot of de-energized moments, broadly it's like, "Wow, this is cool. People seem to really value this." So I started doing that more. I thought I wanted to start a company, but that kept sucking me of energy as I was working on ideas. So that alone was really, really powerful. And it sounds like really simple advice, but it's really [inaudible 00:39:10].

Paul Millerd (00:39:10):
It's hard too. I think the pull to create a company when you leave a big tech company is so powerful. And what you're saying is sort of crazy. You're saying, "I just feel good writing. I'm going to follow that." 

Lenny (00:39:29):
It's not a popular path amongst my friends and family. 

Paul Millerd (00:39:32):
And I think the root of that is you're triggering insecurities in them. You're doing something they weren't allowed to do at your age. 

Lenny (00:39:41):
The thing I found really helpful there, another friend gave me this advice, just tell people you're tinkering. When they ask you, "What are you working on?" "I'm just tinkering. I'm tinkering with some writing." Because something about that word makes it sound like, "Okay, cool, it's delightful and cool. Tinker wave." 

Paul Millerd (00:39:57):
I feel like that did not work with my parents. But yeah, trying different things. I always tell people you need a boomer compatible story for what you're up to, as just give them something. Just say, "I'm an entrepreneur," or, "I'm a business owner."

Lenny (00:40:18):
That totally resonates. I'd be excited about that if I was a boomer. In the book, you also talk about taming fears. So we talked about a few of these things, and just the power of taming some of these fears that you have. There's success, the fear of not being successful, of money, of belonging, of loneliness, and of health. Can you just talk about either all of those or any of those, just why it's important to tame those fears, and then how one goes about taming these fears?

Paul Millerd (00:40:45):
Yeah. So a big source of inspiration around this is Tim Ferriss' fear setting, and he basically forces you to write down what are your fears, how could you mitigate these. But more powerfully, the second part is... And you're framing them around action. And so he reframes, what is the cost of inaction? And that was really powerful for me, and it sort of exposed a lot of the costs in the current state of what I was doing. 

(00:41:16):
And so actually, I want to thank you. It's funny, you messaged me as I was listening to a podcast you were on. I think it was the one with David Perell. 

Lenny (00:41:26):
Yeah, I slid into your DMs.

Paul Millerd (00:41:31):
But I was listening to your podcast and you were talking about hiring a community manager. And this is actually something I've done in the past few weeks. And I think I was scared to commit to the community because I didn't want to create a job for myself.

(00:41:48):
And one thing I've realized is that I'm scared of creating a job for myself, but I sort of reframed the cost of inaction. What's the cost of inaction is if I don't actually hire someone, I'm going to drain all my creative energy, and that's an existential risk to this path. And so that's one example of I'm always thinking about these things, and that enabled me to take very quick action on that. 

(00:42:17):
But I think it was helpful to hear from you. You were like, "I'm not a community manager." And this is a big aha for me, because I launched my community at the beginning of this year. I suck at community management. I'm not good at it, but I found somebody that actually was good at it and I was like, "There are people that like this and are good at it." So that's one thing. I think more broadly though is some fears don't disappear. So that's a very specific project-based fear.

(00:42:47):
Existential fears around health, death, importance, money, they don't really go away. I think the great thing about this path for me is that you can't pretend like they don't exist. They sort of just punch you in the face. You'll wake up one day and you'll have an existential breakdown of, "What the heck am I doing? Is this sustainable? This is so silly. Am I going to run out of money? Next year, are my book sales going to tank?" And so the longer I've been on this path, those big worries turn into these small little daily things that pop up. And I'll sort of have a conversation with my fear and I'll say, "We're worrying about money today. Okay, I see you. Yeah, that's real. Yeah, I don't know if we can solve that, but yeah, six and a half years, let's keep going. Let's see if it works."

(00:43:48):
Yeah, that's the thing that makes me feel better every time something like that comes up is, it's worked this long. It's probably going to work for a lot longer. There's this concept of [inaudible 00:43:56], of the time something is going to last is usually as long as it's already lasted. And so that always makes me feel better. The main thing I think about, is am I going to run out of stuff with a newsletter to write about? And it's been four years now. I'm like, "Nah, it's probably going to keep going for at least four more years."

(00:44:12):
It's very important to dance with your fears and really get in with them. If I'm afraid of not making money, it's very reasonable that book sales will fall. And so I don't know if we can sustain our lifestyle on what I have set up two, three years down the road. But taking that fear and saying, "Okay, I'm going to solve that and make that fear go away by getting a job," is off the table. So I have no choice but to actually just be like, "Yeah, that fear's going to be here. It's going to be part of my life, and we're going to have to just deal with it."

Lenny (00:44:52):
Along those lines, is there a path you took that was a big failure or didn't work out, something that you thought was going to be a big opportunity and wasn't?

Paul Millerd (00:44:59):
The first 10 years of my career, I just kept jumping from job to job. I think I was looking for my current path in job shaped containers and I couldn't find it. And I was just so desperate to find a really good situation.

(00:45:15):
And there were all sorts of circumstances, like bosses who hired me, kept quitting immediately after I would join. Layoffs, all sorts of random things that happened that were very weird. And I just sort of kept searching. 

Lenny (00:45:33):
So I've been comfortable with trying things, and starting new things, and experimenting for a long time. And so one frame I have, I call it ship, quit, and learn, which is what is the quickest way I can ship something designed to quit, but as soon as I ship it, I learn about what to do next?

Paul Millerd (00:45:57):
And so this is how I started my podcast. I just said, "I'm going to do five episodes." I stole this from Tim Ferriss as well. I'm going to do five episodes. I'm going to see how it feels. And this is one of these things, super energizing. I love how I feel after podcast conversations. I'm going to keep doing it. I wasn't aiming at success, but it was like, "I know I can keep doing the podcast and my newsletter." I had that experience, that feeling from it, but there are things I've tried that I'm like, "Yeah, not again." A couple consulting and advisory type things early on in my path, it was like, "Whoa, I need to build in protectors such that I don't take a gig like this again."

Lenny (00:46:39):
I connect to something you said earlier, which I super resonate with, which is you want to avoid creating jobs for yourself that you don't enjoy with this path. There's so many things you could be doing and so many pulls that often, for me, it's like writing a book is always this thing that's out there. Actually, starting a podcast with one of these for a long time, "I don't want to start a podcast. Life is good. I got this awesome newsletter. Things are going great. Why would I want more work?"

(00:47:05):
Eventually I crumbled, and I did it, and here we are, and I'm happy I did. But there's all these other things that are always like, "I should do these things." But I think it's really important to pay attention to what do you not enjoy and don't do that. It's easy to create bad jobs for yourself.

(00:47:19):
A really clear example of that is finding a niche that you don't enjoy, spending time on in this life of writing about something you don't actually care about, or podcasting about something you don't care about. You just created a job for yourself you hate. Why would you do that? And so it comes back to paying attention to what gives you energy. 

Paul Millerd (00:47:37):
So I've created a lot of slack in my life. So I'd say 95% of my days, I cannot work. So I don't do meetings. I don't really have employees or anything like that. I have contractors, but I hire contractors for very specific roles. And I create systems such that we can do it asynchronously. And of course, I'll have conversations with them if they want to jump on a call. But I optimize for people that want asynchronous and work on those specific things. So I'm just very conscious of that.

(00:48:15):
I think one challenge I have now is I've created so many things that I'm doing a few things really well, and then sort of ignoring a lot of them. So I actually feel like I'm in this evolution right now of trying to figure out what comes next. 

(00:48:35):
So we haven't even talked about this, but I started this business strategy early on in my path because I wanted to productize my consulting. And one of the consulting projects I loved early on was training people on consulting skills. I did a training program for a consulting firm in Boston, and I was like, "Ooh, I could turn this into an online course." And that has slowly built and evolved, and I do workshops now with companies. And that made most of my money from years two to five when I started moving away from project-based consulting.

(00:49:13):
And so the game I was playing was make money from that, don't focus on it too much, spend minimal time, don't try to maximize for success. Create a self-paced course, because I am not interested in making more money in a cohort-based course, because I just don't want to spend the time. And then use all the abundant time to write and explore, create podcasts, spend time with my wife, and do all the non-work experiments, see how I feel and write about it.

(00:49:44):
Now I'm making money from the work I love, which is very weird. I'm going to make, I'll hit soon about $200,000 made for my book, which is mind-blowing. I published a book completely on my terms about what I love and loved the process of it. It's so crazy. 

Lenny (00:50:05):
That's amazing.

Paul Millerd (00:50:06):
And so now I'm building a community around that. That's really fun. I'm doing the podcast. I have some sponsors around that. And so that's sort of taking over. I still have this StrategyU though. 

(00:50:19):
So now I'm trying to figure out how to unwind some of these things. I'm actually exploring trying to find somebody that might want to start their own pathless path, like a strategy consultant that wants to leave that world, that wants to be an operator on this business. So if you're listening, I've recently come to terms with this might be the path forward. 

(00:50:38):
But yeah, it's a constant journey of protecting your time, creating that space, going down projects you want to execute, but then stepping back and like, "Okay, I have all this maintenance I'm doing. How do I outsource this, eliminate it, restart, recreate?" And I think this path is really just a commitment to constant reinvention, which is really, really hard. And you shouldn't do it unless you get some satisfaction out of personal reflection and that journey.

Lenny (00:51:09):
For someone that may want to help you with that program, what's the best way to reach out to you if they're just like, "Oh shit, this is a cool opportunity"?

Paul Millerd (00:51:14):
Yeah, Twitter, paul@strategyu.co, or I'm very easy to find. My email is all over the place. But yeah.

Lenny (00:51:22):
We'll link to it in the show notes too. Just a couple more questions. I feel like one criticism of this path is, is there anyone left to actually do work at companies and build things and scale if everyone ends up being on this pathless path, creating content, starting their own companies? Do you have any thoughts on that side of things? 

Paul Millerd (00:51:42):
I don't buy that, because I've met most people and most people are like, "Hell no," when they hear about my life.

(00:51:51):
I think it's an interesting critique. I also think there's a more secular trend of gigification of work. All the growth in the economy from 2005 to 2015 in the labor market came from alternative work arrangements. So if you search David Deming's work on this, it's pretty compelling. Right now, we don't really count non-traditional work that well, so it's really hard to get good data on this. But even the way companies are treating their internal talent, it's much more project-based. People are shifting around, moving to different roles a lot quicker. And I think that's going to continue. 

(00:52:29):
So you could make an argument that people will actually be able to slot into companies more easily in the future. Right now, companies under exploit the creator economy and the freelance economy, because they're so tied to you have to hire somebody through a full-time job. 

(00:52:47):
So I think there's two sides to that, is one, most people would hate my life. And two, the world is becoming more giggified. So it could go back the other way actually. 

Lenny (00:53:02):
I really like that advice. Paul, is there anything else you want to leave listeners with to maybe start down this pathless path or any other piece of advice before we get to very exciting lightning round?

Paul Millerd (00:53:14):
I think the key thing that doesn't get talked about enough is it might be hard and it might suck, but it might be worth it. And I think that's a hard reframe for people, because people will say, "Well, I'm worried about not knowing what I'll do or not making money and all these things." And it's like, yeah, I felt like after quitting my job. 

(00:53:44):
But man, I'm so glad I did it, because it enabled me to now know that I don't have regrets about trying this and figuring it out. And a lot of people that do go back to their jobs are so much happier, because they know I tested that, I found my boundaries, I need more stability. It's not this quit your job and get rich pitch. It's very much like if you're somebody that has a sense that there's something more, there probably is, and it might be worth exploring. 

Lenny (00:54:17):
What's the next step you recommend someone take to start exploring this pathless path? What's something they could do today or tomorrow or in the next-

Paul Millerd (00:54:24):
Read my book.

Lenny (00:54:26):
Perfect. 

Paul Millerd (00:54:28):
So I'm very committed to creating resources for people around this. My podcast is all conversations of people on an unconventional path, and sort of the inner game of work. And I don't talk about tactics and outcomes as much as really just, how does it feel? How'd you deal with that? Things like that. And so I do that in my newsletter, my podcast, etc. But just find people that are on interesting pasts and ask them about their lives. 

(00:54:59):
One interesting thing I've had happen to me over the past few years is I've just met a much more wider diversity of people. I'm friends with people that work at restaurants, and work part time, and work weird schedules, and work nine months of the year and take three months off. And now it just feels so much more normal what I'm doing, because before all I knew was full-time workers. I was working all the time, and that's all you're surrounded by. So yeah, try to find the weirdos. 

Lenny (00:55:30):
Awesome. And for folks that want to check out your book, should I just Google The Pathless Path? 

Paul Millerd (00:55:34):
Pathlesspath.com. I just moved over everything last month. 

Lenny (00:55:39):
Okay, great. And then we'll link to all of these things in the show notes. With that Paul, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready? 

Paul Millerd (00:55:46):
I am ready. 

Lenny (00:55:48):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Paul Millerd (00:55:52):
Yeah, one is called The Great Work of Your Life. Sounds like a cheesy title, but that's actually a good resource for people that want to hear about people from history. Over the past several hundred years, different eras of people that really did design their life around work. It was really interesting, and that was a great book.

(00:56:16):
A second book I'd recommend, I actually really like Luke Burgis' book Wanting. That was another great personal story/deep dive into a nerdy topic. That's my favorite kind of book. That's the kind of book I wrote, which was personal memoir plus nerdy deep dive. And Luke Burgis' is really good too, more from a tech perspective, because he went down the startup path as well. Tut that's a great book. That was my favorite read of the year. 

Lenny (00:56:44):
What is a favorite recent movie or TV show? 

Paul Millerd (00:56:47):
I struggle to answer this, because I'm not watching much TV. I did watch the Anthony Bourdain documentary. That was excellent. Talk about a pathless path, and the ups and downs, and the struggles, and the dark side of it. Man, that person was bringing forth what is inside of him and grappling with his demons at the same time. That was a powerful story worth watching.

Lenny (00:57:18):
Do you have a favorite interview question that you like to ask when you interview, say, contractors or anyone else you work with or hire? 

Paul Millerd (00:57:25):
I'm always curious about, what makes you come alive? I want to work with people that are alive, and connected, and inspired. So the two people I'm working with right now, one's a podcast producer in Poland, but he's doing a bunch of other stuff around video. And he's super energized, used to be a lawyer, reinventing himself. The other person is also a former finance person in India, and she's two years into this self-employment journey. She's writing and exploring all these ideas. So yeah, I'm always looking for that energy first and skills second.

Lenny (00:58:03):
Is there a favorite product you've recently discovered that you love?

Paul Millerd (00:58:07):
I really love the Nuna travel stroller. Super convenient for traveling.

Lenny (00:58:15):
We don't have the travel stroller, but we have the Nuna car seat.

Paul Millerd (00:58:17):
Yeah, yeah, we have that one too. It fits. So we've brought that around the world. That's been super convenient. And then more on the tech side, I just got into the esim game. That was amazing. And then ChatGPT, I just created my own GPT to do podcast show notes automatically for me today. Took me an hour to train it, and it is incredible, so that's amazing. 

Lenny (00:58:44):
That's awesome. I don't know if folks know, but there's a lennybot.com site that uses all of my podcast transcripts and newsletter to have a little bot that you could ask questions to. That's working actually, shockingly well. We're going to try using the new GPT thing that they just launched, where you can kind of train your own GPT and that'll be fun. And actually, a podcast listener reached out to me and offered to help build this thing, so that's a huge success story from this podcast. 

(00:59:12):
Next question, two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you find yourself coming back to, sharing with friends, finding really useful in work or in life?

Paul Millerd (00:59:22):
One, coming alive over getting ahead. That's something I keep coming back to. I'm default skeptical of chasing achievement, and I use this to remind myself that it is about that personal energy versus extrinsic outcomes. 

(00:59:43):
I'm very convinced from my own life experience that the extrinsic outcomes aren't going to do a ton for me. Sure, I need to make enough money. But when I'm in extended states of feeling alive and connected to everything I'm doing in my life, that's it. And I basically repeated this mantra to myself right before rejecting the book deal. It was like I did not feel good in the conversation with the people. They talked down to me, they told me that I probably wouldn't succeed, and it was like coming alive over getting ahead. Don't need their prestige. 

Lenny (01:00:21):
Final question. You've been podcasting, I think, for six years. What's your best piece of advice for someone that wants to start podcasting, has maybe already been doing podcasting like myself, or being successful or anything along those lines?

Paul Millerd (01:00:36):
Yeah. I think if you want to podcast to make money, it's probably not something you should get into. Even if you have an audience, it's probably not the best way. I think if you have a massive audience, it can work, but it takes a really long time. Podcast is the ultimate long game, so you need to find some intrinsic connection to what you're actually doing. If you don't love the conversations or the format you're doing, don't do it. 

(01:01:05):
But yeah, I would recommend more people start podcasts. I'm against... The New York Times says there's too many podcasts, but I take the opposing view. I don't think there's that many podcasts. If you ask people in their personal life out of tech bubbles, "How many people in your life have a podcast?" Now in Austin, a lot of people have podcasts, but yeah, most people don't have a podcast. Even if you do something like interview your parents or anything, it's such a cool, creative thing. It's free. It's free, and you can send it to everyone in the world. Podcasts and newsletters are incredible innovations. Let it rip. You had to get permission to do these things 10, 15 years ago. It's so great to be alive in today's world. 

Lenny (01:01:52):
I feel like when people say there's too much of say newsletters, too many podcasts, my answer is always there's always room for better newsletters and better podcasts. If you can deliver more useful, valuable, interesting stuff, people are going to pay attention. The bar just keeps rising is the challenge.

Paul Millerd (01:02:08):
Yeah. It's also like do it for the sake of itself. Do it for the creative act. The creative act can be super meaningful in and of itself. I've lost money in my podcast over the lifetime of it. Love it. I don't care. I'm going to keep doing it. 

Lenny (01:02:27):
And also, the best stuff often comes from just doing it for yourself and then realizing, "Wow, other people might find this interesting."

Paul Millerd (01:02:33):
Yeah. I didn't start getting podcast feedback until the last two years when it started growing a lot more. I was sort of just doing it into the void. 

Lenny (01:02:43):
Speaking of that, Paul, we've been on our own pathless path. I feel like we're going to send a number of folks on their pathless path. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and learn more about what you're sharing in your journey, and how can listeners be useful to you? 

Paul Millerd (01:03:01):
Yeah, so I've been compiling a lot of my more recent stuff under pathlesspath.com, that will link you to my podcast, newsletter, community, and book. And I'm always willing to gift my book to anyone in the world who wants it. Just email me. I'll even send you a printed copy, if you don't have the money to do it. And I'm always happy to send bulk orders to people that want to gift it and do book clubs or things like that. And happy to send it at the author rate, which is about $4 per book.

(01:03:34):
And yeah, I am starting to explore the potential of selling my StrategyU business or finding an owner operator who might want to get some sort of profit sharing or something like that. It'd be interesting if there are former consultants that might be interested in something like that. 

(01:03:54):
I don't know. I'm so bad at asking for help. I think if you want to share my book, that would be cool, because it is pretty neat to make money doing something from something I'm really proud of. 

Lenny (01:04:08):
Go buy The Pathless Path, available all online bookstores, I imagine. Paul, thank you so much for being here. 

Paul Millerd (01:04:15):
Amazing. Keep going on your path too. I'm really inspired by how you're approaching your path and sharing your reflections too. 

Lenny (01:04:23):
I appreciate that. Bye everyone.

Paul Millerd (01:04:25):
Adios.

Lenny (01:04:28):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Phyl Terry (00:00:00):
When you're looking for a job, you need a spear and not a net. What happens when we're building a product? Same thing, right? We want this product to be for everyone, but we've learned with product market fit that doesn't work. We need a narrow, clear focus.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:12):
How did you realize this is a really powerful method versus the way people normally look for jobs?

Phyl Terry (00:00:16):
While it's hard to figure out your candidate market fit, it's also a relief to know it's not about you. So what I ask people to do is I ask them to think about what they want and what they don't want. Now, you might not think that that's a radical step, Lenny, but most people don't do that. When they get laid off, they spray and pray.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:31):
This is very much like a product person thinks about new product.

Phyl Terry (00:00:34):
There's no I in team. Well, there is an I in village, and the I in village is that when you start to interview and negotiate, you've got to be in charge. I want you to play to win, not not to lose.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:45):
Is there anything else that you think might be helpful to people looking for jobs?

Phyl Terry (00:00:49):
If someone did this, it would blow my mind. I would hire them on the spot.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:57):
Today my guest is Phyl Terry. Phyl is the author of Never Search Alone, which I've seen so many people reference as the most impactful thing they read for helping them find a job. Once you listen to this episode, you'll see why.

(00:01:09):
Prior to this book, Phyl was on the founding team of the first company that Amazon acquired back in the '90s, and then was CEO of the pioneering product and customer experience consulting firm Creative Good for over 15 years, where Phyl and the team had companies like Apple, Facebook, Microsoft, and hundreds of other companies as customers. Phyl also co-authored Customers Included, has written articles for the Harvard Business Review, and has delivered more than 500 keynotes to companies like Apple and Microsoft. This episode is for anyone struggling to find a job or unhappy in the job that they're in. I promise you, the time you put into listening to this episode will help you find a job that you love.

(00:01:47):
If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing feature episodes and helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Phyl Terry. Phyl, thank you so much for being here, and welcome to the podcast.

Phyl Terry (00:02:05):
Oh, what a pleasure. I'm such a fan of yours, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:08):
I'm thrilled to be here.

Phyl Terry (00:02:09):
Thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:10):
I'm a huge fan of yours, and I think by the end of this I'll be an even bigger fan of yours. What I'm hoping that we can do in our chat today is to help people who are struggling to find a job and especially struggling to find a job they love, actually find that job with actual tips that they can use today in this week. How does that feel to you?

Phyl Terry (00:02:29):
That's great. We have some practical time-tested stuff that I've developed over the last 25 years with leaders in Silicon Valley, especially in the product community. We've really brought a product lens to reinventing the job search, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:41):
This is a perfect Venn diagram of topics then.

Phyl Terry (00:02:43):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:45):
There's a lot of ways I can approach this. I want to start with a question about something that you run, something that you created, something that has had a lot of impact on a lot of people: Job Search Councils. What is a Job Search Council?

Phyl Terry (00:02:56):
It's a support group of six to eight job seekers, so product people, but it is not just for product people, but the product community really owns this, it comes out of the product community. And what they do is they commit to being with each other, to supporting each other, go through the process of looking for a job and I lay out a methodology, how to figure out your candidate market fit, one of the big concepts in the book. As well as how to play to win, not not to lose. You know what I mean? People are scared in the job search. Here's the thing, Lenny, that people really have a hard time believing, everyone, I mean everyone, and I work with some of the most senior people in Silicon Valley, I'm talking about CEOs of public companies, I'm talking about chief product officers, VPs of product at great brands, everyone, no matter who they are, Lenny, feels insecure and anxious in the job search. And if you do it alone, it magnifies that.

(00:03:57):
So with Job Search Councils, there's this great hack, I didn't invent this, it's baked into human psychology, if you put anxious people together and ask them to be open and vulnerable and to ask for help, and we'll come back to asking for help, it actually flips the anxiety and the fear into hope, into motivation, into accountability and confidence. It's like, "What [inaudible 00:04:20]?" It's fantastic. My mother taught me this, we can talk about her at some point, but it's really powerful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:28):
That's amazing. Your whole book is called Never Search Alone, so the whole premise of how you recommend people look for jobs is to look for jobs with other people. You mentioned maybe it's your mom, maybe it's something else, how did you realize this is a really powerful method versus the way people normally look for jobs?

Phyl Terry (00:04:44):
Yeah. I set up my first council more than four years ago. I set up the first CEO council for internet CEOs in the mid '90s, and then I've run product and CEO council since. But it goes all the way back to my mom. 1960, Lenny, 1960, what is that? 64 years ago? In the San Fernando Valley, my mom was a newly-minted elementary school teacher, and she put together a council of teachers. That group met for 50 years, 5-0, until the year she died. They worked together to ask for help and support each other in their careers. And Lenny, people say to me, "Does this Never Search Alone method work in a tough job market?" And I'll tell you, it comes out of tough job markets. Absolutely, yes. Starting with my mom.

(00:05:39):
So in 1974, my dad... in 1976 he left and it was just me and my mom and my sister. He had insisted that she stop teaching, so she lost her tenure and everything. Her candidate market fit was terrible, but she had her council. It was the mid '70s, and Lenny, you probably can't imagine how hard it was for a single middle-aged woman with kids looking for a job in Los Angeles in the mid '70s. It was terrible. But she had her support group and they held her hand. The job she could get, guess what? She had to be an entry level teacher again after having been a senior teacher coaching and advising. It was really tough. So that had a big impact on me.

(00:06:22):
And then when the dotcom bubble burst, I was running Creative Good, and suddenly there was a depression. And suddenly I'm helping hundreds of people try to figure out their job search. So it's been going for a number of years, but it goes back to my mom. I dedicate the book to her and the community we've built.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:40):
That's beautiful.

(00:06:42):
Let me tell you about a product called Sidebar. The most successful people that I know surround themselves with incredible peers. When you have a trusted group of peers, you can discuss challenges you're having, get career advice, and just gut-check how you're thinking about your work, your career, and your life. This gives you more than a leg up, it gives you a leap forward. Having a group of trusted and amazing peers was key to my career growth, and this is the Sidebar ethos.

(00:07:08):
But it's hard to build this trusted group of peers on your own. Sidebar is a platform for senior tech professionals, director to C-level, to advance in their career. Members are matched into peer groups to lean on for unbiased opinions, diverse perspectives, and raw feedback. Guided by world-class programming and facilitation all running on Sidebar's technology, Sidebar enables you to get focused, tactical feedback at every step of your career journey. If you're listening to this podcast, you're already committed to growth. Sidebar is the missing piece to catalyze your career. 93% of members say Sidebar helped them achieve a significant positive change in their career. Check them out at sidebar.com/lenny.

(00:07:52):
This episode is brought to you by Sprig. What if product teams knew exactly what to build to reach their goals? From increasing conversion to boosting engagement, these challenges require a deep understanding of your users, something that you can't get from product analytics alone. Meet Sprig, a product experience platform that generates AI-powered opportunities to continuously improve your product at scale. First, Sprig captures your product experience in real time through heat maps, replays, surveys, and feedback studies. Then Sprig's industry-leading AI instantly analyzes all of your product experience data to generate real- time insights. Sprig AI goes even further with actionable product recommendations to drive revenue, retention, and user satisfaction. Join product teams at Figma and at Notion by uncovering AI-powered product opportunities at scale. Visit sprig.com/lenny to book a demo and get a $75 gift card. That's S-P-R-I-G.com/lenny.

(00:08:55):
There's a lot of elements that you mentioned that we're going to dig into, so job candidate fit, playing to win. You touched a little bit this idea of settling, figuring out what to settle for. Your mom took a job that's below what she was doing before, so I want to chat about all these things. A little bit more on these councils. What's the scale of these? So I think it's going to blow people's mind just how many of these are happening and [inaudible 00:09:16]-

Phyl Terry (00:09:15):
We have launched more than 2,000 of these Lenny, 2,000, and they're completely free, completely 100% free. It's volunteer-driven. We have hundreds of pages of tools. We've done a Slack community. We have a free matching program. You can sign up and we'll match you and put you in a council. Then we'll give you training, live training. There's so many volunteers. We have 20,000 hours of volunteer work that's already been put into this, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:42):
You said that it's free. I know these things aren't free to run.

Phyl Terry (00:09:46):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:47):
I saw somewhere that you mentioned that basically all your book sales and also just your own money you spend on running these councils. Talk about that for a little bit.

Phyl Terry (00:09:55):
Yeah, actually two times the book sales are going into running this. So we have 20,000 hours of volunteer time, but you also have to pay for technology and you have to pay for certain kinds of support. Later we will talk about this, and we're always looking for more volunteers. I have a process for people to apply if they're interested in being a part of the team. But yeah, I have dedicated this to my mom, and I'm giving everything to it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:25):
What's the general structure? If someone's trying to think about how these things work, if they want to join these as we go through it, how do they work?

Phyl Terry (00:10:31):
Okay, so you apply at phyl.org, P-H-Y-L, Phyl with a Y. Again, it's free. We match you behind the scenes. Now, when you apply, we ask, "First of all, are you in a job and looking or are you out of work?" Because we separate those two because they have different cadences. If you're in a job and looking, we call you a slow seeker because you have a full-time job and you can't work as quickly. If you're out of work and looking, we call you a fast seeker and we put you in different groups. Fast seeker or slow seeker. We also ask though, are you willing to be a moderator? Every council needs a moderator, and every moderator is a job seeker who volunteers to do that. If you volunteer to moderate, first of all, you get matched faster, and secondly, you get more training and support.

(00:11:18):
It's a little bit more work for a lot more benefit. We've gotten 2,000 moderators, Lenny, it's amazing. And we feel like we're just beginning. So you apply, you get matched, and then you go through an orientation program that we run live where we tell you how this works and what to expect in your first meeting. And then there's a whole set of agendas and materials and everything in the book as well as everyone gets a free workbook, a 100-page workbook after they join the community with all of the templates and guides and questions. And then the moderator pulls you together, you work on Zoom or whatever technology, it's remote typically. And you do a first meeting, we call it meeting zero, where you're open and vulnerable. People share stories about their lives and who they are, builds trust and get a sense of who people are. And then you move into the process. You meet twice a week typically if you're in a fast seeker council and every two weeks if you're in a slow seeker. So that's the start of the answer. Does that help you think?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:22):
Yeah, really helpful. And then you basically are on this council until you find a job, I imagine.

Phyl Terry (00:12:26):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:27):
Awesome.

Phyl Terry (00:12:28):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:28):
Is there anything you can share around the impact you've seen? The reason I reached out to you to come on this podcast is I just started seeing people mentioning that they found a job and maybe the thing that helped them most was your book and being on one of these councils. I imagine there's a lot of stories you hear and a lot of numbers you could see of just people succeeding going through, so what can you share about just the impact you've seen?

Phyl Terry (00:12:51):
Well, I posted on LinkedIn today that I was going to be on your podcast and I asked people if they wanted to share stories with me, and over email and LinkedIn, I've been flooded with stories from people who are in the process or people who did it. If you like, I can pull up and share a few of those if that would be helpful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:09):
Yeah, if there's a few you have there, that'd be really sweet.

Phyl Terry (00:13:12):
Okay, so Justin Meats is a chief product officer who's gone through the process and he posted on LinkedIn today. He said, "As a product leader, I love how it has you apply the product process to your career." This comes out of the product world, it's a product lens on the job search, and it's for everyone, but it really makes sense for product people. And he says, "Not only does your JSC help bounce ideas and help your job search, they also help you keep going and accountable when you're low on emotional energy."

(00:13:46):
I talk about this in the book, Lenny, I say, "Look, most people think, 'What's the most important thing to manage during your job search?'" They think, well, maybe it's their resume or LinkedIn profile or their ability to network or candidate market fit, a concept I introduced I think is really important. All those things are really important, but the most important thing to manage is your emotional balance. I talk about your emotional balance sheet. And for many job seekers, they have more liabilities than assets on their old balance sheets. They have more fear and anxiety, they feel demoralized, they have a hard time going. That's why these things are so important.

(00:14:24):
He also says, "Hey, it's a journey, and the more you embrace it, the more you learn about yourself." And he says... and this is important Lenny. I don't have a magic wand that especially in a down market today that magically gets a job. It's hard. The job search, it can be hard and humiliating at times. I know. This is why I want to create this community, why we're doing this. We want to give you a place where you can really get the support when it's hard and humiliating. But the process will ultimately set you up for success if you follow it.

(00:14:58):
This one woman who just started, she's a senior product leader in a major financial institution, and she said she couldn't believe the level of support and openness and vulnerability. We really emphasize people being open and vulnerable, and I've learned a lot about how to create that environment. It ties back to asking for help, which I know we'll talk about more at some point. But when you create that, it's amazing what people can do together, Lenny. Amazing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:31):
Just to reinforce this point, people listening may be like, "I'm just going to keep looking for a job. I'll use all this advice. I don't need a group." What's your best pitch, again, to help people see the value of doing this in a group and joining a council or starting a council?

Phyl Terry (00:15:45):
I acknowledge that that's a reaction that some people have. That's totally valid. This is unusual, what we're doing here. This is not how people look for a job. We're trying to disrupt the job search process. Lenny, this is my quick story. We had a great interview with a couple. Two of them were product leaders. They had met at Amazon and then had gone to have great careers. They both got laid off. The woman joined a Job Search Council right away. She loved it, she raved about it. Her husband, who was also an engineer, was a little more introverted. He's like, "Ah, this isn't for me." She said, "No, listen, you won't... " And finally he read the book. Because the book, it works for the product mind and for the engineering mind, it makes sense. He said, "I'll join a council, but I'm not going to be field connected to people. But I'll do this because you asked me to."

(00:16:43):
He sat in the interview, we have it up on the side, he was like, "Oh my God, I couldn't believe it. The level of trust we created right off the bat I've never experienced in my life. It's really truly accountability, the motivation, the ability to hang in there." And so I say to people, " Look, try it." We have all these videos on our website with all these people talking. Go look at it. If you want to read the book first and see if you think this makes sense. But try it. You will be shocked in a positive way. You'll discover how delightful it is.

(00:17:25):
We live in a world where there's increasing loneliness, Lenny. There's so much research about this, the Surgeon General's book, everybody talking about... And it's more detrimental to our health than smoking cigarettes. Bowling Alone famously came out 25 years ago. We live in a world where people have not experienced community in a powerful way. I don't mean message boards, I mean real community. And I think you have a sense of this because you do real community. And that's what we're talking about here. It's real community but with some practical tools and techniques, which we'll talk about. What do you think? Is that a good response to the-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:08):
I'm sold. I don't need a job, but I want to join one. You also just had a really beautiful way of describing these programs as a safety net for people.

Phyl Terry (00:18:16):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:16):
Does that ring a bell?

Phyl Terry (00:18:18):
If we go up to the 30,000-foot level, what are we doing here? What's our mission? We're building a private safety net for all those who've been laid off or let go. Look, we're not going to do what the government does with unemployment insurance, we're never going to be able to do something like that. But the government's never going to be able to innovate around how to actually look for a job. That's where we come in. We are trying to build this. We talked about this earlier, Lenny, creative destruction is this economic concept that sits at the heart of capitalism. Creative destruction basically says, "Under capitalism, it's dynamic. New products and services displace or disrupt old products and services, companies and methods." It's why our economy has grown sixfold over the last a hundred years. It's remarkable. It's why we have this amazing multi-trillion dollar economy. But it comes with some negative unintended consequences, which is that people both in jobs and out of jobs, they're anxious and fearful. There's no program that addresses that.

(00:19:20):
That's what we're going after here. We're trying to be the solve for the unintended consequences of the thing that is so positive in many ways and that we as product people love because we get to build new products and displace old products. I'll just say one more thing. The reason you know this creative destruction works so well is if you compare our economy to the late Soviet Union's economy. They were a planned economy with no creative destruction. So there was no innovation, and eventually it just failed. It just collapsed. It's remarkable, this is a huge country with a massive military and nuclear weapons, but they couldn't make their economy work. Why? Because they didn't have this element. So it's something to celebrate, but as we celebrate it, we need to have something that addresses the negative unintended consequences. All of us who benefited from this, I think it's our duty to do something about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:16):
That is beautiful. You're very good at this. Let's shift to talking about tactics. Let's talk about some of the things that you've shared. So you've mentioned things like candidate market fit, playing to win. Go wherever you want to go. Let's pick a few and then dive in.

Phyl Terry (00:20:29):
Candidate market fit is probably the most important job search tactic in the book, aside from the Job Search Council, and it may be the thing I'm known for. When I die, they coin candidate market fit. So here's the thing, and this is why this is so important in a down market, when you're looking for a job, you're in a marketplace with supply and demand characteristics. So if there's a lot of supply, which there is right now in the tech world because there's been a lot of layoffs, the overall economy, there's been net job additions, Lenny, but those have been primarily in healthcare and government. There've been net job losses in tech. We could talk about why that is, but that's the world that we're in.

(00:21:17):
So let's say you're a director of product. Two years ago when the economy was great in tech and the job market was great in tech, you could probably get a VP of product role. What about today? Well, today your candidate market fit's been pushed down because there's a bunch of VPs of products who are going to take a director role. Guess what? That means you might not be able to get the director role you might need to get a senior manager role or whatever. Now, the important thing about this is it's not a personal segment about you. It's the marketplace. And that's what so many people today in their notes to me said, that it was such a relief for them. While it's hard to figure out your candidate market fit, it's also a relief to know it's not about you.

(00:21:59):
So what I ask people to do is the first radical step I ask them to take is to think about what they want and what they don't want. Now, you might not think that that's a radical step, Lenny, but most people don't do that. When they get laid off, they spray and pray. That's the typical, "Let me just... " Wait a minute, just take a moment. They're like, "Oh, don't slow me down." I'm like, "I'm going to slow you down to go fast." In fact, what our data shows is that the average job search in the Job Search Council from beginning to end is three months. If you look at the national data for job search, it's three to six months. So we are at the very low end of the national average. So this is not a slow down, take two years, whatever. No, no. Most people need to put food on the plate, so it's a slow down at first. And we as product people should understand this. You want to think about your strategy. You want to understand the marketplace, your customer, the product market fit. You're not going to just go...

(00:22:59):
You're going to iterate. First step, what do you want and what don't you want? That's the Mnookin two-pager named after Allison Mnookin, who was a member of one of our product councils. So we run product councils and general management CEO councils for people in jobs. That's a paid program that companies pay for. It's out of that program helping those people that I developed this methodology that we're now as a community giving to the world. So Allison, she was the GM at Intuit, and then she spun out a division and ran it as CEO, and she's now a professor at the Harvard Business School. And about 15 years ago, she was in transition and we talked and she created and we created this thing we called now the Mnookin two-pager. I told her, "Allison, I'm going to make your name famous." That's my job. I love her.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:46):
Great name.

Phyl Terry (00:23:46):
She's wonderful. And it's just a simple thing, what do you, what don't you like and you create it and then you share it in your council. And here's something cool, Lenny. Let's say you and I are in a Job Search Council. You share yours, I share your mine. Now you see a few things about what you don't like. I'm like, "Hot damn, I also don't like those. I forgot, I got to add that." Or you say a thing about what you like, you're like, "Oh, wow, no, that's really important to me, and I left that out." So that's part of the shared learning environment. I'm asking you to do these, but with others who you're walking it through.

(00:24:16):
Now, once you have done that Mnookin two-pager, and it's a draft, you don't have to get it fine, and not everyone knows exactly what they want, by the way, this is important, especially younger people. But sometimes mid-career people too, they're like, "Oh, I'm not... " So I'm not asking you to make a final decision, no, no. We're going to iterate. Okay, we're product people, we're going to iterate.

(00:24:38):
So we're going to take this Mnookin two-pager, this draft that shared with our council, and we're going to go out and do a listening tour. Because guess what? In the job search, we're the product. We're our skills and experience. That's the product that we're bringing to market. So we have to go see what the market wants. Now we have a sense of what we want, but what does the market want and what does some of our trusted friends, what do they think about what I want and what I'm a fit for? And what do they think I'm a fit for now given the market conditions that we have?

(00:25:09):
I will tell you, people are terrified to do the listening tour. They're like, "I don't know, what am I going to hear from people?" Because I asked them to ask a golden question, if you were in my shoes, how would you approach this? I call that the golden question. It's such a creative question. It really opens the conversation. But they think, "Oh no, people are going to tell me all this stuff." No, mostly people tell you this. Once in a while you get a helpful piece of critique, "Oh, you make everything a priority, in which case nothing is, and you could work on that." Super helpful to know. We all have stuff to work on.

(00:25:43):
But I will tell you, once people do the listening tour, they're blown away. I mean, the people who are in jobs, they love, they love helping others if it's done well. Because guess what? They're also anxious themselves, and they want to give back. They want to feel like they're supporting people. You actually end up, and we're going to talk about this, but when you ask someone for help while you've done your homework, you're thoughtful, they want to help you even more. They become invested in you. So the secret about the listening tour is that not only are you getting market research customer feedback on your fit, you're also creating a whole group of listening posts, people who are invested in your success.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:33):
Just to clarify on that specific point of this listening tour, you write this Mnookin two pager, which basically describes what you want, what you don't want, goals you have, what you hate. And the listening tour is find colleagues, friends, people that are other, say, product managers and get their feedback on what you want, what you don't want, what you hate, what your goals are.

Phyl Terry (00:26:54):
And what they're seeing in the market, what they think you're a fit for.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:56):
I see. Got it. So it's like, "Oh, this is unrealistic. You're not going to get this."

Phyl Terry (00:27:00):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:00):
Looking for that [inaudible 00:27:02]-

Phyl Terry (00:27:01):
And we see both things, Lenny. So some people underestimate their fit, others overestimate it or don't recognize that changed market condition. The other thing I'll say is that in the book I have three different kinds of structured listening tour conversations. One I call reverse exit interviews. This is people you used to work with before, go ask them, "Hey, what did I do well, what do you think my strengths are? What do you think I'm a fit for? Here's what I'm thinking. Do you think I accurately am projecting myself?" The second is your broader network, and that's where I ask you to do the golden question, "If you were in my shoes... " And then third is recruiters.

(00:27:43):
Now, this is an important hack. Recruiters don't like being barraged with, "Get me a job." They do like someone saying, "Hey, what do you think I'm a fit for?" asking their advice. And this is especially true if you pre-

Phyl Terry (00:28:03):
And this is especially true if you've pre-built a relationship with a recruiter. So anyone listening to your podcast right now, if you're in a job, I have a really important message for you. When that recruiter calls, pick up the phone even if you don't want the job, help them, network with them, introduce them to other people, and build that relationship, because whether you lose a job or whether you decide to start looking when you're in work, you want that relationship.

(00:28:29):
Now, Lenny, there's a problem many people haven't done that. Okay? So part of what we're doing with the Never Search Alone community is we're building a recruiter network. We're finding recruiters who are willing to, in a protected way, do a couple of conversations a month, helping people think about their candidate market fit. And if anyone listening to the show is a recruiter, please come join us and volunteer. We need more recruiters. I know many of you want to give back and you don't know how. You tell me this. Here's a way to give it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:01):
Mm-hmm. Love that. Okay, and so the intent of this is that you're trying to figure out, one, what does the market want, and how do I be honest about what it wants because what you want may not exist right now, and then, two, help you refine your pitch and how you're approaching and who you're talking to. Is there anything else that comes out of doing this exercise? Because I think people might be hearing this, like, "Ah, so much work. I have enough work to do, all these interviews. Got to reach out to people. I got kids and a family. I have to write this two-pager now and listening tour." What other benefits do you get out of this, doing this exercise?

Phyl Terry (00:29:37):
You build those relationships. You turn people on as listening posts, so you light up your network in a way that you... If you just send an email saying, "I want a job," or if you just go, "Hey, do you have a job for me," people don't know what to say. But if you say, "Hey, if you're in my shoes, how would you approach this, and what do you think if you were me I should be looking for, and what are you seeing in the market," they love that, and now they're really thinking about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:05):
And if they see a job that might be a fit, they tell you about it.

Phyl Terry (00:30:07):
They tell you about it. Yeah, and that gets to candidate... Because at the end of this, we're going to create a very simple, narrow, focus candidate market fit statement at the end of listening tour.

(00:30:17):
So once you've now done this listening tour, now you need to create a focus candidate market fit, and this is tough. Look, again, this is why you need a job search council. You need them to be there with you during the listening tour. Not every listening tour conversation will be a home-run. Once in a while it'll be a dud. I talk about this in the book, like, "Warning there are some curves ahead." You could have a conversation... A number of women that I have worked with over the years who've gone and done conversations and they've gotten frankly sexist feedback... It was not helpful. "You're too poised," or "You're not poised enough." It's just this strange set of stuff. So you need your council to help you parse out and interpret what people are telling you.

(00:31:02):
And at the end of this listening tour, and it never really ends, but once you've done 10 or 15 and you're ready to say, "Okay, I'm going to take a stab at my candidate market fit," now you need your job search council because you're going to want... Every bone in your body is going to want that to be expansive, to want it to be broad. Remember, we're product people, at least those of us in Lenny's podcast community; what happens when we're building a product? Same thing, right? We want this product to be for everyone, but we've learned with product market fit, that doesn't work. We need a narrow, clear focus. Same thing with candidate market fit. So I say to people, and we have this whole grid that we give them, "I'm looking for a director of product role in a healthcare, series B startup in San Francisco," like "Bing, bing, bing," and people say, "Oh, if it's so narrow, I'm going to lose..." And here's the thing, when you're looking for a job, you need a spear and not a net. With a net, everything slips through.

(00:32:08):
Now, part two to this, people are expansive, but not reductive. What are you talking about, Phyl? Here's what I mean. If you give them a specific... If I say to you, "Lenny, I'm looking for a director of product role at a healthcare startup that's a series B in San Francisco," well, if you see another FinTech startup that's in a heavily regulated industry looking for a director of product that's a series B, you're going to be like, "You know what? Phyl is looking for that, but I bet Phyl could do that." You can be expansive. But if I told you, "Hey, Lenny, I'll take any product job I can," you are never going to think of me. You're never going to remember me. You're not going to be reductive from a broad statement, but you will be expansive from a narrow.

(00:32:52):
And I'll tell you, Lenny, this is so hard for people, and this is why, again, you need that council and you need that broader community. And every two weeks we do a LinkedIn Live where we address... We go over these questions again and again because it goes... If I were in the job search, I'd feel the same way, even with all the darn research I've done. It's really hard.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:13):
If you've been using this metaphor, approaching this like a product person, and this is very much like a product person thinks about new products is there should be a very narrow audience to start with kind of a wedge or an ICP. When someone's building this, what is a sign they've narrowed it enough? Are there a certain number of attributes? What tells you that, "Cool, this is small now"?

Phyl Terry (00:33:31):
So it's typically three to four attributes, and we give people a whole grid in a set of examples. So we had a woman who was a designer. She was a product designer. And what her product market fit was, she was looking for companies that either did not have a design team or needed to reboot one. So she wasn't talking about stage of business, or even industry, but that really plants an image in your mind. If you hear about a company that doesn't have design or looking to reboot design, you're going to think of her immediately because after you've done your listening tour and you've created your candidate market fit and your council signs off on it, Lenny, this is important, then you go back out to your listening tour and you tell all those people, "Thank you for your help. Here's the candidate market fit I've come up with." And you also post it on LinkedIn. You tell the whole world, right?

(00:34:29):
Now, will that candidate market fit change over time? Yeah, we're iterative, right? So if you go and go... And the market is changing. What was true three months ago may not be true now. Two weeks ago the stock market was convinced we're going into a recession, and everything crashed. Two weeks later we're like, "Oh, no, we're not going into a recession," and that affects the psychology of hiring managers and companies. Not just psychology, their willingness to open up, recs and everything else. So things are changing, so you need to be flexible and adaptive to that, which is also why you need the council and why you need to have a good network around you that you've asked for help from and they're invested in you and can be there for you as you try to keep navigating this.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:11):
Just to follow us through it a little bit more, when someone is... Someone's thinking right now, "Okay, what are my attributes," what's on that grid, roughly? There's stage of company, I imagine there's-

Phyl Terry (00:35:21):
Stage of company, industry, level of role and function, of course, and culture.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:27):
Is there a set of options you have of type of culture?

Phyl Terry (00:35:30):
Basically everyone wants a good culture, right?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:32):
Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly. So culture.

Phyl Terry (00:35:38):
Sometimes it can be very specific, like, I need a company that has a particular kind of policy for kids, or whatever, remote or hybrid or whatever, that kind of element. But I tell people, make it simple. This should not be paragraphs and paragraphs. It should be a one-sentence statement. You can do a longer thing that you can then share with people when you're getting into the conversation, but you want something simple that people go, "Oh, Lenny looking for a chief product officer role. Oh."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:11):
Yeah. It's exactly like you want your product to feel too.

Phyl Terry (00:36:13):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:14):
I need a SOC 2 compliance, so I'm going to think of-

Phyl Terry (00:36:17):
That's [inaudible 00:36:17].

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:18):
Yeah, exactly. Okay, so I'm thinking through this list here. So level and role I imagine people get a pretty good sense of where they want to be. Stage, any advice for someone to decide what stage is right for them?

Phyl Terry (00:36:35):
If I were coaching someone which, as you know, I do, we would talk a lot about this. But when I'm in the book and in the community, I say, "To figure out stage again, I want you to rely on your job search council and your network and your own experience," and it becomes pretty... People usually have a pretty good sense, like, "Who was I talking to recently? I need a big..." Whereas many people are like, "I don't want that. I want a startup." Okay.

(00:37:01):
And what I will tell you is that one thing to keep in mind right now is that there are more jobs in the startup world than there are in the established companies in the tech world for product people. That's where new job creation has been happening. It's slower than it was before, but the big companies, they've just been shedding people. They've just been throwing them off. Whereas the smaller companies, there's more opportunity there. Now that doesn't mean that... If you can't stand working at a startup, I'm not telling you you should go there necessarily.

(00:37:35):
But I will say this, and again, if you need to put food on the table... We were talking to someone recently; they had moved to a new city and then were laid off the next day. They moved for the company, and then they were laid off the next day, and they're like, "Okay, I need to get a job." I said, "Okay, yeah, sure. Just know that if you're going to get any job just to have while you still look for the job you really want, just know that that's hard. That's a hard pen. I understand it and I support it, it makes sense, and it's hard." It's harder than you realize, and you absolutely have to keep your job search council, because otherwise you're going to get lost.

(00:38:16):
Can I share one story about candidate market fit-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:19):
Please.

Phyl Terry (00:38:19):
... that might be helpful to people? I was coaching... He was an EVP at a traditional media company, but on the digital side, running their streaming business, but it was very much an old economy, old media company. This was not a player in the streaming space. And they smartly recognized that if they stayed there, they were going to end up in a pretty bad cul-de-sac. And by the way, that company's had layoffs, and they would've... So they decided they wanted to go work for a company like Netflix or Apple TV. And they're someone who ran hundreds of people, corner office, limo, first-class, you know what I mean, in the airplane? What was their candidate market fit? They went out and did this, their candidate market fit, if they were going to join a top streamer was as an individual contributor, Lenny. Because those guys, they didn't respect much of what they brought from traditional media. And if he had done this search alone, he would not have done that. But to his credit, he decided to take that, and it transformed his career. He's not someone who had a lot of management experience, but also tied now with one of the top streamers. He's just done incredibly well. But that is really hard to do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:35):
So in this example, when you talk about candidate market fit, a big part of it is what the market wants from you. It's not like he's like, "I'm going to go IC." He just realized as he was going through the process, "This is where I'm actually going to succeed."

Phyl Terry (00:39:48):
He talked to people, and I helped him network with people in Silicon Valley. They were just honest with him. And that's what Justin was talking about, this can be hard and humiliating at times to figure out... We had another person who was a chief product officer in a startup, and she was great. She helped me with the book, she was an early reader, she's a member of your community, Lenny. And she realized that she wasn't getting the right product trend. She was the only product person, and she didn't really know what she was doing. Well, what was her candidate market fit? It was an IC. It was an IC role, an individual contributor role in a larger tech company. And to her credit, she realized that was the right path for her learning, and she did this before the shoot really hit the fan. I'm in the tech world, fortunately. Just not swear.

(00:40:38):
I talk about this in the book. Sometimes you need a two-step strategy. Let's say you want to be a VP of product at a top streaming company or whatever it is, but you not a fit for that today. So the question is how do you step there? I tell a story in the book about a guy who'd been a VP of product. He wanted a COO role. He was not a fit. He was not a fit, Lenny. And it was very clear. The market was telling him, he did the listening tour, but he came back to me and said, "I don't care. I want a COO role." So he interviewed with 50 companies. 50. Can you imagine? It took them a year and a half. The 50th company hired him.

(00:41:15):
10 days later, they were a public company, massive fraud, and they went bankrupt. I said, "Okay. The market is clear. The only COO role you're a fit for is a company that's about to go bankrupt." And he's like, "Okay," and he went back to the VP of product role. I said, "If you want to become a COO from that role, where you are today, one of the great paths is to do it from that job inside a company." Okay? And that's what he ended up doing. It was a two-step strategy. He couldn't go straight there.

(00:41:46):
I'm not talking about people's innate worth, Lenny. I believe every human is worthwhile person, and I deeply believe in belonging and giving people support and spreading love and creating community. But I also believe in being practical and realistic. I didn't create this situation. I'm just trying to report to you what the situation is and how you can manage it so that you don't get stuck. How many people have you seen, Lenny, who get stuck? They get stuck in a bad job, they're not learning, and then they can't go from there? They get into their 40s and 50s, and it is tough. A number of people in the job search community who are in their 50s, 60s, whatever, they're dealing with ageism, they're dealing with... They're not close enough to the technology frontier. You got to get closer to the technology frontier, even if that means you're going to go from the EVP to an IC role. That's how creative destruction works. The closer you are to the technology frontier, the more new jobs and opportunities there are. The further you are from the technology frontier, the worse you're going to be over the long run. You might be able to get a better-sounding job in the short term, but you're going to find yourself stuck.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:55):
I love your Venn diagram of just warmth and support and belonging, and also just straight real-talk. Here's the reality.

Phyl Terry (00:43:04):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:05):
What a combo.

Phyl Terry (00:43:06):
Oh, thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:06):
This is such powerful advice, and I think people might be feeling like, "Yeah, I get it, but man, I don't want to be a IC again. I've been a director, I've been a VP. That sounds really not great." Is there anything else you can share to help people get past that, of like, "Okay, maybe I really should be looking for an IC role again?"

Phyl Terry (00:43:24):
Again, if you're in a job search council, and also you're in our Slack community, what you're going to find is that you're not alone. That's a big thing. It's not you. There's not something wrong with you. This is the market that we're in. And by the way, the more relationships you build, the better you do your listening tour... One of the tactics, Lenny, I tell people is you've got to send out an update note every month to all of your network that you've talked to. And it might be, "I don't have a job yet," or "I don't even have any news, but I just want to let you know I'm still going and I appreciate everything you've done for me and I'm still looking for X." That could be it. And Justin, in his note, I referenced him earlier as chief product officer, his note on LinkedIn today said, "Phyl told me to keep people updated, and I didn't do it enough." Don't make that mistake. You got to do that.

(00:44:12):
Lenny, I met with a group of about 50 job seekers recently who've been in the Never Search Alone community for more than a year. Okay? They're struggling. Again, I don't have a magic wand. But as I talked to them, what was happening? They stopped network. They left their job search council. They weren't updating their candidate market fit to the changing market condition. I'm like, "You have to do everything. You can't get passive." One of the concepts, Lenny, I talk about is you've got to be the I in village. There's no I in team. Well, there is an I in village, okay? And the I in village is that when I'm saying you've got to ask for help, you got to be a part of job search council community, you have to be independent and accountable and responsible. I'm not saying you're not going to become passive independent. This is how you become more independent. This is how you stand up and be even more accountable and responsible. This is how you can do the best search possible in the market conditions that we have.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:12):
So the advice here is if you're struggling finding a job, this is a solution. Join a council, bring people on board with you, update people on your progress. These are the things that break you out of that funk that you're probably in.

Phyl Terry (00:45:26):
And it will still be hard. It will still be hard. I wish that weren't true, Lenny. Now, I will tell you that, look, what's the difference between now and the dot-com depression of 2000, 2001 and 2? The difference is that we were a much smaller industry then. And people had been in web jobs only for a couple years, where now we've got people who are in jobs for 10, 15 or more years in tech who have never seen a downturn, have never seen a market like this. We've never seen a tech market like this. It will improve at some point, but right now it's tough. And I can't change that, but I can provide tools, I can provide community, I can provide heart and smarts, so that you can get the best job you can get right now.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:10):
Speaking of advice, is there anything else along the lines of candidate market fit before we move on to more tactics?

Phyl Terry (00:46:17):
Just that, again, that you're going to resist the narrowness of it, every bone in your body. Just know that that's what everyone is feeling. But go watch... I have this great video online of... He was a VP of product. He was initially masked, but VP of product at Nike. I met him through Marty and Chris at Silicon Valley Product Group. He joined one of our product councils, and then he decided to leave. And he was like, "Phyl, I love you, but this candidate market fit stuff, no. You're wrong. It needs to be [inaudible 00:46:57]." And so he went out and he actually spoke to a bunch of VCs and like, " We don't have any idea what to do with you. You have to tell us something really specific." He was like, "Oh, man." So he went, he's like, "Phyl..." So he redid it, bam, bam, bam.

(00:47:12):
I tell another story in the book about Dee. She was a chief data officer of a large company in tech, wanted to become a CTO. She had a technology and engineering background, as well as data. She spent a year spinning her wheels alone. I said, "Join a job search council." She figured out her candidate market fit. It turns out she was a great fit for a mid-size regional bank CTO. And within three weeks she had three offers. A year, nothing. Within three weeks, three offers.

(00:47:43):
So I can't guarantee that you're going to get three offers within three weeks, right? I'm not saying that. Some of you, it might take you six months or a year. And the more senior you are, Lenny, the longer it is. If you're a CEO, it's going to take you a long time, unless you happen to be the CEO of Chipotle, who just became the CEO of Starbucks.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:02):
Yeah. Yeah, I know you're creating a page that we're going to link people to, which is, I think... Is it phyl.org/lenny?

Phyl Terry (00:48:08):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:09):
Okay, cool. And is it going to have this template to help you work out your market fit?

Phyl Terry (00:48:13):
There'll be a link to where you can download not only that template, but all the templates. You don't even have to join a job search council to get all this stuff. I hope you do. Again, it's free. I will say, early on people were like, "What's the trick here? This is free, and you're going to charge me." No. No, this is free. Why am I making it free? Because, one, I can, which is cool; second, this is in honor of my mom; and third, I want to create a private safety net for the ravages of creative destruction. It's great. A lot of positive consequences, but there's negative ones. And I just don't love the idea of charging people for this. I charge people for other things, but not for this.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:58):
And we'll link people to the things you charge for so they can support you and benefit you in other ways, or benefit themselves in other ways.

Phyl Terry (00:49:04):
Benefit them and me. That'd be awesome.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:07):
Let's talk about some other tactics. You mentioned this idea of playing to win, and I think within that, there's this kind of OKR in mission tactic. Let's talk about that.

Phyl Terry (00:49:15):
50%, Lenny, of the people who read my book, join a job search council, and follow everything I've described, the people don't do what I'm about to tell you, it is the biggest mistake and miss, and I'm really sorry about this. I'm on a campaign, right? So here's the thing. When you start to interview and negotiate, you've got to be in charge. This is collaborative coaching. I want you to play to win, not to lose.

(00:49:49):
Now, when people hear me say that, they translate it in their brains into, "Oh, Phyl is saying that I've got to be a ruthless negotiator." If anyone who knows me know that ruthless is just not how I am, at least in this sense. No, no, I'm like, "What I want you to do," and it's a great tactic that we stumbled upon, and it's one of the best tactics in the book, and I really hope we can get the other half of the people who are in the community to do this, and your listeners who aren't involved who decide to join also do this, when you start interviewing, I want you to create your own version of the job description. I want you to do it privately, Lenny, and I want you to create what I call a job mission with OKRs.

(00:50:38):
Now, most job descriptions, they suck, Lenny. The company doesn't know what the eff they're doing. They don't know exactly what they're looking for. But I'm not telling you to say that to them, just to be clear. I'm telling you, "I want you to create your own job mission with OKRs." This is key. It needs to be with OKRs. Now, your audience knows what an OKR is, objectives and key results, and I assume I don't need to explain that. It needs to be something where you are saying, "Here's what I think I'm going to be accountable for. Here's what I'm going to actually... the outcomes I'm going to deliver," right?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:13):
At the company that you join.

Phyl Terry (00:51:14):
At the company you join. Now, you'll keep it private at first because drafting it... This thing has multiple benefits. The first is drafting it will help you understand and develop great interview questions to ask them to clarify, what is this job? And they'll be impressed by that. Okay? The second thing is, once you've had a couple of interviews, and it's a draft... Now, it's not a full, final thing. This is so important. I want you to pull the hiring manager aside and say, "Hey, Lenny, you're the hiring manager. I've thought about what the role is. I want to make sure I'm understanding it correctly. Can I share something with you?" I don't want you to email it. I want you to do phone call, Zoom, or coffee or whatever.

(00:51:54):
Lenny, can you imagine how hiring managers feel when they get this job mission with OKRs? I was talking to a senior guy at Amazon who's hired more than 2000 product leaders and others. He said, "Phyl, no one in..." He's part of our product account. He said, "No one in my life has ever done this. If someone did this, it would blow my mind. I would hire them on the spot." And that's the message I want these folks to understand.

(00:52:22):
We talk about silver medals, Lenny. In the job search, the silver medal sucks. At the Olympics, hey, it's pretty good. You get to be on the podium. But guess what? Silver medal is... It's almost worse than... Because you were almost there. And we have a number of videos and other things where we talk about the difference, in many cases, between getting the silver and gold has been doing the job mission with OKRs. Companies say, "This is what distinguished you. This is what..." We were like, "Who is this person?" They're already thinking about what they're accountable and the outcomes, and naturally they're thinking about it better than I am, which is fantastic, right? So it raises the odds, but it also does something if you present it...

(00:53:02):
Again, Lenny, you're the hiring manager. I show you my job mission OKRs, and you're like, "Oh, this is fantastic," but you also say, "Oh, this thing you have here, this OKR, this isn't part of the role. Well, that's helpful to understand, but this thing that you don't have listed is." "Oh, really?" Lenny, how many times... I'm going to ask people in the audience to raise their hands. How many times have you taken the job A that turned out to be job B? Everybody just raised their hands, Lenny. So this helps to address that, right?

(00:53:35):
And then if you get the offer, and again, this raises the odds of getting the offer, it then sets you up to negotiate what I call the four legs of the negotiations tool. This is not hard negotiation. This is something the company loves. I actually say, you get an offer and it's like whatever, $250,000 base with a 30% bonus. This may be a director or whatever, or senior manager. Maybe it's an 800 base if you're more senior, whatever it might be. I want you to go and talk to the hiring manager, if possible. Hopefully not the recruiter. We'll talk about that. And I want you to say, "This is great. I want to talk about money, but before we do, I want to think about some of the things that will set me up to see succeed in this role. I think there's like $10 million of tech debt here. Does that sound right to you? And are we on board that that'll be priority one to eliminate the first day I start the job?"

(00:54:39):
We had two CPOs, both interviewing at private equity firms, private equity-owned companies, about the same size, SaaS companies. One had tech debt of 20 million, one had tech debt of 10. I told them both, "You got to talk about that in the..." So one talked about it in the negotiation, and the company was like, "Oh, that's great." They wrote a check on day one. Six months later, the tech debt was relieved. They updated the systems. They were able to get into innovation. A year later, they got promoted to a GM role in addition to their CPO role, and then a year after that, they were being interviewed for the CEO role. The other person, where there was 10 million of tech debt, was kind shy about asking, sort of mentioned it, they were like, "Oh, we'll talk about it when you get here," but they didn't really commit, and they never addressed it. One month, six months, 12 months, 18 months later, he's looking for a job. This is the opportunity cost of not being set up for success.

(00:55:34):
Now, again, don't hear this as antagonistic. We're not antagonistic here. We're trying to say, "What's going to help me succeed?" So one CPO recently was negotiating... I'm not just talking about budget for tech debt or whatever. If you're a senior person, do you think that team needs more training? Do you need to send them over to Marty's workshops, over to my product councils, right? Get them into Lenny's community. The company was like, "You're negotiating the training budget of the team that you don't even run yet-"

Phyl Terry (00:56:04):
You're negotiating the training budget of the team that you don't even run yet while we're talking about your salary? Who are you? We love you, we're going to pay you even more. Lenny, companies love this. And even if you're a junior person, you're not going to negotiate budget, but you can talk about mentorship, professional development, will you be able to attend conferences or training? Again, and this is, we're not hard negotiating this, we're saying, "Here's what I think I'm going to need to accomplish the OKRs that we've already agreed upon."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:33):
This is really cool advice, I want to make sure people super understand it. So an example of tech debt. This person asked, "I need $10 million budget in order to address this tech debt."

Phyl Terry (00:56:42):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:43):
I see. So it's not like, "I believe we will save $10 million if we spend on time." It's like, "Here's how much this team will need and I will need to be successful."

Phyl Terry (00:56:51):
I'm going to need a check for $10 million on day one.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:54):
I guess you're right, someone would be shy asking for that. Or that was $20 million actually, that was the one that asked for it.

Phyl Terry (00:57:00):
That was the 20 million, that was right. And again, it was not... Yes, people feel really shy about this, but the companies love that they understood what it was going to take. I will tell you what, if the company doesn't like this, it's a huge red flag. Huge red flag, it means they're not serious. But if you're talking to them, "Hey, I think we're going to need train the team. I'm going to need to hire three more ICs," or the design function is weak, or whatever it might be. And then you're like, "Do you agree? Do you see it this way?"

(00:57:37):
And they're like, "Yeah, that's right. Good. Wow." You're already like bang, bang, bang. We haven't even finished negotiating your salary. And this is so counterintuitive, Lenny. I'm the queen of counterintuitive stuff. Kelly Marcus said it's counterintuitive, right? But this is as well. People think they're going to lose the opportunity when it actually wins them. Now, of course, if they marched in and said, "Damn it, you have to do X and Y," right? That's not what I'm talking about.

(00:58:10):
"Hey, here's how I see it. This is the OKRs. I think we're going to need this. Does that make sense to you?" And you're having a collaborative conversation about how you need to be set up for success.

(00:58:21):
And by the way, if they say, "No, I hear you. I believe you, but no," then you make a judgment decision. I'm not always saying you turn that away. Well, especially if you need a job, but you're now going in eyes wide open. You are not going to be able to believe that tech debt initially. You're going to have to work within that constraint.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:41):
So I love that we're getting into negotiation advice by the way, because I was hoping we'd get there. So the advice here is identify something that you'll need to be successful, and your finding is that when you ask for, and it seems like a financial investment as a part of you joining, ends up leading to a better comp for you.

Phyl Terry (00:59:00):
Yes, and I will say that there's less negotiating room today than there was two years ago because of the market that we're in. And the data all bears that out, and we see that. But here's the other piece of data. So I want you to ask for things that tie back to the OKRs that you've already agreed on with the hiring manager. This is how this thing connects together, right? It's like Legos, and then we come to the money and you've had this lovely conversation. You've shown them how much you're invested in succeeding. See, Lenny, the problem that every hiring manager has is distinguishing be someone between someone who is a good talker, and someone who can actually make things happen. You know this, right? And this is true every from individual contributor to CEO.

(00:59:50):
By doing the job mission of the OKRs, and by showing them that draft, you are showing them. Not telling them, showing them that you take initiative, that you're accountable, that you can make things happen. And then in the salary negotiation, by talking to them about what you need to succeed, you're showing them that you really want to succeed. And guess who that benefits? That benefits the company, obviously. I want you to do that first and then, okay, so then let's talk money. Now, 87% of the time, Lenny, when you ask for more money, you get it. Now, that's a longitudinal statistic, meaning over many years. It's going to be lower in a moment like this, but you can still ask, and people are afraid to ask. Again, don't ask in some shark way like some of my friends in business might do. Some M&A negotiators, whatever. No, ask, are you open?

(01:00:48):
Unless it's a deal breaker. If it's a deal breaker, just be open about that. But if it's not, let's say they offered you whatever it is. 400 base with up to 100% whatever in some RSUs or options, blah, blah, and you really wanted 450. Lenny, you can say, "Hey, are you open to 450? That was really what I was hoping for. What I think I'm worth, are you open to that? Is that something we can talk about?"

(01:01:16):
And most of the time they say yes. They may not get you to 450. They may be like, "You know what? Yes, thank you. Let me get back to you." Or, "No, we could go to 420. Does that work? Great."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:28):
You make it sound very easy.

Phyl Terry (01:01:30):
Here's the thing-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:30):
I hate negotiating. Yeah, go.

Phyl Terry (01:01:32):
I do too. And I talk about this in the book and Jason Fried, who you know. Jason Fried's got this great thing where they have all very clear bans, 37signals, well, at Basecamp. He's like, "Because no one's trained in negotiation, how can we expect people to negotiate?" And there's another thing Marty says about my book. He says what he loves is that companies have all of these resources. They've got lawyers and HR people, and you're there alone.

(01:01:57):
That's why you need your job search council. This is when you really need to ask for help because every bone in your body is going to say, "I'm not going to negotiate. That's going to make it worse," and it almost never does. And again, you could be a jerk about it, that won't be good, but that's not what I'm talking about. I'm talking about collaborative conversation. I'm talking about what you need to succeed, showing them that you're thinking about resources, support, budget that will help you deliver on the things that you signed up for. And then asking, are you open if they didn't quite hit your range.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:30):
Yeah. The way you phrase it, make it very low risk to ask.

Phyl Terry (01:02:35):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:37):
Do you have any specific advice on doing this over email, over phone call, or in person? Is there something you're like, "Definitely do it in this way."

Phyl Terry (01:02:43):
Strongly, strongly want you to do it either in person or over the phone live with the hiring manager. Now, some companies won't let you do that. You have to talk to the HR person or whatever. But as much as you can work with the hiring manager, even if it's to say, "Hey, I just want to run by you some of the things I think I need to succeed in the role before we talk money with the hiring manager," or whatever. With the recruiter I mean, and they'll go to bat for you behind the scenes if you do that. Not guaranteed, but more like.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:20):
Yeah, that's totally true because oftentimes you don't really have a specific budget as a hiring manager.

Phyl Terry (01:03:24):
Right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:24):
So to you it's like, "Sure, 450, let's make it happen."

Phyl Terry (01:03:27):
That's right. Now some companies like know this and they're like, "You have to talk to the person we designate the internal recruiter," but you can also get back to that hiring manager, and even informally. Again, if you've built a good relationship and everything is about building good relationships, Lenny. I want you to be a good interviewer. I want you to ask good questions. I want you to listen. I want you to present that job mission OKRs. It shows how innovative and how much you take initiative and how much you're thinking about this and how much you want this, right? Every step of the way.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:00):
This episode is brought to you by Dovetail, the customer insights hub for product teams. Understanding customers is a critical part of good product development, but it's so much harder than it should be. Whether it's finding insights and large volumes of customer calls, crawling through feedback, or finding out what you already know, getting the full picture of your customers is slow and full of friction. This is where Dovetail comes in. Dovetail is the AI first customer insights hub that automates end-to-end qualitative data analysis and insight discovery. Their latest AI features automatically break down your calls into key moments, themes, and digestible summaries so that you can get to the heart of customer problems fast.

(01:04:42):
When you need quick clarity on a decision, you can use Dovetail's AI powered semantic search to retrieve supporting data from across your organization, summarize it, and create video highlight reels that you can share with your team. Get access to all of Dovetail's latest AI features on their professional plan. The best news is that listeners of this podcast can get an exclusive 30 day Dovetail Pro trial today. Just go to dovetail.com/lenny, that's dovetail.com/lenny.

(01:05:13):
While we're on this topic of negotiation and comp, is there anything else there that you might want to share that might be helpful to people?

Phyl Terry (01:05:18):
In the book, before you do the listening tour, I ask people to do what I call the gratitude house exercise, which is to think about who are all the people in your life who have helped you get to where you are today? I mean, you could talk about your third grade teacher, you know what I mean? I'm just talking on, I just want you to do that, and I want you to do that because everyone has this idea that they're alone. We have all received enormous help to do what we're doing, whoever we are. Even the [inaudible 01:05:51] was born to a mother, and they did not make it themselves for their first several years of their lives. We all are born of mothers. We all are born as families and communities. Some better or worse. I had a pretty tough childhood, but there was love.

(01:06:09):
I want you to do that gratitude house exercise, and then it can sometimes surface people that you'll go talk to in the listening tour. Might not talk to your third grade teacher, but you'll go talk to some. Now when you're going into interview, I ask people to take a moment and re-reflect the gratitude house exercise, remind themselves of everyone they're carrying with them, to imagine that they're on your shoulders. All of those people, including your job search council of course, and everyone you've talked to and you're listening to, you're walking in with 50 people, Lenny, okay? Even people who tell me, "I don't know anyone." Now, that is not true. You might not know as many people as I do, okay? That's understandable. My job is to know people, but everyone knows some people and you bring them with you even metaphorically, so that you feel not alone when you're going into that interview.

(01:07:10):
The other thing I say with the interview and the negotiations is you've got to go do the debrief right afterwards, Lenny. Because we all have these cockamamie ideas about what happened. We think we did terribly when we did well, we think... We need to talk it through with someone else who can help us parse exactly what happened and really where we're at. I had a woman who was a director of product, she was interviewing for a VP of product roles. She texted me after the interview, "Oh, I screwed it up," this and that, this and that, "but they really liked me and we're going to go to the next round."

(01:07:41):
I'm like, "Wait a minute, wait a minute. Something is not true here."

(01:07:48):
This is just your own imposter syndrome and inner critic. That's another exercise we ask people to do, by the way, is what we call the inner critic exercise name the critic. Mine is Tub Tour. I was overweight when I was a kid and my dad called me Tub Tour.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:04):
I learned that tactic from Julie Cameron from The Artist's Way, she recommends that.

Phyl Terry (01:08:08):
Yes, she's great. Love that book. By the way, it's on my bookshelf back there.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:12):
I love that. I think I called mine Jim. Yeah, we had a really good episode. I don't know if you saw with Joe Hudson, he has a whole series of advice on your inner critic, and his point, and I'll point to it is your inner critic is always lying to you.

Phyl Terry (01:08:30):
I did see that episode. I love it. We all have it. People think, "Oh." Everyone. And that's what I love about this moment we're in too, Lenny. I started in therapy in the 1980s. In the 1980s, you did not share that you were in therapy, okay? Today, we have tennis stars talking about their emotional well-being and their therapy and how they're doing. It's beginning to normalize in some really important ways that emotions, they're not bad. They're actually really important to the decision-making system, but they can go off in certain ways that can really hurt us.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:13):
And it feels like these councils are like a lite therapy for people.

Phyl Terry (01:09:16):
Yes. I would never want to say the word therapy because of course that implies certification and training, but there's a therapeutic aspect to it. I feel comfortable saying that, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:28):
Okay. So on this gratitude house, just come back to it real quick. The reason that is powerful is that gives you confidence to ask for stuff to believe in yourself. You're worth something-

Phyl Terry (01:09:37):
Gives you confidence to walk in there as who you are, Lenny. Not as your inner critic, but as the whole good person that you are. And when you show up, this is one of the reasons job search councils are so important because if your anxiety and fear starts to run away and erode at your confidence, it will hurt your interview. You will not show up well. So you're not going to even, even in a down market you're going to get even, you won't even get the jobs that your candidate market fit suggests you're good for in that down market. You're going to slide down a few more notches, or you just won't get offers, and then you're going to get paralyzed and feel like you're really worthless.

(01:10:17):
And if anyone watching this has been out of work for a while and feels that, let me just tell you, you are not worthless. You are not worthless. I want you to invest in yourself, to prove that to yourself that you're not worthless. You are worth the investment of this time and energy. I'm not asking you to do this for me, I'm asking you to do this for you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:40):
You got tingles when you said that. That was a really powerful message. I'm glad you said that.

Phyl Terry (01:10:46):
Thank you, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:48):
So yeah, so we're on this topic of playing to win. And what you just said is along the same lines is just remember, you're playing to win. You're not trying to lose, you're not trying to find-

Phyl Terry (01:10:56):
Not lose, just be really, I just can't say anything. I just can't rock the boat. I'm not asking you to rock the boat. I'm asking you to take charge and demonstrate the power of who you are. These companies will love it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:10):
When I asked a lot of people to ask you what you're amazing at, one of those common themes is really good at just asking for help and teaching people how to ask for help, which was actually an topic for a recent newsletter post by one of my newsletter fellows, Natalie. So let's talk about it. Talk about why this is so important, why you spend so much thought and time on this topic.

Phyl Terry (01:11:32):
First, I want to shout out my mom again. So my mom's name, her nickname was Chic, C-H-I-C. Her friends and family and I dedicate the book to Chic, and she started that first council in 1960, and she asked for help. Of course, she taught me to ask for help, and to start councils. And of course, when I was very young, I didn't want to do what my mother said, right? You're not. But I ended up in a bad situation and she's like, "You've got to ask for help," and I asked my high school teachers for help. I was an alcoholic at the age of 12, Lenny, and things were really spiraling downwards. I was no longer living with my mom, there's a whole long story about that. I was in a pretty unsupportive position, and she's like, "You've got to ask for help." And so I did.

(01:12:23):
And OMG, Lenny. I mean, I was carried by these teachers. And I also have to give a shout-out, and I'm going to cry now to my girlfriend in high school, Karen Kavanagh, whose family had very few resources. They were struggling, but they made a home for me, and I couldn't have done it without them and some of my other friends and my teachers. I worked a full-time job by the age of 16 and I was going to high school, and I was in a tough situation. It was transformative, Lenny. It was transformative. Did I feel like asking for help was a weakness? I did. Did I think people were going to think less of me? Absolutely. I thought all the things that people think, and it is not what happens.

(01:13:24):
Now, there is a warning here. If you ask for help poorly, and I'm going to define that, it does end up leading to bad consequences. What do I mean by asking you poorly? I mean, if you don't do your homework, if you're asking for someone to do it for you rather than advise and support and give you perspective, we all know that. I get these emails, Lenny. So when I started the product councils, Marissa Mayer was a founding member, right? Marissa Mayer at Google and Miriam Moheed at Amazon. And as Marissa's reputation grew, suddenly everybody wanted to talk to Marissa.

(01:13:57):
So I got all these random emails from people I've never met. "Oh, I've got software, would you please introduce me to Marissa? I think she'd want to license it or buy at Google."

(01:14:08):
I'm like, "Who are you? What? That is the dumbest." Of course, I'm never going to answer that, right?

(01:14:13):
If they had reached out to me and said, "I know you don't know me. I have this small software company. I'm not well-connected, but I would love your advice on how to grow this business and what you would do if you were in my shoes," which I have never received, Lenny, even though I've written about it and said about, I would've done that phone call.

(01:14:34):
And then if they have said, "Well, can I talk to Marissa?"

(01:14:36):
I'm like, "You have not earned that yet. That's not a statement about your worth. It's just you're not ready for that conversation."

(01:14:48):
So you can do it poorly. But if you do it well, if you've done your homework and you're open, oh my gosh. There's four counterintuitive rules here. Asking for help is not a sign of weakness, it's a sign of confidence. It both requires confidence and strengthens it, Lenny. That's number one. Two, it's not a taking activity, it's a giving activity. If you do it well, you're actually being giving to the people you ask. This is really counterintuitive, Lenny. This is what I teach in my product councils. I'm like, "You have to ask for the money." If you ask for help and you're open and vulnerable, you're a smart person.

(01:15:27):
So at one point, Marissa came in and said, " Listen, I'm developing a new product. I want to present it to the board, but I'd like your feedback on it first, and what do you guys think?" Am I approaching this in the right way?

(01:15:37):
People were like, "What?" Google was already a public company at this point. Wow, that, they were just blown away. They were so happy to help.

(01:15:48):
So if you've done your homework and you ask someone who has some expertise in the area that you have, and you do it in this way, "I'd love your perspective and thoughts and how would you approach it?" People feel given to, they feel given to. Here's the thought experiment that'll prove it. Imagine that somebody that you respect comes to you for help on an area that you have expertise. And they ask you in this way, how are you going to feel, Lenny? How do you feel?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:17):
Like they value. Like they value my opinion-

Phyl Terry (01:16:20):
You feel honored, and you feel excited, and you love giving. Everyone loves giving, it's a part of human activity. And you learn more when you give, of course, because it helps you see something new. Asking for help is not a sign of weakness. It's not a taking activity, it means you're becoming more independent, not independent, and it doesn't hurt your reputation, it improves it. Something I did not understand when my mom was trying to tell me to do this, Lenny. And it took the experience to drill into my head.

(01:16:49):
And then I will tell you, I won't name names, but one person that you asked, who's a prominent product person who's worked at great companies, right? He said ask him about asking for help. I think he would agree with this. He'd been a member of the product councils for a long time. I think it took years before he really embraced it. I've seen many people, they're like, "Bill, I know you keep talking about this asking for help thing." And I know there's something to it, but it is transformative, Lenny. It is transformative if you learn to ask for help well.

(01:17:25):
I can tell you about Brad Smith at Intuit who toppled the stock price there. But he was a GM. He became a CEO. He was a GM. He ran a project and he didn't do it well. He lost $300 million for company. He thought, okay, that's over. But they came to him and said, "What's your lesson here?"

(01:17:46):
He said, "I didn't ask for help. I was pigheaded. I didn't listen to my team." That's a great lesson, and if you really internalize that, then it's worth it because you're great in other ways. And he ended up getting to the CEO role. And what did he do? He joined a council, right? And he asked for help. Boom, boom, boom. Stock price goes up 7X in his tenure, okay?

(01:18:08):
Kenneth Chenault at American Express. Joins in the 1980s, one of the few African Americans in professional roles there. Ends up as a CEO and chairman of the board. First African American chairman of a Fortune 50 company. You ask Kenneth Chenault as I did, how'd you get there? He asked for help. And by the way, what did he do once he became CEO? He got on a CEO council.

(01:18:33):
And by the way, who asked for help? Well, this is going to blow your mind if you. Warren Buffett. People think Warren Buffett only listens to himself and Charlie Munger who passed away last year. That guy asked for help. Well, it doesn't ask anybody for help. He asked people he respects and so on, but that guy asked for help. Every single leader I've ever worked with that has done well asked for help. And I have data in the book. 85% of the people get to a senior role credit asking for help to help get them there. 85% of the people in a junior role say they're afraid to ask for help because they think it's a sign of weakness.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:06):
Perfect.

Phyl Terry (01:19:07):
It's literally the same number if you can believe that. I couldn't believe it when I did the data. I was like, "What?" But it's really, and guess what? If you don't learn to ask for help and you're a junior person, you're going to remain a junior person most likely.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:19):
When you say ask for help, what are some examples and common times and uses of asking for help? Because it could be like, "Hey, can you just look at this email for me?" Or is it like, "I'm struggling with this project?" What are some things that you've seen when people think ask for help do this.

Phyl Terry (01:19:35):
One of the things that Kinshaw talks about is what he calls defining reality. So it's a CEO at American Express, he was constantly just going around and asking different people in the company and outside the company, "How do you see things? What are you seeing? What are you thinking? Help me understand your perspective," right? So that's a form of asking for help, for sure. Okay.

(01:19:52):
Reviewing my email absolutely is a great form of asking for help. If you're sending a good email, an important email let's say, and let's say you have a history of maybe sending emails that don't get well received, you go ask for help. And by the way, I have a whole workshop where I teach people how to use ChatGPT with some communication models to help you with that email. So there's ways to do that with ChatGPT. But I still, if it's a really important email, want you to have eyes on, right?

(01:20:22):
There's a woman who became the president of a digital retailer in the United States about five years ago, and then she realized that she had significant technical debt. The project, they were trying to build a new platform, and it was stuck. So we convened what we call a peer coaching call, and I also talked about this in the book. We got three other presidents of retailers, online retailers who had re-platformed and spent an hour, just one hour with her asking them for help. "What would you do if you were in my position?" I mean, bing, bang, boom.

(01:20:55):
So when people get a new job, by the way, I tell them, do a first 90 days peer coaching call. I want you to talk to people who are in that role today. Not at that company necessarily, but they're a director of product, they're a VP of product, whatever it might be. And I want you to say, "Hey, I'm starting this job. Here's my job mission with OKRs. What would you do if you were in my shoes? What mistakes have you seen others or yourself make that I need to avoid? What should I focus on? Here's what I'm thinking for my 30, 60, 90."

(01:21:24):
Whatever it might be, I want you to do a first 90 days call. Now, let's say you're a director of product in a job is going well, and you want to get to a VP of product role. Well then, I want you to do a career evolution call where you're talking to VPs of product. "Okay, I'm a director. I want to become a VP. How do I get from A to B? Will you tell me?" And that's another peer coach you call. So these are the things we do in the paid community, in the product councils and stuff. But you can do these on your own, right? And I tell people how to do them on their own in the job search councils.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:54):
Perfect.

Phyl Terry (01:21:54):
Are these helpful answers?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:56):
Absolutely. I think all these examples you're sharing is exactly I think what people are wondering. Just like, okay, I see.

Phyl Terry (01:22:01):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:01):
Feels like it's not-

Phyl Terry (01:22:02):
Can I share one more?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:03):
Please.

Phyl Terry (01:22:03):
That's so great. So Bradley Horowitz joined Google in 2008 as director of product. He had come from Yahoo, but he was initially intimidated. He had a weekly meeting with Jonathan Rosenberg, who was the SVP of product, with Susan Wojcicki. Susan just passed away tragically. Absolutely fabulous person by the way, if people don't don't know her, go learn about her. Marissa Mayer, and also another director of product named Sundar Pichai, right? Who is now the CEO of Google. And Bradley, he was nervous, he didn't know how to be in that meeting.

(01:22:42):
One of the things I tell people, when you ask for help, use your emotional intelligence, use your product council if you're in a job or your job search council, if you're looking to get feedback on, am I thinking about this well? Because I don't want you to ask the wrong people for help. Someone who's going to take advantage of that. You have to be thoughtful about this.

(01:23:02):
He was picking up vibes from Sundar that he was very approachable, that he lacked guile. Bradley told me Sundar just made it easy for him to say, "Hey, after one of these meetings, could I ask you a couple of questions?" And he says, first question he has is, "Is this meeting, is it just me or is this meeting intense?"

(01:23:21):
Sundar was like, "Oh, no, no, this is intense. I feel the same way you do and I've been here for a couple of years."

(01:23:29):
So they start to build a bond, and that's a form of asking for help. It's like you're checking, is your experience the same as mine or am I missing something? And then Horowitz who felt relieved at this point, felt more trust with Sundar, decided to ask him another question and this question. And by the way, now Bradley, he's kind of embarrassed that he asked this question, although I'm really happy that he did, I told him this.

(01:23:56):
He asked this question, he basically said, " I haven't been here very long, but you, Sundar, you strike me."

Phyl Terry (01:24:03):
"I haven't been here very long, but you, Sundar, you strike me as a really thoughtful person and great leader. Why is your remit just working on a toolbar for Marissa?" Whoa. Heard the wrong way, that could sound like an insult or something, rather than an honest attempt to understand the culture of Google and how it operates. But again, he had trust with Sundar at this point. And it was an open and vulnerable question, and it was great. Pitch I basically said, "Listen, I don't worry about title or scope or any of that. I've really been focused on just doing good work and letting the right things happen. That's the culture of Google." I will tell you that that was more true of the culture of Google in a way that's not so...

(01:24:48):
You have to be a little more politically aware at Google today. But the point is not so much the exact question he asked, but that he was open and vulnerable. He was thoughtful about who he asked, and it really made a difference in terms of his entry into Google and eventually led him to the VP of Product role. Of course, Sundar came into the CEO role down the road, but that's what I'm talking about, right? He was part of the product councils, Bradley. You need to have that sounding board so you can be thoughtful about... I teach people how to map and figure out who their allies are and their blockers and play what I call positive politics. That's all in my next book, Never Lead Alone, just to give a little. Don't worry, at least a year away.

(01:25:32):
When I write a book, I do... I did 400 drafts of Never Search Alone. I had a couple of thousand people help me with it and 200 people read it and use it. I had 2,500 comments and 400 drafts. I like to really dock through this stuff. I'm doing the same with Never Lead Alone. That's how I know it works, by the way. I'm a prouded person, Lenny. I mean, that's what we do.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:57):
[inaudible 01:25:56]. That's amazing. Let me ask one last question around the art of asking for help. So we've talked about when to ask for help a little bit. What are just a couple tips for how to do it well? You know, people come to me and like, "Hey, can you look at this email?" And be like, "No. I'm pretty busy. I don't know if I have time to look at an email."

Phyl Terry (01:26:15):
Have to think about the relationship, right? Again, showing that this random, small software company wanted to talk to Marissa Meyer. I didn't know them, they didn't know me, and they didn't know Marissa. That's not going to happen, right? Lenny, if your mom or your close friend or your colleague who you work closely with says, "I want you to look at this email," you're going to respond in one way. If some person, let's say in your podcast community, which is great, wants you to do it, I mean, you have thousands of people there. You can't do that. People come to me for job search advice in the job search community. I said, "I can't do that. I can't scale that. That's what the Job Search Council and the Slack community is there for. I appreciate you asking, but that's what the deal is there."

(01:27:03):
You got to think about the relationship. Listen to your emotions. This is where, again, emotions are really important for decision making. If your emotions are telling you, "I don't know if I trust this person," don't get all open and vulnerable with them. I want you to learn to ask for help in a counsel format where it's really safe. You can flail around. You can ask in fakakta ways. There's ways to ask for help where it's like... Have you experienced this, Lenny? Where I want you to do me a favor, but I'm actually acting like I'm doing you a favor. Lenny, I have this person to talk to I know is really going to be great for you to talk to, when really I'm trying to get you to give me... Whereas I should said, "Lenny, I have a favor to ask. Would you be willing to do this?" You just say yes or no. That's the other thing, I really want you to be honest with people about what you're asking. I never want you to hide the ask.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:00):
That is really good advice. A lot of times it's just, yeah, okay, if this is just a favor for you, absolutely.

Phyl Terry (01:28:05):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:05):
[inaudible 01:28:06]

Phyl Terry (01:28:06):
I mean, if people would say to me, "I have a favor to ask. Would you be willing?" "Yeah." Most of the time I'm going to say yes to that, you know?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:14):
Yeah.

Phyl Terry (01:28:15):
Do you get cold introductions, Lenny?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:18):
Where people introduce me to someone else without asking. Yeah. It's not a super common, but it does happen, for sure.

Phyl Terry (01:28:23):
It almost never is someone you want to talk to.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:26):
Yeah, that's right.

Phyl Terry (01:28:27):
It's not like, "Hey, let me introduce you to Sergey Brin," you know?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:31):
Yeah.

Phyl Terry (01:28:34):
It's [inaudible 01:28:32]. No. It's like they're trying to help somebody and you're doing them a favor, but they're not being honest.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:39):
Yeah. Okay. That's amazing advice. Phyl, we could talk for hours about so many things. You're involved in so many other things I want to hear about, but maybe one last question before we start to close out our chat. Just a broad question, is there anything else that you think would be valuable for people to know or leave with as kind of a final note around either job hunting, asking for help, anything else? And then I'm going to ask you to share all the things that you do for people that maybe could benefit from one of these other programs.

Phyl Terry (01:29:08):
When my book came out, we did a book party in New York and the host of it, very senior product person, got up and said, "The most important thing about this book that I learned," and they run a Job Search Council, "was, and I said this earlier, but I want to come back to it, everyone feels anxious and insecure in the job search." Lenny, everyone. It's built into the fabric of how capitalism operates. It's not something problematic in your head. It's the instability of the system, which gives it its dynamism, but which also creates trends in security and fear. Everyone feels that, Lenny. You are not alone. But my saying that is not enough. What I say in the book is that this book is like a cookbook. You don't get the calories from reading it. You got to actually make the dishes. To experience what I'm saying, you need a Job Search Council and you need to go like, "Oh my gosh, it's really true, I'm not alone. Even Lenny. Lenny feels this. Holy, I respect Lenny. Wow, look at everything Lenny has done and created, and he feels this way. Maybe I'm not crazy." There's so much else to this, but that is such a core point.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:37):
That's such an important point to leave with. And just to build on exactly what you just said about me, this strange life that I've created for myself, I originally called the project Avoid Getting a Real Job because I was worried about that. I forced myself to try something else instead.

Phyl Terry (01:30:53):
That's amazing. That's amazing. That's great. Well, thank you, because you have created something that's really meaningful to a lot of people, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:00):
Thanks, Phyl. So have you. I'm so thankful that you made time to share so much advice. I think this is going to be one of the popular episodes I've done. I think it's going to help a ton of people, but we're not done yet. Tell us about some of the other stuff that you've got going on. You've mentioned product councils, you do coaching, just so people know what else might benefit them.

Phyl Terry (01:31:17):
21 years ago I started these product councils. And by the way, I like to show this Marty Cagan, and I go back to the late nineties, early... He was actually a client of mine when he was at eBay.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:31):
Wow.

Phyl Terry (01:31:32):
And I'll tell you what happened. We were about to sign a project and he decided, he called me up. Literally, we were signing that day. He called me up, "Phyl, I got bad news." "I mean, what are you telling me?"

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:40):
Now?

Phyl Terry (01:31:41):
"I'm leaving."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:42):
Come on.

Phyl Terry (01:31:42):
"I'm leaving and I'm starting something." And he started the Silicon Valley Product Group.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:47):
Oh, wow.

Phyl Terry (01:31:47):
But why am I saying that? Because that was around the time that I started the councils and I started with Marissa. Basically, I went out and did a listening to her Lenny and I said, "Listen, I think for those of us left in the digital world after this depression, I think we need a place to come together that's not a conference with sponsors and people that are all trying to sell each other. We need a private, safe, secure environment to really talk. Does that resonate with you? Do you want that?" And they were like, "Yes," so I started this thing and Marty has been involved from day one. He has sent me something like 30% involved with members we've had over the years. We've had a couple thousand members and he just sends people over, which has been amazing.

(01:32:33):
And so we have product councils for VPs and CPOs. We also have an associate council program for ICs and new managers. We started that a couple of years ago. It focuses on women and people of color and LGBTQ, but not exclusively. So you can be a white guy who's straight, whatever, and you're a product manager. What we care most about is if you're willing to ask for help, and you're really committed to being there for each other and being a part of this community and activity. And so that's what I've been doing for years. And I have a great team and amazing... Teresa Torres was one of the moderators of our private councils, by the way, and great friend, and been on the podcast here. Gino, obviously great friend of yours. She asked me to really emphasize asking for help and share some of the stories that I did. She's just been such an important part of my life. I can't say enough about her.

(01:33:28):
We've got those and we have CEO groups and we have [inaudible 01:33:31]. That's my day job. That's sort of what pays the bills and I've been doing for 20 plus years now. But then I also have a series of other learning communities. I'm one of these, I read. If you asked me, "If you had one job title, what would it be?" Reader. I read, Lenny. Books are machines to think with. Books are machines to think with. And I'm on a campaign to get more people reading more because... And product leaders need to read more. I have a whole bunch of book recommendations on my Lenny page, by the way, that are for product leaders, and we can talk about a few of those. But I also run something called the Reading Odyssey, which is a partnership between scholars and readers at Harvard, Cambridge, for lifelong learning and curiosity.

(01:34:22):
I run the World Business Reading Group for high school students. It's a high school business literacy. Not financial literacy, business literacy program based on the philosophy of Warren Buffett and Charlie Mugger. And taught by really senior executives, like partners at venture capital firms, hedge funds. And I'm an investor. We have this amazing faculty. It's pro bono. We're all volunteer. We have a small charge for middle class families and it's free for anyone who can't afford it. And it's a summer program and it's going gangbusters. What else?

(01:34:54):
Oh, Slow Art Day. So one of the things I teach people is that you need to develop mentors. Most people do not have mentors, Lenny. 95% of the people in my community of senior product leaders do not have mentors. And mentorship programs, it's like the typewriter. Our parents or grandparents have them, but we don't have them. The companies don't offer. One of the ways that everyone listening to this podcast today can get a mentor, you can get what I call a dead or distant mentor. Warren Buffett is my mentor, he just doesn't know it, which is great. I don't have to listen to everything he says and he doesn't have to take my calls. Steve Jobs is my mentor. And when I talk about mentor, I don't mean just, hey, I'm a fan, or I like the products, or I read the biography. I mean really study.

(01:35:46):
If you really study Jobs, you have to come to 1997. He's interim CEO. So he was fired from Apple in '84, '85. Actually, after the Mac came out. He wandered the wilderness for 10 years. He created a company called Next, which wasn't next. And then in '95, '96, Apple buys the operating system from Next, and the company is in really bad shape and makes Steve the interim CEO. Interim. They wouldn't give him the full title. They're like, "Ah, the business is so terrible. You're going to destroy it anyway. Whatever. You'll be interim." And he does a bunch of stuff, but he gives a talk in 1997. He's got tattered hole jeans. There's 300 people at the developers conference. They all are pissed off. And he gets up there and he says, "You have to start with the customer, not with the technology." And that's what we're doing it at. People talk about that customer. If you really study Jobs, that's what he did.

(01:36:49):
And what does that mean? I can tell you there's a lot of product people, Lenny, who talk about customer and don't really focus. And if you really study that moment and study what Jobs did, it can inform your decisions and actions. So one of the things that Jobs also talked about was the power of art and that everyone needs to go to art museums and that you need to be inspired and it will help you think about design if you create great products. So I started a company, something called Slow Art Day, which has now been in 1,500 museums around the world. It teaches people how to slow down and look. And especially for Lenny's podcast, I am making free both the teacher materials, the leader materials, and the participant materials so that all of your podcast listeners who are running product teams can go to a local museum and do an offsite and develop more visual literacy, empathy, connection with each other, and an understanding of art that will help them be better [inaudible 01:37:46].

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:46):
That is amazing. I'm going to try to do that myself.

Phyl Terry (01:37:49):
It will blow your mind.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:51):
So you mentioned Marty Cagan and Christian a couple times, and Marty Cagan described Chris as the most interesting person in the world. I feel like you deserve that title. You're doing so much and so much good and so much variety of things. It's really impressive. And the amount of impact you're having is wild.

Phyl Terry (01:38:10):
Thank you. It really means a lot.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:38:14):
I'm just saying it how it is. I'm really thankful you've shared so much wisdom on this podcast with everyone. I think that's going to help so many people. We're also not done yet. We've reached our very exciting lightning round. Phyl, are you ready?

Phyl Terry (01:38:28):
I am ready for lightning round.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:38:31):
Here we go. And you've talked about books. I imagine you're going to have an answer for this.

Phyl Terry (01:38:35):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:38:35):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Phyl Terry (01:38:38):
Of course, I've recommended hundreds, but right now what I recommend is Creative Destruction, and I'm going to give your listeners the link to the right book, it's by a group of French economists. It's a little bit academic, but it's so important. It's so important for product people to understand. It is so important. More jobs get created because of creative destruction. There's not net job loss. There's more jobs created. AI is going to create more jobs, not destroy. Everybody got that wrong. Almost everybody, except the people who understood creative destruction. But you have to be close to the frontier. That's where the job creation happens. And product people, you got to be close to the frontier. You got to do whatever you can. If you're at a company that's not close to the frontier, do stuff at... I was working at Moody's Investor Service and I built one of the first 2,000 websites back in the early nineties, Lenny. I was doing all this stuff outside of work. That was bringing me closer to the technical frontier and was changing my candidate market fit. So I recommend that book.

(01:39:36):
I also, of course, I recommend Marty's books. Now, I want to just say again, I don't want you to just read Marty's books, listen to his podcast, the great interview you guys did here at Lenny's. I want you to read and reread those books as if he's your mentor. And rereading is important, Lenny. And people say, "Oh, I listened two or three times speed on the audiobook." You are not going to have that deeply inform your decision making. Now what I'll do is I'll read a book and then I'll listen to it as a reinforcement, or I'll read it and listen to it at the same time. For the important books, Lenny, you got to read them more. And Marty's books are important.

(01:40:20):
The last book I'll recommend is The Manual. It's a short introduction to Stoicism. People misunderstand Stoicism. They think Stoicism means repressing your feelings. That is not what Stoicism means. It means understanding and accepting your feelings, but not necessarily always being driven by them. Incorporating them. Your feelings are an important part of your decision-making system, but they shouldn't rule you. And it's a really important book. I have driven a lot of sales with that book because I really hammer it home in my book. So if you go on to Amazon, you'll see the book that's most bought along with my book is that book, right? I have other books I recommend that are on my website, but those are two or three.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:40:58):
Amazing. On the listening to things at fast speed, I sometimes meet folks that listen to the podcast and they're like, "Oh, this is what you sound like at regular speed, because I just listen to every podcast fast." Second question, do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Phyl Terry (01:41:16):
So there's a great new TV show on Apple TV that is not getting the audience that it deserves. It's called Las Azules. Las Azules, the Blues. It's about the first women recruited onto the police force of Mexico City in 1971 or 2. Of course it speaks to me because 1970s, these are women and my mom and how close I was to her and what I... I saw the world through my mother's eyes, Lenny, and it really shaped me. It's a great TV show. I love that. Of course, I love the show that I've always recommended and everyone's now seen it, I hope. If they haven't, it's been out for a while, but it's... Oh, the name just escaped me. The American football coach who goes to England and becomes a soccer coach.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:42:10):
Oh yeah.

Phyl Terry (01:42:11):
How can I forget this? I've recommended it so many times.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:42:13):
That's the guy's name, right? The character, Ted Lasso.

Phyl Terry (01:42:15):
Ted Lasso, Ted Lasso. Thank you. So the kindness in there. And by the way, a great message around asking for help in that. The last thing I'll say, of course, is the Inside Out movies. The second one came out this summer. Just the way it's normalizing emotions, again, and helping us start to talk about emotions. Really love that. Okay, what else in the lightning round?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:42:36):
So there's this next question that I cut. I moved to other questions, but I wanted to bring it back with you. It's about your favorite interview question. You help a lot of people interview and interview better. I'm curious if there's a question that you've heard that you really like.

Phyl Terry (01:42:50):
If you are interviewee for a job and it's a senior level job, I want you to ask, "Tell me about a time that you, the company, brought in a senior level person and it failed, and why?" Because they often fail bringing senior level people into companies. So ask them what happened and why, and figure out how can we avoid that outcome. And hopefully they're going to have a good answer. I have a whole bunch of questions in my book, but I love that one.

(01:43:19):
I also love, if you are on the other side, if you're hiring and you want to check references, I have the most amazing question. The most amazing question. By the way, this is the best thing I learned in my two years at the Harvard Business School. I learned this in my running and growing a small business class. It's like the best thing I've learned. It is, if you want to get references, what you do is you want to leave a voicemail or you could send an email, whatever. And you want to say, "I'm about to hire Lenny. Okay, if it would be a huge mistake if I didn't bring him on, if you think he's amazing, then call me back. Otherwise, don't bother." And that gets around all the legal blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and it's just it cuts through. I love that question. I don't know if that resonates with you as much.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:44:10):
Yeah. So is the idea if you don't hear back from them, they're not necessarily amazing?

Phyl Terry (01:44:14):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:44:15):
Wow.

Phyl Terry (01:44:16):
Yeah. You're leaving that space there. And by the way, I love doing that for back channel. When you start a job or when you are accepting an offer or interviewing, I want you to back channel that boss a little. Talk to people who've worked with them, if you can. Use your network and ask them, "Would you work with this person?" And even say, "Hey, if I called you and told me I was interviewing with this guy and you should only call me back if you thought I should take the job, would you have called me back?" You'd know, and so you can do a form of it that way.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:44:47):
Do you have a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love, whether it's like a digital app?

Phyl Terry (01:44:50):
I'm going to give you a very different kind of answer than I would normally give, but I'm hoping you and your community will appreciate this. So I did recently discover it, but I'm going to talk about a book, Lenny. So 25 years ago, a guy named Robert Strassler, who was a business guy, he started teaching at a special high school for kids who were dropping out. And he was teaching them some of the classics like Herodotus and Thucydides, expert, and they couldn't get it. And the books were terrible because there was no context, so he spent 10 years and he reinvented the format of a history book. There are 120 maps. Each of them he drew specifically, and they're only relevant to the previous one or two pages. Okay? There's a margin summary in plain English for each paragraph describing what that paragraph just said. He got the top scholars in the world to write two-page appendices on their expert topic, things they've written hundreds of books about, hundreds of pages about, you have to do it in two pages.

(01:45:58):
And by the way, the publishing world wouldn't back it. He funded it himself. He hand drew the maps. He spent two years creating a concept index, not just a keyword index. And it's just blown apart the whole industry. Completely disrupted. He sold hundreds of thousands of copies of these books. They are a masterpiece, Lenny. They have Landmark Series. Landmark. They have new ones coming out. Every product person, in my opinion, should go look at this and look at the product design of this book. It is masterful and it teaches you a lot about usability and the reader experience. I want product people, Lenny, to get out, who are doing digital work to get out of the digital world and look at products outside the digital world for inspiration and thinking, because I don't want you all looking at the same stuff. You're going to just create the same stuff. I love tools like Calendly, which I just didn't... I've been using for years, but no one could get it right until they got it right. Those are great. How's that for an answer?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:47:06):
That's incredible. So what is it called again and where do you find it?

Phyl Terry (01:47:09):
And it's going to be on the Lenny page. If you get on [inaudible 01:47:12], if you do Landmark Herodotus or Landmark Thucydides, either one, you'll get there. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:47:19):
Oh my God. Sounds incredible. Great choice. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often like to think back to and share with friends or family?

Phyl Terry (01:47:27):
Of course, we talked about asking for help, and I say that a lot. But I also love, and I said this earlier, books are machines to think with. And as product people, Marty and I talk about this all the time, we have to be thinking. And I coach people all the time, how can I think more? You've got to read more because books are machines to think with. Good books. There's a lot of bad books in the business world, but good books. Good books, thoughtful books. Books that'll help and shift your perspective, whether it's history or science. I read widely, and I want you to do the same. Books are machines to think with. That's probably one of my greatest lines.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:48:09):
Final question. Usually I try to make this fun, but I want it to come back to something practical for people. So to leave people with something they could do this week to help them find a job or help them improve the chances of finding their job, what's something you'd recommend?

Phyl Terry (01:48:22):
I have one very simple thing. Go to Phyl.org and sign up for a Job Search Council.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:48:28):
There we go.

Phyl Terry (01:48:29):
It's free and it will transform your search. Is it a good [inaudible 01:48:34] answer, or were you looking for something different, Lenny?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:48:36):
Beautiful answer. It also is exactly what I would've asked you next, which is just where do people go find the stuff you're up to and learn more about things that we've been talking about?

Phyl Terry (01:48:44):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:48:44):
There's phyl.org and then there's phyl.org/lenny, which has a lot of the templates and things that you referenced.

Phyl Terry (01:48:49):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:48:50):
Amazing. Final actual question, how can listeners be useful to you?

Phyl Terry (01:48:54):
That's such a lovely question. So on the Lenny page at Phyl.org, I outline some ways. We're raising $100,000 right now to build a platform for job seekers. It will remain free for job seekers. Part of what I'm doing is I'm doing a speaking tour on AI, and I'm taking all my speaking fees and putting it to this, but people can also make a donation just to that. They can also volunteer. And we're looking for, if anyone's a Salesforce admin, I'd love to have you volunteer with us. If any of you have really good PHP experience, let me know. If any of you are really good at Typeform or Formsite, which is a tool I don't like much. By the way, if anyone from Formsite is listening, your tool sucks. You need to really improve the product there. There's a lot of different ways that you can help, but those are some of the things.

(01:49:48):
But most importantly, tell someone who you know in your life who's looking for a job, that there's a community here for you that's free, that has all these smart tools and resources and people who are genuinely here to help you and who will help transform your search in this very hard moment. People ask me, "Is this good in the hard moment?" This is born out of hard moments.

(01:50:12):
In a great job market, it's easier to say, "Oh, I can just grab a job." You need to be more thoughtful in the down market. Now, I think you should be in the up market too. This is our moment to be there for people. This is what. And I would love, so many people still don't know this, Lenny, we want millions of people. We want to help millions of people. We have 20,000 hours of volunteer time already. We want to have millions of hours of volunteer time. We are changing something about the way capitalism works with this community. We are changing this negative consequence of creative destruction that people have just been left to fend with on their own.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:50:54):
Well, I'm excited to be helping spread the word. Phyl, you're wonderful. Thank you so much for being here.

Phyl Terry (01:51:00):
Thank you, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:51:02):
Bye, everyone.

Phyl Terry (01:51:02):
Bye. Thank you, everybody.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:51:06):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Sam Lessin (00:00:00):
I just feel like no one's being honest in teaching founders this. Be early. Don't order the most expensive thing on the menu. For a video call, an appropriate background. Don't smell like shit. Tell me why you decided to spend time teaching people proper etiquette. You have a lot of really young people.

(00:00:14):
They've been holed up in a room coding. And they show up encouraged by Silicon Valley to be in some way abrasive on purpose. You want to be able to show up in a way where people are like, "Okay, this is someone I can work with and trust." Etiquette is a skill for how to show up in a room with a low heart rate. You're at the Kleiner Perkins holiday party.

(00:00:29):
You have all the venture capitalists in the world and all the CEOs. You're at your first company. You're like, "Oh my God, this is my shot, but I need to convince this person of that and make this connection." It becomes very transactional. If you show up like a little energizer bunny, you're going to scare one off.

(00:00:44):
You're going to project totally the wrong vibe. This isn't your one shot. You'll have other opportunities. You kind of want to show up with the self-confidence and the calm of abundance. This is part of the story. This is not the entire story.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:58):
Today, my guest is Sam Lessin, partner at Slow Ventures, previous VP of Product at Facebook and two-time founder. This is an unconventional episode that may surprise you in how interesting and useful it is to your life. I asked Sam to come on the pod and talk about proper etiquette.

(00:01:15):
You'll hear the backstory of how Sam got into this stuff, but this is turning into a big thing for him. He's teaching classes around the world. He published a book on proper etiquette. I love his framing for why etiquette matters, that the goal of learning good etiquette is to show up in a room with a low heart rate. And we cover all kinds of social interactions like introductions, small talk, meals, meetings, and basically all of the most important things you need to know when it comes to etiquette.

(00:01:40):
I personally found these tips really, really useful and I learned a lot from this conversation and from his book. Sam is also hilarious and so fun. And I hope you enjoy this very unique episode. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It helps tremendously. And if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of 19 incredible products, including a year free of Lovable, Replit, Bolt, Gamma, n8n, and Linear, Devin, PostHog, Superhuman, Descript, Wispr Flow, Perplexity, Warp, Granola, Magic Patterns, Raycast, ChatPRD, Mobbin and Stripe Atlas.

(00:02:12):
Head on over to Lennysnewsletter.com and click Product Pass. With that, I bring you Sam Lessin after a short word from our sponsors. This episode is brought to you by 10Web, the company that pioneered AI website building before ChatGPT. In the last three years, over two million websites have been generated with 10Web's vibe coding platform. 10Web's vibe coding platform is a powerful way to build websites.

(00:02:36):
Think of it as Lovable for WordPress, front-end and back-end. Users can build any website at any complexity, e-commerce, portfolios, information websites, blogs, and it comes with the WordPress admin panel and thousands of ready to use plugins. 10Web also offers website generation as an API as a service for SaaS companies, marketplaces, hosting providers, MSPs and agencies.

(00:03:00):
SaaS companies can embed it via API so that users can launch AI generated sites directly inside of their platform, connected to their own data. Agencies and MSPs can get a white label dashboard to manage clients and resell under their brand. Hosting providers can self-host the API builder on their own infrastructure. Check it out at 10web.io/lenny and use code Lenny for exclusive free credits and 30% off API or white labeled solutions. That's the number 10web.io/lenny, vibe coding platform as an API.

(00:03:36):
Today's episode is brought to you by DX, the developer intelligence platform designed by leading researchers. To thrive in the AI era, organizations need to adapt quickly, but many organization leaders struggle to answer pressing questions like, which tools are working? How are they being used? What's actually driving value? DX provides the data and insights that leaders need to navigate this shift.

(00:03:59):
With DX, companies like Dropbox, booking.com, Adyen, and Intercom get a deep understanding of how AI is providing value to their developers and what impact AI is having on engineering productivity. To learn more, visit DX's website at getdx.com/lenny, that's getdx.com/lenny. Sam, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Sam Lessin (00:04:26):
Blessed to be here. I'm excited to have the conversation.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:29):
This is going to be a very different kind of conversation. I suspect this is actually going to be really, really useful and really, really interesting to a lot of people.

Sam Lessin (00:04:39):
Useful and interesting. That's so unlikely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:41):
That's the Venn diagram that we aim for. I also think it's going to just be a lot of fun. So I really appreciate you doing this. I want to give you the opportunity to set the stage for why we're chatting through this. Just tell me why you decided to spend time on teaching people proper etiquette and why should people pay attention to this? Why is this important?

Sam Lessin (00:05:01):
I really enjoy things at the intersection of hilarious and useful. You kind of need both. And hilarious just because you should have fun in life. We should be working on things that are fun and interesting. Also, candidly, if we're being more honest about it's very hard to cut through the noise these days. So you need humor is a great way to cut through it, but humor just for the sake of being funny is not that useful.

(00:05:25):
There has to be a deeper truth to it. And so with this etiquette thing that we've gotten into, it started as many things to do with a tweet. It got escalated into an event. It's gotten escalated into a book and a bunch of other stuff. I kind of believe that you should always ... There you go. You got it with you. I've got my coffee too.

(00:05:42):
There's a rule, you always want to just double down in life. And so I'd say why etiquette? Look, there's a serious real narrative to why etiquette matters in 2025 for founders, almost 2026. One, we talk about software getting commoditized. We talk about all this fearmongering and scared people feel about Silicon Valley and AI and all the things that are going on.

(00:06:06):
The net is if you want to do business and you want to do business and build great partnerships with team members, with companies you want to do business with, almost like with anyone, the reality is etiquette ironically matters a lot. There is a deep truth to this. Especially when you're asking people to trust you with their data, trust you with their business. And when technology is no longer some cute sideshow, but it's a major deal, people are worried about losing their jobs.

(00:06:29):
Understanding how to meet people, where they're at, build trust, mirror kind of expected behaviors. These are all tools. And so that's the deep truth. The shallow truth is it's kind of funny to teach Silicon Valley people etiquette. The whole narrative for so long has been, none of this matters, just focus on your product.

(00:06:48):
Saying, "Well, actually it does matter." And I'm wearing a T-shirt. I'm not exactly known as the most high etiquette personal, but I do know the rules, and I think it's fun and funny as well. And I think those things are both important.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:02):
I want to get into the actual rules, but just to follow that thread, you had a really great line somewhere that etiquette is almost a skill for how to show up in a room with a low heart rate.

Sam Lessin (00:07:10):
Yeah, this is the thing I think about a lot. Again, again, you and I are now old people, right? But you're young.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:11):
I feel that.

Sam Lessin (00:07:18):
You feel it in your bones. It's like you're young, right? You're at the Kleiner Perkins holiday party. You have all the venture capitalists in the world and all the CEOs. You're at your first company, you're young, maybe you're from a different country. You're like, "Oh my God, this is my shot. I have all these people I need to talk to and I need to convince this person of that and make this connection."

(00:07:39):
It becomes very transactional. If you show up like a little energizer bunny, you're going to scare one off. You're going to project totally the wrong vibe, but I can understand why you'd be a high intensity moment in a lot of ways. I think understanding how to show up, take a beat, come in with a mindset, not of scarcity, but of abundance, understand how to give more than you take, understand how to build a relationship, not collect business cards.

(00:08:05):
These are things that actually serve you massively well. And I just feel like no one's being honest and teaching founders this. Instead, they're saying, "Oh no, all that matters is your product." I'm like, "The product does matter a lot, but if understanding these rules can be the difference between doing really well and missing a business deal, if you show up with too high a heart rate and you burn a bunch of mild relationship opportunities, I don't know why you wouldn't want these skills."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:30):
Yeah. Is one way to think about it. You can be successful not doing any of this, not knowing any of this. You're hurting yourself, you're making it harder.

Sam Lessin (00:08:39):
Yeah, I think you're creating an unnecessary uphill battery for yourself. I'd also say that, look, this goes back to technical differentiation where things are at. It is true that if you bring manna from heaven, you invent something that is literally the next Google or whatever out of pure thought that sometimes none of this stuff matters, that's it. It's literally like that happens. It happens very, very rarely, but it does happen.

(00:09:07):
It is not what 99.9% of startups are doing. But if you have that, yeah, you basically can get away with anything. It is true. That doesn't mean you should. You shouldn't be a jerk. And candidly, over the course of history, you need to work with great people and you'll be more successful if you show up with good etiquette and rules and context. But there are ways in which that can trump all. It's just candidly not the experience of 99.9% of startups.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:30):
Awesome. Okay. So let's get into it. You divided this book into about 10 categories, 10 social situations is one way to describe it. So let's just go through each one and just give us some pieces of advice.

Sam Lessin (00:09:41):
Sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:41):
And something I didn't mention, the reason I'm excited to do this, the reason I reached out to you to do this, this wasn't you pitching me, "Hey, let's talk about this in your podcast." Is I was like, "Wow, this is really interesting. I did not know these things."

Sam Lessin (00:09:51):
Cheers. Again, I think the thing for us is I'm kind of a ship early, ship often guy. So V1, you should buy it now and study it because it's good and it's going to be a limited edition. The funny part about doing this is people come back with a bunch of other things we should cover. So I suspect that eventually this will evolve beyond it, but I think we're starting with some good stuff.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:10):
Let's do it. Okay. So introductions and entering a room.

Sam Lessin (00:10:13):
Yeah. Be early. That's the first one. Again, I say this as someone who, I'll be honest, again, hypocrisy ... I live with hypocrisy. I'm frequently not early, but you should be early. And you don't need to be half an hour early. That's a little weird, but making sure that you have some buffer time so that, again, think about low heart rate. If you come in racing in the room five minutes late, your heart rate is up.

(00:10:37):
If you come in, you had a second to take a beat in the waiting room. They kept you waiting. That's the dynamic I think you want to cultivate. Now, if you're not late, I'm sorry, if you're not early, just apologize. It doesn't need to be like a 511, again, it goes back to this heart rate thing. You could just apologize simply and move on. I've seen people screw this up so many times when they come and flustered and all over the place, you're like, "It's okay. We understand."

(00:11:02):
So I think that's another really kind of obvious one, but an important one. Something I've seen, I'll go for a few others that we talk a bunch about in kind of is, look, you want to have a strong handshake, firm, don't crush the person's hand. Again, this is not practice on your friends. You want to repeat names back is a really, really valuable thing to think about when you're meeting someone and say, "Hey, Lenny, it's great to meet you." Why? It shows that you're actually trying to remember the person's name.

(00:11:31):
A lot of times people meet a lot of people. If it's like, nice to meet you, you move on. First, it's going to be harder for you to remember the person's name. Second, it actually shows you're meeting them and making an effort to actually connect and say, "Okay, I'm trying to focus on you. You're not just a number to me." You're not just a potential check for whatever it's going to be. So there's a bunch of things like that. I'm kind of curious. We can go through a bunch more, but those are some of the ones I would think about.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:52):
One that I loved was if somebody else is late, do not make them feel bad and do the opposite of what you're doing, of what you do.

Sam Lessin (00:11:59):
100%. And I think this is like, I've seen this with entrepreneurs. And I get I'm a VC. I do get scheduled in 30 minute chunks back to back all the time, especially on Zoom. Guess what? I am frequently late. I don't feel good about it, but it happens. And a lot of times, founders, most of the time I'd say founders know that if I'm late, I will always apologize. I'll try to email them ahead, et cetera, but then it is what it is and we kind of get right into it.

(00:12:26):
Every once in a while, you'll have some founder who is super indignant about it. It's fine if you feel that way, but it's really not very productive to make a big deal out of it. If this is a deal breaker for you that I was a few minutes late, then now I feel like I'm wasting the next 25 minutes of my meeting time because this is going to be the wrong dynamic, and so I just think there's like, don't harp on it. It's okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:50):
Yeah, and also some advice on eye contact. Share that one.

Sam Lessin (00:12:54):
It's really important. Again, I think the thing I keep in mind is especially in an age where everyone's used to being in front of computer screens and looking at six different windows at the same time. Again, people are taking their time to meet with you or at a party, they're taking their time to listen to you. And it's just a matter of respect to be like, "I'm actually here in this conversation. I'm not off on my screen. I'm not glancing around the room."

(00:13:17):
Now look, there are some people, we all know this who are literally quite neurodivergent and that's very hard for them. That happens, and a lot of founders have neurodivergence in some ways. So there is grace in this to a point, but it's a thing you should make at least an effort. I think one of the most important things about all this stuff is what matters in some ways is the signaling of the effort as much as the actual thing. I think it's a really big overarching theory. So it's like, "Look, if you have trouble with this, but you're really trying, that goes a long way." Versus just being like, whatever.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:48):
Maybe a final tip there is around partners, introducing the partner, saying hi to their partner, share that one.

Sam Lessin (00:13:53):
Yeah. So look, this happens all the time. And again, in the spirit of, I'm not permitted at this either, if you're with your partner, introduce them first. Bring them into the conversation. One great trick we talk about in the book, which I really unfortunately use all the time is there's this whole thing. Let's pretend you're with your partner or with someone who's a friend. It doesn't have to be romantic partner, whoever you're with. You're going to forget someone's name, and what you really should do is-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:18):
All the time. All the time.

Sam Lessin (00:14:19):
You get the friend's name and that's what you're supposed to do. The etiquette is you say, "Lenny, please meet my wife, Jessica." And that kind of thing. Now here's the thing, this is where you start betting rules. What if I don't remember your name? If you have your partner with you, you can flip it around and say, "Jessica, I want to introduce you." And then you can kind of figure out how to frame it up so that you then Lenny extends your hand and say, "It's really nice to meet you, Jessica." And you get to pick up the name again or things like that. So there are some-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:46):
You let it hang, that's the craziest-

Sam Lessin (00:14:47):
... which by the way-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:48):
I love that.

Sam Lessin (00:14:48):
It's a great example of the fact that if you're really in tune socially, you kind of know what's going on. You know what I mean? You're not an idiot. You know, "Oh, what is proper? What this person is doing?" There's a gap between it. There's a reason. The reason is, but it's at least enough plausible deniability of semi-bad etiquette that leverages the social situation to be a better etiquette, that it's a useful thing to think about as a small queue.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:14):
I'm so bad at remembering names. I think I have a medical issue, so I just can't remember names. So this tip alone is so good. And just to reinforce it, so there's almost two ways to do this is what you're describing. Either it's like my wife's name's Michelle, so it's like, "Hey, Michelle. I meet my wife, Michelle." And then they're like, "Oh, I'm Bob. Nice to meet you, Michelle." Or make it a little more awkward of just, "Michelle, meet and then let it hang." Is that the thing?

Sam Lessin (00:15:41):
"Michelle, I want to introduce you." Or something like that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:43):
I want to introduce you. Okay.

Sam Lessin (00:15:44):
Something like that, or I want to introduce you to Michelle. You look at them in the eye, and then your wife would be like, "Hi, I'm Michelle. Remind me your name or it's nice to meet you." Or whatever it ends up being. Look, I also, for what it's worth, I actually have such a clinical problem on name face recognition that actually runs in our family. I have this whole backstory, which is part ... and I worked at Facebook for a long time, was really into it early on.

(00:16:06):
No kidding. I think part of my early attraction to the platform was it was the first time you walk around college and you're like, "I know these people, I just don't remember their names." You're like, "Oh my God, there's a resource I can study." And this was a very valuable social thing for me. So I'm with you. I have the same problem I think a lot of people do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:21):
Okay. Let's move on to conversations. Give us some tips.

Sam Lessin (00:16:25):
So I mean, on the conversation front, I think the key again is to welcome people into the conversation. Consider it, especially you see this happen sometimes, especially when there's weird power dynamics at play. You'll see some famous VC or founder walk into the room, and then some young startup person will waylay them and almost flock them off and they're really excited to talk to this person, but you're like, there's a bunch of people around and the more you can be inclusive and low heart rate, it's not a scarcity mindset, it's an abundance mindset.

(00:16:58):
I think that's kind of the tone to think about in terms of what a conversation is and how to show up in a room and meet with people. Another really big one we harp on a lot in the book in a bunch of the panels is ask questions, but there's a limit. So asking questions is great.

(00:17:16):
You're coming in and says, "Hey, it's nice to meet you. Let me give you my four-minute startup spiel and everything I'm into da-da-da." So self-centered. It kind of misses the point that a conversation is a give and a get and it should be an exchange. And so when you go in with a mindset of I should ask questions, that's great.

(00:17:32):
There is doing it too much, which is when it's done in a forced way, sometimes I feel this, you'll meet someone and you feel like it's the inquisition or all they're trying to do is extract information to you and giving you nothing in return. This happens sometimes. And so I think, again, this is about balance, this is about low heart rate. I do think questions are a great tool to engage someone, but don't make it six questions in a row and make sure there's always in some ways a give to get.

(00:18:00):
If you can come in, the best conversations are coming, someone comes in and gives you an idea or has a point or sparks something, then it's like a game of ping pong, then you can kind of react to and it goes back and forth where there's openness and they're playing with you, not playing single player is almost the way I would think about it in a conversation.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:17):
So the tip here. So it's basically indexed towards asking questions, but not 100% you asking questions?

Sam Lessin (00:18:22):
Yeah, consider almost, put it this way, imagine you're playing ping pong or tennis or whatever you want. Hit the ball back, right? That's the question and they'll hit it back to you and then you hit it back to them. That's kind of what the flow should be. If you hit 10 balls at them in a row, you know what I mean? Or that's kind of not the vibe you want to go for.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:41):
Yep. Awesome.

Sam Lessin (00:18:42):
Look, we talk a lot about matching vocabulary. You're going to meet a lot of different people. You want to make people feel good and welcome. I'm not saying that you should walk into a room and start talking and jibe, but I am saying if you're speaking to a university professor versus a 12-year-old, if they're using a certain level of vocabulary words, again, the point is to meet people where they're at in a way that makes them feel relaxed and good, not try to mirror them, if that makes sense. But there is a subtlety that I think really matters to it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:16):
Cool. There's a few more I'll point out real quick. Connecting to this idea of asking questions, not trying to give your whole spiel constantly, this idea of leaving them wanting more.

Sam Lessin (00:19:25):
Yes. This is important. I think in the end of the day, most interactions, let's put it you meet someone you're really interested in or whatever. If we're being transactional about it, what's the real goal? The real goal is to leave people in a position where they're like, "Wow, that was a really interesting person. I'd love to hear from them again or meet with them again." Or maybe even better, every once in a while this will happen.

(00:19:45):
It's like, "Wow, that's a really interesting person or idea." The person walks across the room someone else is like, "Hey, you really should talk to Lenny. Shout to Sam." You want to leave them being like, "That's interesting and I like to continue this or expand it." Not, "I just heard this entire person's life story, I never need to talk to them again." And so I do think there's, again, leave them wanting more, I think is important. And that is partially about knowing when to excuse yourself gracefully as much as it is about when to enter.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:12):
And again, this comes back to this idea of abundance. This isn't your one shot. You'll have other opportunities. People don't want to feel like you're just on them just trying to-

Sam Lessin (00:20:20):
I've had this conversation with so many, and I think it's a uniquely American and honestly a uniquely Silicon Valley thing. I'll go so far to say that, which is, look, we're used to, especially if you're young and these are big opportunities or big moments, people are kind of used to this environment of scarcity. It reminds me of the Eminem song when he talks about, I have one shot, one opportunity.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:43):
I think it's ... Oh, Eminem. Yeah, yeah, yeah.

Sam Lessin (00:20:44):
It's a great song. It's a great song. It's great beat. Every once in a while before a big presentation, you got to listen to it and pump yourself up. But actually, again, in terms of putting people at ease and building relationships and etiquette, even if in your heart of hearts, you're like, "This really is my one shot."

(00:21:00):
You kind of want to show up with the self-confidence and the calm of abundance, being like, "This is not going to be my only opportunity. This is an opportunity. I'm excited to be here. I'm engaged. This is part of the story. This is not the entire story." And I think if you kind of remind yourself of that, you remind yourself that it's okay to not know everything, you keep focusing on low heart rate, engagement, eye contact, you get so much of the way there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:26):
You also have a tip about how to handle famous people that you might meet.

Sam Lessin (00:21:29):
There's so many ways. There's a bunch of tips about, I think, generally famous people, but I think there's this thing which is not being sycophantic is what I basically say, but also not being ridiculous is almost the way I would frame it in this conversation, which the ridiculous is if you go up to Mark Zuckerberg and everyone knows what he looks like and who he is and you're like, "Hi, I'm Sam. And who are you?" You're like, "What are you doing?" It's ridiculous.

(00:21:55):
On the other hand, going up and being like, "You're the most important person I've ever met." Is wrong. And so there's a way to, again, it's about grace as much as anything else and recognizing that they're people. And again, you're playing an iterative game and the best thing you can do is say, as much as it might actually be, this is not my only opportunity to meet Mark.

(00:22:14):
And in an ideal world when I walk away, I'm like, "That was a pretty nice person. Maybe I want to talk to them again." Now going up and being like, "I need your email address and phone number." It's like, no, let him offer it. That type of stuff I think matters.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:28):
Maybe one last tip is you actually start with this one of this line of great to see you when you meet someone versus nice to see you again.

Sam Lessin (00:22:34):
Well, again, Lenny, you and I probably use this all the time, I bet, because I honestly, again, we go by name, face, whatever. It's really difficult social situation to put someone in. It just think about from their perspective. If you go up to someone and say, "Hey, it's really great. It's great to meet you. " And you're like, "We've met five times."

(00:22:51):
It's quite embarrassing and for them, for you, for everyone. And so the more I love ... In fact, my wife of many, many years who have data since college has a really funny story about this, which is the first time right before we started dating, I went up to her and I basically did a nice to see you line and I very clearly couldn't remember if we had met before and we had and she remembered. And so for me, this is an important one to keep in mind.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:17):
My wife is constantly making fun of me of saying like, "Oh." And not knowing if I've met someone before not she's like, how can you ... I don't know what to do with you. So that's a great one. So the line there is great to see you because it works whether you meet them or not.

Sam Lessin (00:23:30):
Yeah. And again, it's one of those things where here's the thing. People aren't dumb. If you go around saying nice to see you to everyone, they're like, there's a small percent chance this person doesn't remind me who I ... remember who I am. And there are other ways or cute, but that's okay. That's part of the etiquette dance to some degree is like, that's fine. What's not fine is it's so nice to meet you and we've met six times, right?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:54):
Yep. Okay. Let's talk hygiene. There's a couple there that stood out to me. Tell me if I'm missing any that you think are really important. One is just subtle fragrance.

Sam Lessin (00:24:04):
Yeah, don't smell like shit. It's like don't overpower it. You shouldn't smell like you just doused yourself in perfume or cologne or whatever it is, but you also shouldn't smell bad. And it's again, your scent should not be noticeable is almost the way I would put it in any direction. There's no advantage to that is basically what I would say.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:27):
By the way, this is a good question. Does this advice apply both equally to men and women? Is there anything that as maybe as we go through it?

Sam Lessin (00:24:33):
So it's an interesting question. I think broadly in this book, the answer is broadly yes. I will say that there is probably in January or February going to be a, what we've internally been calling the fem etiquette course because my wife and other women have said, "This is good, but there's a bunch of other stuff that women need to know." And so I can't speak to that yet. I think the fragrance one I would say, I don't think you want your fragrance to be memorable for anyone no matter what your gender is.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:59):
Awesome. This is good. Let me take two tangents here real quick. One is, you told a story on your podcast about your kids and the impact this has had on them. Maybe share a story there.

Sam Lessin (00:25:09):
Well, look, here's the funny thing. I literally have realized in doing this, I love my children. They have terrible manners and there's certain things they're not bad at. But broadly speaking, I have an eight-year-old, a six-year-old, and a four-year-old. And I'm like, "Wow, you guys eat like animals. You don't know how to use a forklift knife properly." Again, it's not like at four or six, it's not like stopping them well in life. I'm like, "I can't be the etiquette guy if you guys are eating like." Some of them has been really cute.

(00:25:37):
Others have been really funny. My six-year-old has started standing whenever my wife comes to the table, which is kind of arcane from an etiquette perspective. You can argue about whether it's actually even really etiquette anymore or not. But if you're being really formal when a woman comes to the table, you stand. And it's very funny to have the six-year-old do that. So in our household-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:56):
That is so funny.

Sam Lessin (00:25:56):
Don't judge me yet, but in a year you can judge me on my children's etiquette. Then it might have to be a children's etiquette book.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:01):
So good. I think actually at the end you say that whenever anyone joins you for meal, whether it's a man or woman, you stand up as a modern way of thinking about that.

Sam Lessin (00:26:09):
That might be better is what I would say. I will say that it's an ongoing, somewhat hilarious debate at our dinner table. I'm just trying to get them to not use a fork and knife like animals right now, but we're working on it. We're working on it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:22):
I was just speaking of that. I was just listening to Tyler Cowen had Alison Gopnik on this podcast and she studies kids and her whole thing is how kids learn scientists and she has a whole thing about how they figure out how to use a fork by just experimenting until something works.

Sam Lessin (00:26:36):
Right. To be clear, they're able to feed themselves. It works, but it's like you look at it and it's like, what are you doing?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:43):
Yeah. Okay. The other tangent is you didn't share the class you actually taught to founders already. So maybe share a little bit about this class you taught.

Sam Lessin (00:26:49):
Yeah. So before the book, we did a class specifically initially for YC founders, right? Partially because YC, Garry Tan got very mad about this. So I'm like, well, now I have to do it because that's very funny. But yeah, we basically, we gave them all certificates of completion, but we did a class. We hosted, it was at the Four Seasons. We did some stuff that was fun and a little bit irreverent.

(00:27:10):
We had some very fancy wokes basher people come in with models and show a talk about dress at different types of events and things like that, which was kind of tongue in cheek, but a lot of fun. We also did caviar and wine tasting type stuff. But then we also spent a lot of time focusing on the actual meat of the matter, which is things like how to show up with a low heart rate, how to have an abundance mindset, basic skills, like look people with the eye, shaking hands, how to eat that shows that you're being respectful, things like that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:40):
Why do you think Garry Tan was so mad at it? Is it because he's like, "This is a waste of time, not worth it." Versus just build a thing that's successful?

Sam Lessin (00:27:46):
I don't know. I don't really understand what makes Garry Tan mad and it's fine. But from my perspective, I think he's just like, in some ways, again, to be clear, it's a little tongue in cheek. We're a little bit making fun of the fact that YC Founders do come out a little bit like animals. Having met with many of them, I guess it's not their fault.

(00:28:01):
They're like young kids, they've been holed up in a room coding and that's all they've been thinking about for months or whatever. And so when they show up at your office to pitch you and they get a coffee or something and then they leave it on the table and don't ask you where to put it, it's a subtle sign of not being aware of your broader environment that you may or may not know, but I think it's valuable. Maybe they're like, "This is the wrong thing to focus on." I just think it's funny as much as anything else.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:29):
I love it. Okay. So on the hygiene thing, is there anything else?

Sam Lessin (00:28:30):
I think the hygiene stuff, you should get the book. I think it's fairly obvious hygiene stuff. Don't be covered in schmutz, you know what I mean? Show respect, try to anticipate how the room is going to be dressed and don't massively overdress or underdress. It's like if you show up to a business casual thing in a tuxedo, you're kind of trying to stand out. Don't be memorable from that perspective, but you also don't want to be memorable in the other direction. It's like, "Wow, that person really has no respect for the room."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:59):
This actually, you're getting to the next category, which is dress, which I'm excited about.

Sam Lessin (00:29:02):
Yeah. Look, I got to say, again, in terms of know the rules, but don't always follow them. My first job out of college, I was an associate at a bathing company. This is a consulting firm and there was a business casual and I kind of came up with the snarky realization that there was a minimum dress code, but there wasn't a maximum dress code. So I started in the office as somewhat of a mini rebellion in the consulting firm, what we call tuxedo Tuesdays, where all the associates would wear tuxedos to work, which then meant we didn't have to go to the client meetings because they would never take us to client meetings and tuxedos.

(00:29:32):
So it was like, again, you know the rules to break them, it was fun. But I do think from a dress perspective, again, I think the real thing is look put together, look like you cared, look like you made some effort, but you don't overdo it is basically the upshot of the most simple way to dress, unless you're trying to very intentionally break a rule, which maybe you are, but I think you should do that with a lot of cultural understanding. Let's put it that way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:57):
So here's a couple tips that I love. So one is just dress one Level up as a really simple tip.

Sam Lessin (00:30:01):
It's an easy way to win. Not two, not three, but one.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:05):
And oftentimes you can reduce that. If you have a suit on, you could take off the jacket and you're a little less formal.

Sam Lessin (00:30:11):
Sure. 100%.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:12):
And then you talk about fit of the item versus the brand.

Sam Lessin (00:30:16):
100%. At the end of the day, fit is everything. And I say this, again, you guys, all your listeners have to understand. Part of my joy at doing this is there's some level of hypocrisy in it, which is great. You got to have a little bit of that in your life in terms of how I myself behave sometimes. But look, in the end of the day, a well-fitting $20 shirt is way better than a misfitting $500 shirt.

(00:30:41):
And candidly, it's the same thing. It's like if you're a startup founder, you do want to dress to the level of the room, but you kind of shouldn't show up and you shouldn't have a Rolex. It's very classless, if that makes sense, to show up as a startup founder with a Rolex. Again, it goes back to heart rates, trying too hard. You're not going to trick anyone is the upshot.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:06):
Yeah. This bit of our brand and just expensiveness of the item is such a big one that I think is ... I think people don't realize just it could be a pretty cheap thing that if you get tailored in some small way, it just looks so much better even if it's not the highest quality item.

Sam Lessin (00:31:20):
A hundred percent. Again, I would put differently, think about the average person, not every person in the world, but the average person in the world can look at a suit and be like intuitively that seems like it fits the person who doesn't. Most people can have no idea what things cost. And so in some ways, it's this weird thing where it's like if you show up at a super misfitting but very expensive item, you're like, "What signal are you setting?"

(00:31:47):
It's like, well, you're not very aware culturally. You're not matching the room. You're not showing a lot of sensitivity to the situation and what people actually can prioritize. And it's like, are you trying to impress me because you have a fancy outfit? What are we talking about?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:01):
One other tip you have is if you're not sure the level of dress, just ask.

Sam Lessin (00:32:04):
Yeah, this is a big thing in general, which is I think people are afraid to ask in all sorts of situations down to which forks should I use? Or what's the expect? It is absolutely fine to ask. In fact, if anything, it shows a level of confidence and calm and humility to ask if you don't know. So I actually think this is a great example. There's absolutely nothing wrong with asking about dress, about etiquette, about expectations. Again, it goes back to this whole give to get.

(00:32:35):
If you get someone on the phone and you ask them a hundred questions about etiquette, at a certain point you're like, that's not a pit game of ping pong. But it's totally fine to call and be like, "Hey, what's this going to look like?" And by the way, it's important because in New York versus San Francisco, there's different expectations. People do things differently and your job, you're not expected to know every nuance of every culture you might enter.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:58):
So maybe as a final question in dress, do you have any just, I don't know, tips for dressing well? I know this is a big question that our professionals spend time teaching and charging for.

Sam Lessin (00:33:10):
I think the answer is find someone in your universe who you think dresses well. And again, ask them for help and what makes sense from that perspective. Again, the well-tailored, great. That makes a lot of sense. The basics I can say, yeah, have jeans that are clean and fit you, things like that. But again, when my wife listens to this podcast episode and hears me being asked about specifics of dress, she's going to be chuckling.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:39):
Great. That's a win. Okay. Let's talk about dining. Give us some advice for etiquette during dining.

Sam Lessin (00:33:49):
Tip well. Don't not tip, don't tip badly. Don't be super stingy about, "Okay, who ordered the flambe?" Split bills evenly, make things easy for waiters. In general, it's don't order the most expensive thing on the menu. Does it really matter? Especially to an investor, do they really care? No, they don't really care, but they do notice. And you're like, ah, you are the type of person that is truly insensitive to what things cost, even if it doesn't actually matter, and so I think there are things like that.

(00:34:25):
Same with wine. And then I think, look, in the terms of asking, ideally, don't order first because I think if you see how someone ... Are we doing starters? How long is this meal going to be? There's a lot of times in dining situations you don't know. And the more you let someone else set the tone and then match that tone, the better. You kind of want to go middle of the pack to last, if that makes sense. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:49):
So this isn't a situation if someone takes you out to dinner, like it's a VC, another found, someone invites you to dinner.

Sam Lessin (00:34:50):
Or a partner or whatever it is.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:50):
Yeah. Awesome.

Sam Lessin (00:34:58):
And look, I think I would say in terms of this, which I always think is important is like, look, within reason, always offer to pay. Now, you should be turned down. If you go out with a VC and you put a card down, 99% of the time they'll be like, "I got this. Please, don't worry about it." And that's the right vibe on it. You do not need to do this if it's a $10,000 dinner, if they've ordered a super expensive bottle of wine.

(00:35:25):
There are limits to this, but if you go out to a normal dinner in a normal situation, you don't offer to split it, you just offer to pay for it. And then you should be declined on that, but there is a little bit of a risk there because someone might not decline you and then you kind of are on the hook for it, but that is, I think, the polite thing and the polite way to approach it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:44):
What if they're just a billionaire? I just had dinner with a very successful VC and I did not feel like offering to pay made sense, would you still-

Sam Lessin (00:35:52):
Yeah, I actually would. I think it depends what the dynamic is. If the billionaire ordered a $10,000 bottle of wine, you don't need to offer. If you had a normal meal, I actually think it's great to offer. And they'll almost certainly be like, "Of course not." But I will say, I'll tell you a funny story, which is when you go out with dinner to really fancy people or someone who's like ... There are two interesting dynamics.

(00:36:19):
One is it's actually, I think, especially nice to offer and even sometimes pay because the reality is, if you think about it, they obviously don't care about the money, but no one does that. They're like, "Well, clearly you should pay." And so the more you're like, "Oh no, I'm treating us like this is a conversation and equals and I'd love to offer or just pay as big."

(00:36:38):
The second thing, which is important is if you're, especially if you're out to dinner with someone who's very, very well known, you have to tip like crazy because the problem is, this is one thing, this is not in the book, this is a 201 course. But if you go out and start with someone that are like, okay, they're either known or relatively known known and you're making the gesture of buying it, not because they obviously don't care about the money.

(00:37:01):
It's more like the gesture that's nice that you would offer that. You kind of have to tip the way they would tip and they're going to tip 100% of the bill because it's just the right thing to do. And so I do think if you're going to do that, you really have to tip well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:16):
Got it. Speaking of tipping, my God, I hate tipping so much as a concept. Obviously, people deserve to be paid well and I love that they make more money, but it's just so convoluted and just like, what the hell do I do? I never know.

Sam Lessin (00:37:30):
Tip a lot.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:31):
Tip a lot. Okay.

Sam Lessin (00:37:32):
Just tip a lot. I think 10, 20% is the minimum. If you're out in a situation, I think you kind of want to tip in my mind to the level of no one you're effectively paying for would bat an eye that you're being stingy is the way I would think about it. 20% feels like the minimum. 30% sometimes, more seems a little bit silly, but it is a squirrely topic. And again, let me put it this way. I don't think you want your tip to be memorable is almost way to put it.

(00:38:01):
This is not a thing to focus on. When the person that go out to dinner with thinks back on the dinner a month later, they want to think about the content of the conversation or what the ideas were or the business opportunity, they want to think about, "Oh my God, that guy tipped an incredible amount. What was that?"

(00:38:17):
And by the way, I have stories in my own life where I've been out with people and they've tipped so much that a decade later I remember it. And I'm like, "It's fine. They can afford it." It's cool that they did that for the server, but honestly, the only thing I remember from the night is how much the person tips.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:34):
Okay. But I think if you're extremely rich, you do it. Don't even tell anyone basically, but feel free to do it, obviously.

Sam Lessin (00:38:40):
Sure. Yeah. The tip is not a point. The tip is like everyone should feel good about it. And again, it's about, again, putting people in a sense of ease and comfort and you might not like it and it might not be fair in the world, but people are like, everyone's being taken care of. I can be relaxed about this is kind of what you're going for.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:58):
I recommend your next book after this FamiKit edition is a tipping guide.

Sam Lessin (00:39:05):
A tipping guide. Well, you know what would be funny is there's a great episode of Seinfeld that's all about the tipping calculator. I don't know if you're a Seinfeld guy.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:12):
I love Seinfeld. I don't remember that.

Sam Lessin (00:39:15):
It's a great tipping episode. I feel like you could honestly have a very funny modern LLM app that is only about tipping. Imagine a tipping app where instead of a tipping calculator, you take a picture of the bill, it geolocates where you are, you're like, "This is the situation." And it just tells you what to tip.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:35):
Well, a restaurant is one thing, but then it's like the garbage person, a gardener, the person that-

Sam Lessin (00:39:42):
Especially this time, end of year, at the end of year-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:45):
Yeah, exactly.

Sam Lessin (00:39:45):
I think no one knows how to tip anymore.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:48):
Yeah, some guy that installs the shades in our house. Do I tip?

Sam Lessin (00:39:52):
I don't think you tip that person. Do you tip that person?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:55):
No, I did not because you already paid a bunch of money for this thing.

Sam Lessin (00:39:58):
Yeah, no, I feel like that is weird. I wouldn't tip people like that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:04):
That's why we need this book. You're just going to be a huge hit. What does [inaudible 00:40:08]?

Sam Lessin (00:40:08):
Why are you going to fund it? You want to fund it with me? We should fund an app. Talk about YC companies. If someone pitched me in the terms of funny but real, if someone pitched me the 2026 AI-driven tipping calculator, which gives the social situation and the details and all the things and it's like, this is how much to tip, that is hilarious and probably quite useful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:28):
And probably not venture scale, but I don't care.

Sam Lessin (00:40:31):
You know what? It's 2026, it might be. Everyone has the problem. Everyone globally has the same problem, which is tipping.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:38):
Yeah, just the tokens cost of that.

Sam Lessin (00:40:40):
It actually reminds me, I'm reading one of my sons right now, the third book of Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:45):
Mm-hmm.

Sam Lessin (00:40:46):
And I don't know if you've read this series.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:47):
Yes.

Sam Lessin (00:40:48):
It's important stuff. Do you remember about the, what's Bristomatics Mathics?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:48):
No.

Sam Lessin (00:40:53):
So basically the idea is that after the improbability drive, the way they're able to move across the universe very quickly is the most complicated math in the universe, which is the math of your bill at a restaurant. So I think we're onto something. It's in science fiction.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:10):
Oh, man. What other tip that I just thought of as around dining is you have this tip about sommeliers, give them a sip of your wine if you order something really well.

Sam Lessin (00:41:17):
Yeah. If you want to say nice, that I'm going to be very clear again in terms of, I don't order a very nice wine. No sommelier really cares what I'm drinking. But if you are doing that or you're into it, which is great, again, think about being generous. If they're like, "Oh, I would love to taste that." Have a taste. It's great.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:33):
I love that. I would love to do that. That sounds really nice.

Sam Lessin (00:41:36):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:37):
Yeah. Okay. And one other tip here I wrote down, B for bread, D for drinks. So explain that.

Sam Lessin (00:41:42):
Oh, BD. You just got to look at your hands, right? Bs and Ds for which was your bread plate is kind of the way to think about it. And look, people get this wrong all the time. You sit down at a big table and you're like, ah, which is mine? And you're kind of waiting for someone to pick it up and do the math. I'm like, "Okay, that's my bread." But the B and D is useful. Also, look, forks and knives, just knowing what side they go on, knowing one thing I always drive with me nuts that is related is the knife blade goes in.

(00:42:11):
People, when they put their knives down, the knife blade goes in because you don't want to stab your partner next to you, but it was really funny. I had an entrepreneur, this is not yet a product. People have started sending me videos of them dining or in situations and asked for feedback. And I recently had to give feedback to an entrepreneur who was like, "You did a very nice job eating your soup. Good job. Your napkin should have been in your lap and your knife is pointed the wrong way."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:38):
Okay. Napkin actually. Okay. So napkin in lap.

Sam Lessin (00:42:40):
Napkin in lap. Not in your neck, not off to the side. Napkin in lap.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:46):
I saw someone once had a napkin on just one leg versus both legs. Any opinion there?

Sam Lessin (00:42:51):
I don't think you want your napkin placement to be memorable. My biggest thing is the point about etiquette is that it gets out of the way. It shouldn't be memorable.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:59):
It's like the Kindle. You don't want to think about the technology.

Sam Lessin (00:43:02):
No, let the conversation flow.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:04):
Yeah. Okay. Amazing. Okay. Speaking of conversation, small talk and humor, give us some tips.

Sam Lessin (00:43:10):
Here's the thing. Humor's great. I love humor. It can be overdone. And again, it shouldn't be the point of things. And also, I'd say humor is quite conditional and subtle to the audience. So in the room you're in, dirty jokes. You don't want to tell a dirty joke in the wrong room. But I think the thing about humor is there's this interesting subtlety to why it's so useful in social settings, which is one, it kind of shows you the ultimate mastery of a social situation.

(00:43:40):
If you're able to tell a joke, which is right up to the line or even pushes at one degree to show your own comfort in the space. So the ultimate demonstration of comfort in a space is to tell a joke that's a little over the line or a little off color, but not too off color. It's like the ultimate thing. So if you're really in it and feeling good, using humor is great.

(00:44:02):
You should not be remembered as only the comedian. And again, the level of jokes that you're playing with is a very subtle thing. So you don't want to tell a knock-knock joke with adults, but the off-color sex joke that is hilarious, you better be pretty confident before you tell it in space. The last thing you want, a joke that everyone laughs at is great.

(00:44:28):
A joke that no one laughs at, it's like a huge risk maneuver you failed. It's not the point. So it's a great tool. I love it. I think everyone should have their file of jokes. I do. I don't know about you, but I have a Evernote. It's not Evernote anymore. It's like a bear of my favorite jokes. And they're loosely ranked and from least offensive to most offensive because I forget the jokes, but you kind of want to use humor sparingly and smartly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:54):
This is your next book, this list of jokes.

Sam Lessin (00:44:56):
List of jokes ranked by social situation and level of extremeness.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:01):
Everyone's going to be telling you same jokes. Oh, man.

Sam Lessin (00:45:05):
Well, there is a funny joke about that, which is the whole, the prisoners. I won't even tell it. It's funny. There's a funny joke about people who know all the jokes. I'll leave it at that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:14):
I'll leave you hanging and wanting more for our next podcast conversation. Abundance. Okay. You also recommend self-deprecating as a-

Sam Lessin (00:45:22):
Make fun of yourself, not other people.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:24):
Yeah.

Sam Lessin (00:45:25):
It's just like you can make fun of yourself as much as you want. Again, making fun of other people shows an incredible level of familiarity. And if you're there with your business partner and you're really feeling the vibe, and again, it can be quite effective, but the second it feels disparaging or people aren't on the same wavelength, it's a very high risk maneuver, making fun of yourself is always fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:50):
Here's a puzzle for you. What do OpenAI, Cursor, Perplexity, Vercel, Plaid, and hundreds of other winning companies have in common? The answer is they're all powered by today's sponsor, WorkOS. If you're building software for enterprises, you've probably felt the pain of integrating single sign-on, Skim, RBAC, audit logs, and other features required by big customers. WorkOS turns those deal blockers into drop-in APIs with a modern developer platform built specifically for B2B SaaS.

(00:46:19):
Whether you're a seed stage startup trying to land your first enterprise customer or a unicorn expanding globally, WorkOS is the fastest path to becoming enterprise-ready and unlocking growth. They're essentially Stripe for enterprise features. Visit workos.com to get started or just hit up their Slack support where they have real engineers in there who answer your questions superfast.

(00:46:39):
WorkOS allows you to build like the best with delightful APIs, comprehensive docs, and a smooth developer experience. Go to workows.com to make your app enterprise ready today. Also, so you said you had this kind of list of jokes that you ... Because I can't remember. I have zero jokes in my head that I'm like, "Okay, here I'm going to get one, so I should make a list."

Sam Lessin (00:46:57):
Make a list. I got some good ones for you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:00):
Okay. I love to borrow some. You also recommend having some stories, please read kind of stories to tell.

Sam Lessin (00:47:05):
Yeah, you want to have some easy stories that. Again, it shouldn't be 10 minutes. But again, I think the thing about it is imagine that the whole game in these social settings, again, is putting other people at ease, making them feel like you understand them and the room and you're a trustworthy person and on the same wavelength. And in some ways think about it as who's carrying the conversation.

(00:47:25):
It shouldn't be your monologue. You shouldn't force them to monologue either. And that's where questions come in and back and forth. Having a fun build on story, they tell a story, you have a story to tell. Again, I really think of it as a conversation or these social interactions as a ping pong game and you kind of want to have a few of those in your arsenal.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:43):
Your last tip in that section was how to wind down a conversation, just the importance of realizing it's time to wind down any tips for how to do that.

Sam Lessin (00:47:49):
Yeah. Just like when the conversation is over, gracefully leave and basically the upshot. The worst is the conversation ends and the person just stands there and you're like, "I'm going to go get a drink." Or do you what I mean? And then whatever once in a while the person will be like, if someone says to you in a conversation they wind it down, it's like, "I'm going to go grab a drink."

(00:48:09):
Most of the time, that is not an invitation saying, "I'd love one too and follow them to the bar." So I just think you have to recognize the signs effectively when the moment is passing or it's time to move on, et cetera, and then respect it is what I would say.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:27):
I use that one all the time. Is there any other ways you find useful to wind down in conversation just to get out of a conversation?

Sam Lessin (00:48:32):
Well, I think the other thing people do frequently, which again is totally fine if done respectfully, is bring someone else into the conversation. In some ways, give them their next partner and be like, "Oh, I've enjoyed this conversation. It's super cool. By the way, have you met Steve? Let's go meet Steve. Go talk to Steve for a bit and I'll pick you back on it." And like, "Okay, I'm going to go say hi to my wife."

(00:48:55):
There's ways to handle it. Again, the key though is subtlety on these things, I think in all things. You want to basically let people feel respected as much as anything else. So if you're too overt about it, even if everyone kind of knows what's going on, the key is to give them plausible deniability to themselves and the community effectively that we've wound down this conversation. So you have to look for the signs.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:21):
Awesome. Okay. There's four more sections. The next one is scheduling etiquette. Give us some advice.

Sam Lessin (00:49:28):
Oh, well, I think I'd like to say that I'm fairly famous for hating Calendly. I actually, I think I am not overstating it when saying there was a period where calendar where I personally had driven most of their growth for the month. I got messages from the board because I went on this diatribe about how much I hate Calendly and how disrespectful it is. And apparently, this was such an internet fervor. I got millions of engagements that meaningfully drove their month. So they thanked me for it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:53):
Wow. No bad press.

Sam Lessin (00:49:54):
No bad press and no bad tweets. Yeah. So I think, look, there's a few obvious ones. Make sure you have availability. If you ask someone to schedule with you, it's not always wrong to be like, "Here's my availability or here's a link." But make it real. You have to give them real options. I really strongly believe the default should not be Calendly.

(00:50:13):
The default in most situations, especially if you recognize the power hierarchy or the busyness hierarchy. If you're the less senior person, if you are the less busy person, you should let the other person tell you when they're free and then make it work on your end, is what I would say. And it's fine if the first thought doesn't work, but one of the first three really needs to.

(00:50:33):
So I think that in some ways that it's important to respect that. It's better to ask what they can do and then move your schedule. If you really can't and you're going to use a scheduling agent or something, it just needs to actually have real options is basically, I think that comes up all the time. Look, rescheduling happens when you do it, give notice as much as possible.

(00:50:55):
Once you're asking for rescheduling, you need to be even more accepting of what the other person can do, I think is really important. If you're asking to reschedule, you basically within reason need to make it work for them, is what I would say. And then look, I think there's obvious stuff that people should know and sometimes forget. Time zones are really tricky. People screw them up all the time. Check.

(00:51:17):
It's worth the extra check to make sure you're not both scheduling, you're getting the numbers right, but then also really importantly, scheduling at reasonable times. Sometimes people are like, "I want to meet at this time." You're on EST, you're aware, that's like 4:00 in the morning for me. And so I think being respectful of that and just asking, I think is super important.

(00:51:34):
It's not rocket science because it's important. Last point I make, which we make in the book is you really need to respect EAs and PAs and the whole people. The number one way to look extremely classless is to not respect people who are helping the other person. This is the number one thing. Now you don't need to be so over the top exuberant.

(00:51:57):
You don't want to overdo it, but there should be this deep well of respect for anyone who's helping you, whether that's a server or a PA or an EA or whatever. This needs to come with an extra gesture of respect. That means saying thank you when they schedule and follow up with them and things like that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:14):
I'll tell a story when we were selling our company to Airbnb, we had this guy helping us sell the company and he made it a big point to build a good relationship with the EA and office manager at Airbnb because if they like you, it helps. It helps you get the thing.

Sam Lessin (00:52:31):
The general story of make the gatekeepers happy and like you is true. I do think there are ways to overdo that for what it's worth. It becomes almost too transactional. If you show up with flowers for the EA, you better be damn confident in what you're doing, if that makes sense. But just like the small things go a long way.

(00:52:50):
You just make eye contact with them, thank them, respect them. If they bring you a coffee cup, ask them where to put it when you're done. Don't treat people who you might feel like the team or the staff feel that way, make them feel like part of the team it equals.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:08):
The Calendly stuff, I feel like that's its own separate book of Calendly Etiquette.

Sam Lessin (00:53:15):
Calendly is one of my favorite episodes of going hyperviral on something hilarious.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:20):
So one thing that Calendly does is you can embed. I don't do this yet, but I should. It feels like just embedding your times in the email feels like a good-

Sam Lessin (00:53:27):
Look, I'll be honest, I go the other way. I don't use any of that stuff. And look, I think scheduling is very complicated. This is part of it. I always think of these, it's like, when are you free? It totally depends on who's asking. If Barack Obama, or I don't know, I won't say Donald Trump, someone wants to meet with me and it's like 4:00 in the morning my time, or I'm totally, "You know what? I'm going to make it work."

(00:53:55):
And so I do think I'm actually kind of against the flat hierarchy, all meetings are the same, da-da-da-da. That does mean, honestly, I think that you probably knocked me. My bet is that my calendar moves more than most people's, and I'm sure that feels disrespectful to some, and it is. I want to be really clear, but it's also the reality of trying to balance these things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:16):
The other flaw with Calendly, I've realized someone once figured out my Calendly URL and just booked a meeting with me, like a founder wanting to pitch me, and it was on my calendar. I'm like, "Who is that?"

Sam Lessin (00:54:26):
The funny one I've had is there are people whose names are very similar to other people I know. And every once in a while, I've ended up accepting a cold meeting and showing up and be like, "You are not the person I expected." Because I was like, "Oh, your name is off by one letter." That's cool. That's not a thing to call out, by the way, from an etiquette perspective. Once you're committed to the meeting, you're doing the meeting, even if it's the wrong person.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:49):
Oh, man. Okay. Well, one last question with Calendly. Something I try to do, curious to get your take is like, okay, someone want a founder, I'm meeting with a founder and the way I approach it is like, okay, do you have a Calendly or something I could use to book a meeting with you? If not, in parentheses, here's my calendar in case that might make it easier.

Sam Lessin (00:55:08):
Yeah, I think that's perfectly fine in terms of the way to do it. I just think the key is to make it easy for the person you're trying to do business with.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:15):
And not make them feel like they have to do the work if they don't want to.

Sam Lessin (00:55:21):
No, you do the work. Basically, you're asking for something, you do the work is the upshot.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:23):
Okay, sweet. Moving on to the next topic, communication.

Sam Lessin (00:55:27):
Don't use emojis, try to proofread your stuff, get to the point quickly, assume the person you're reading is busy. Again, I think these are all the types of things that none of this is rocket science from my perspective, but people, it's just good to remember and be on top of it. I do think people have different things on this. I personally do think that on things like email, you kind of do have an SLA to respond.

(00:55:53):
There's some people I know who are like, "Email does not mean I have to respond. You send me an email, you may or may not get a response. It's completely up to me. I have no contract to respond to your email." I personally go the other way, which I feel like from an etiquette perspective, I don't owe you a 12-page essay, but I do owe at least an acknowledgement quickly of what you've sent.

(00:56:13):
You don't want to leave people hanging. But again, I just think it's like if you read an email, I'm sorry, if you write an email, imagine you're receiving it. How does it feel? Does it feel like you're asking a ton of the person you send it to? If you send them 10 paragraphs, it's annoying. You're like, "Okay, I have to read all this. What am I going to find time?"

(00:56:33):
This is like you're asking a lot. It's kind of like a monologue and a conversation. You've just said, "I'm going to spend 10 minutes talking at you." And so I do think keeping it short and to the point, not being silly, not using emoji, trying to make it readable. These are all important things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:47):
Say more about the emoji piece. Is your advice just know emojis if it's a business?

Sam Lessin (00:56:52):
I think emoji from my perspective, it's quite a step of familiarity, if that makes sense. From a business context, look, if someone sends you a smiley face, you can respond with it. You can kind of match. Again, it goes back to this matching vocabulary and language. I'm not saying you should be totally cut and dry, but it's kind of, I would say emojis almost feel like jokes to me, which is like, tell them at your own risk and they're probably not worth it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:20):
Awesome. Okay. I do use emojis. I use the thank you hands one a lot.

Sam Lessin (00:57:25):
Look, I think text is different. I think people might have slightly different takes on this. And so I wouldn't say anything I'm saying here is dogmatic, but I'm just saying that, again, emojis are not highly legible to most people. They can mean lots of different things.

(00:57:39):
They usually have cultural connotation to them. And I would say that they're kind of harder to read than just a well-worded, simple to the point email, and I think you just want to come across as a literate to the point, simple, clear person.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:54):
And emoji sometimes kind of implies used AI to generate this thing because ChatGPT loves emojis.

Sam Lessin (00:57:59):
Totally. And I also say, look, there's a whole ... We want to get spicy for a second.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:04):
Yes.

Sam Lessin (00:58:05):
I don't know how I feel about people who have invested too much in their emojis. So you get people who have changed the colors of their emojis from the default or whatever. I'm not saying not to do it. I'm just saying it's quite a statement is my view that you've invested in your emoji pack or using special emojis people haven't seen before or it's like, again, it's a subtlety and you got to understand the room and the culture and what you're responding to, but I do think that people read more into that than people want to be read into it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:36):
You know what's crazy now? I don't know if you've seen this, you can create your own emojis now in iOS and emojis are so ... It's like a whole new world, just infinite emojis.

Sam Lessin (00:58:45):
But again, it's like if you choose to use those, you are going way out on a limb that people are going to be receptive to that and not be like, "This is a person who spent a lot of their time customizing their emoji pack when they probably should be doing something more interesting."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:58):
They should be finding product market fit.

Sam Lessin (00:59:00):
Yeah, or learning etiquette.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:03):
The other tip you had that I loved, which is think about the order of the emails when you're emailing somebody.

Sam Lessin (00:59:09):
Yeah, I do think you kind of want to think about ... There is a connotation to who you send it to and who you CC and the order in which people. Now, I don't want to overstate this, but put differently, it's like if you're sending an email and the first person on the email is the assistant and the fourth person on the email is the CEO, you've probably done it wrong.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:30):
And because the implication there is who you think is most important comes first. Who's first to mind?

Sam Lessin (00:59:35):
Well, who are you really sending this to? You know what I mean? It's almost the way I think and who's kind of included. So if I look at an email and I'm the first person in the two, candidly, I mildly pay more attention to it than when I'm the fifth, right? Because in my head I'm like, "Okay, well, this is really to Kevin and I'm on it."

(00:59:53):
If you see an email sent to many, many, many people, almost by definition, it's not that important is almost the way I would put And so you have to be really careful with managing that. I think even the who do you send it to and who do you CC. There's a language to that from an etiquette perspective to understand. And I do think people sometimes miss that. The CC line is very, very valuable.

(01:00:13):
It means, "Hey, you should have a copy of this. This is not really to you. I'm not expecting an immediate response." I even think there's even a subtlety who responds then. If you send an email to 10 people CC'd to the whole nine yards, there is a subtle etiquette to when you respond.

(01:00:30):
If you are the fifth CC on an email, you're not expected to be the first response. Again, you can break this rule. There are times to break it. There's a subtlety to it, but it wasn't really sent to you. And so there's a whole language to who you send to and who you CC in the order that, again, it's very subtle, but is worth understanding.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:51):
So true. Man, and you would think nobody sees all these little things in the Gmail thread, but you do. They're just right there and you're like-

Sam Lessin (01:00:59):
This is the whole thing about etiquette is it's all this invisible stuff that you don't need to spend all ... In some ways, the whole story of doing this well is it should not occupy 80% of your brain. What you're saying is, "I've got this. We're on the same wavelength. My heart rate is low. I'm doing it properly and I'm doing it with intuitively almost." Which is a hard ask because what we're basically saying is these are unknown things, but intuitively you should just know them. And that is actually what you're signaling is you can trust me because intuitively, there's this well of knowledge and cultural connection and whatever that we can share effectively.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:33):
And if your BCC definitely do not reply all.

Sam Lessin (01:01:36):
Yeah. I have some unbelievably funny faux pas from my history with CC/BCC To lines. One of the worst etiquette/mistakes I ever made, never, ever, ever put someone you're talking about who's not on an email in the To line to check the spelling of their name and then hit send. That's a bad idea. So whatever you're doing, that's not even an etiquette thing. That's just being smart.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:04):
Proofreading thing.

Sam Lessin (01:02:04):
Proofread. Proofread. And don't send emails to people about them that they're not supposed to see.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:10):
And it's like Gmail makes it too easy to do that because it adds them automatically if you have their name.

Sam Lessin (01:02:15):
No, for me it was more just like the way to check the spelling of someone's name is not to put them in the To field, ever.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:20):
Yeah. Okay. Oh man. Well, you're still kicking, so it wasn't so bad.

Sam Lessin (01:02:27):
I'm still kicking.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:28):
Okay, great. Okay. Two more. Meeting etiquette.

Sam Lessin (01:02:33):
Yeah. Again, we've talked about arriving a little bit early. You should do that. Don't arrive up too, too early. Again, if you're an hour early, walk around the block. It's fine to walk around the block. You don't want to sit in someone's office, because then all of a sudden it feels like this person's been here a long time.

(01:02:49):
It feels like even though they're not scheduled, we're leaving them hanging. You're six coffees deep with the receptionist. You don't want that. So I think you want to be 10 to 15 minutes early. You do not want to be much earlier than that. We talked about meeting other convenience. I do think it's fine to start with a little bit of small talk.

(01:03:10):
There are times it's not or times people are running behind, but the pleasantry of the weather is nice or how is your weekend? Or something that kind of cuts the air a little bit and then you flip into business is a good thing. Even though it feels transparent, it's still useful is what I would say. And again, it's almost a signal of, I am here for business, but I am a normal person and I'm willing to have signaling like, "Oh, I know that we should start with a normal conversation." If that makes sense.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:41):
I don't know if you saw this on Twitter. Someone described small talk as the TCP/IP act handshake.

Sam Lessin (01:03:45):
I love it. It's a great description. I always describe it as like, imagine the modem crash from when we were kids on a 424. That old modem crash. That's what small talk is. It's a modem crash. We're trying to hit the wavelengths, et cetera, is the way-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:02):
And so that you're ready to talk, so they ready to really communicate.

Sam Lessin (01:04:04):
Yeah. For meetings, virtual ones, camera on. And again, I say this as someone who sometimes violates this. I violate it knowingly. I violate it knowing what it costs me, but you really should have your camera on. And again, you should dress appropriately for a video call. You should have an appropriate background. If you have your bed in your background, it should be nicely made. You know what I mean?

(01:04:28):
In some ways it's like doing the easy stuff is the key. And I go a step further. I actually, this is less a hard rule. I actually really don't love virtual backgrounds for the same reason. I'm like, "Look, I'm not going to judge you if you're in your bedroom, if you're a startup founder. It's fine, but I would like to see that your bed is made." Or I'll give you another one that's classic that I see with founders all the time.

(01:04:55):
Close your closet. People will get on Zoom calls and you'll be on a call and their closet is open and I'm like, "It's not a big deal, but do you see your own self picture here? Can you just close your closet? I don't want to see your shirts." That type of stuff I think goes further than people realize.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:15):
Awesome. One other tip you had was clean up after yourself if you're in a real meeting.

Sam Lessin (01:05:20):
The easiest way, and this is by the way, it's for my partner, Kevin Colleran, But the easiest way to come off badly is to not offer to put your coffee cup in the kitchen. And honestly, we do this because if you think about it, we work for LPs, limited partners. That's who we raise money from and then deploy it from.

(01:05:40):
And my partner, Kevin, even more than me, has this thing, which is he is maniacal about this, which is no matter who's in the room, if we're with an LP, you take the coffee, you take the Diet Coke. Even if you know full well, someone's going to come in and clean up after you and you make a point of asking where we can put it or putting it on the side table, et cetera, and acknowledging that there is a mess.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:59):
I feel that. Final topic is exiting and leaving. What are some tips?

Sam Lessin (01:06:05):
You should stand where people leave the table, right? Not ridiculously. By the way, you should go stand with the table. Stand to shake hands. Don't be sitting when you're shaking your hands. It's just what you do. And it shows that you're aware of it.

(01:06:16):
Follow up with gratitude. You should send people thank you notes. They shouldn't be long. They shouldn't be ridiculous, but we met. I got something out of it. Thank you for taking your time is always appreciated is what I would say. Obviously there's stuff like don't take calls, et cetera. This is the kind of obvious stuff in terms of exiting and how you think about it.

(01:06:40):
Even if someone rings you and the meeting's over and you're overtime, you're like, "I got to pick up this call." You hit the button that says I'm calling you right back and then walk away. Don't just pick up the phone and wave, is what I would say. Yeah, and I think there's stuff like that that I would just keep in mind.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:57):
Also, don't make a production if you're exiting, just exit.

Sam Lessin (01:07:03):
Yes, I think that's really true. There's even a point to like, there are lots of scenarios where I think an Irish goodbye is the best goodbye where you just kind of disappear. Any large group setting I think is great. Maybe you thank one person on the way out of the host. But the I am leaving now, right? Let me kind of say goodbye to everyone and hug everyone. It's too much. It's too much.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:25):
I love that. Okay. We got through everything. Is there anything else that you think might be important to share?

Sam Lessin (01:07:31):
There's so much other stuff. Again, I go back to this whole thing, which is like, these are all fun tips. I love the cartoons. We iterated them a bunch. We have more to do. We're having a lot of fun with this and I think it is providing a lot of value to people, which is great. That's kind of my goal is to both have fun and actually provide value and help people. That intersection is great.

(01:07:49):
There's a thousand other tips. And so for the biggest thing for me is when you have more or think of them, send them to us because there'll be a second version of the book and then a third. And I actually really want to cite the people who contribute to it. The book is what? 50, 60 pages. It will be a few hundred eventually. And I think there's a lot more to come and we're going to be doing classes next year all over the country and actually world. We're going to do one in Tel Aviv.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:13):
Wow.

Sam Lessin (01:08:15):
We're going to do one. We're certainly doing one in New York and a few other places and it'll be fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:19):
Oh my God. You got a whole new life forming here.

Sam Lessin (01:08:23):
The funny thing is this stuff, the etiquette story is obviously pretty fun. And so people like Morning Brew just keep making videos about this and there's this whole etiquette thing going on. And I'm like, "Oh my God, I've done some pretty good investments in my life, built some cool products. Am I going to be ultimately remembered as the etiquette guy? That's kind of hilarious."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:41):
That's what we're doing here.

Sam Lessin (01:08:42):
I'm into it though. I'm into it. I'm fine with that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:45):
So you have the TLDR at the beginning. I'll just read this real quick and add anything that we're missing.

Sam Lessin (01:08:49):
Yeah, sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:50):
So this is just like what to do if you do nothing else. Remember the goal of all etiquette is essentially building trust and project genuine confidence. Always maintain an abundance mindset. Remember that you are worthy and have nothing to prove and that it's okay to ask questions and keep your heart rate low.

Sam Lessin (01:09:06):
That's the points. If nothing else, if you remember those points, we will be served well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:12):
There we go. Okay. I'm going to take us to close out and make this more of a regular episode. I'm going to take us to two recurring segments on the podcast, AI corner and Contrarian corner. I don't know if I told you I was going to ask you these questions, but I'm going to go for it.

Sam Lessin (01:09:23):
You lay it on me. I love Contrarian corner. An AI corner depends what you mean by that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:28):
So the question in AI corner is just what's one way you've found AI useful in your worker life that might be helpful for people to hear?

Sam Lessin (01:09:34):
So look, I'm by default pretty skeptical of most AI applications. I will say the thing that I've had the most fun with with AI and I find great is it actually is partially where the cartoons for this came from is I built a little personal news aggregator called Letter Meme that basically takes all the newsletters I don't have time to read and turns them into daily cartoons.

(01:09:56):
So I have a grid of what's going on in the world as a front page in cartoons. And I actually love it. It's like the best way I get an overview because there's all these smart newsletters, you don't have time to read any of them. So I piped them all in and-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:07):
Except Lenny's Newsletter, but keep going.

Sam Lessin (01:10:07):
And what? Except Lenny's Newsletter. Sure, of course. That one I don't put in the aggregator, although of course I don't do that, but it's great. So I'm super into it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:19):
And that's lettermeme.com. I'm checking it out. I love this. So this is AI generated, aggregates all the important newsletters and creates a little summary and a cartoon.

Sam Lessin (01:10:28):
Yeah, and you can make your own. So for me, I actually, I'm looking at this now, there's actually one thing that got messed up on this we need to change. But yeah, the idea is you basically get an email digest once a day and it's continuously updated to what's going on in the world and you pipe your own newsletters into it. So it's like whatever you actually trust and pay attention to.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:45):
Genius. And how did you build this? Was it vibe coded? Did you have an engineer help you?

Sam Lessin (01:10:49):
Well, both actually. I actually, the vibe coding thing, this is exactly what vibe coding is good for is like, this is like cursor and digital ocean and Cloudflare will get you a long way in terms of just building this stuff on the fly. And so I built the first version of this myself end to end, but then vibe coding also doesn't really scale. And so the reality is after a certain point, I had some friends who are great engineers just take it and up level in a few ways that I honestly ran out of time to work on.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:15):
Well, let's go to Contrarian corner. This could be an entire podcast conversation with you, I suspect, but just like what's something you want to share that you believe that most other people don't believe?

Sam Lessin (01:11:25):
I think that the venture capital, the seed venture capitalists who invest in companies that are branded as AI companies are going to lose an impossibly large amount of money in the coming years. And that doesn't mean that I don't think you should be using AI to build things. I actually think you absolutely should.

(01:11:44):
It's kind of like not using AI in your startup is the equivalent of not using the cloud in 2010 or not using the internet in 2000. It would be insane. Of course we're going to use these tools, but there's a difference between a great business that you're using AI to supercharge or make better or just as a piece of infrastructure. That's not an AI business.

(01:12:03):
This is a business and I'm very into those versus all of these companies that come out that say we are the AI blank, I think they're all going to zero. Even my kind of argument this from a seed perspective is like, look, is OpenAI a good investment or not? It's a terrible seed investment, right? The way the number's baked out, even at a $500 billion market cap when all said and done, the seed investors have made something like 25 times their money. That's insane if you think about it. That's basically the worst.

(01:12:33):
It's like a middling at best seed investment for the company that is defining the moment. And the reason is because these things are so capital consumptive. So if you're trying to deploy $100 billion, the market is fragmented, people want to dream a dream, people want religion, they want belief. There's a bunch of reasons why you can squint and justify it. You know what? If the storytelling of Elon allows SpaceX, which by the way, I love, I think SpaceX is an awesome company, but if all of a sudden that actually can be worth $1.4 trillion to the public market, guess what?

(01:13:06):
The money plowers are going to do great with all this narrative driven religion is what I would put it, but if you're a disciplined seed investor, I guess my contrary intake would be run away from things that are AI companies because even if you look smart for the moment, you're playing a dangerous game of get out before the narrative collapses.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:26):
Wow. I love this. Okay. I want to follow this through a little bit. So you're saying because of the dilution that goes along with these companies.

Sam Lessin (01:13:31):
It's like they're too capital. If they work, they're too capital intensive. Seed investing does not work in highly capital intensive businesses, so that's not going to happen. Two, they're fundamentally commoditizing in all sorts of ways. It's very unclear what the lock-in or value is on any of these things. And so it's just like the whole dynamic is off, and the thing is people are desperate right now for things to believe in.

(01:13:54):
If you think about the history, we've done so well as a country with Terra Nova. The US was amazing for so many years because we had the West, and if you were going to work hard, you could go west and you'd do great. And there was all this opportunity, land of opportunity. We've had reverberated, my generation, your generation, we were blessed because we had the internet. The internet was digital Terra Nova and we got to build fortunes and do amazing stuff and new work be in this new world that was created, but it was effectively the same thing as the West all over again.

(01:14:23):
And ever since then, whether it's mobile, which again, if you look at the math on it, everyone wants it to be disruptive in Terra Nova, not really. It's just more internet or like crypto, which by the way, I think crypto is amazing. I think it's the closest thing to Terra Nova, but to now the AI God narratives, every generation is desperate for their Terra Nova story with good reason, right? But the story is it has to be real. And I think unfortunately this time, this is a classic example of AI is a powerful tool. It's incredibly powerful for existing businesses and existing structures. It's not a great startup opportunity.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:58):
So what is it you look for? What do you look for when you're investing in AI startup?

Sam Lessin (01:15:03):
Well, again, I won't invest anything that I would consider an AI startup. I'll invest in things that use AI. For me, I think I'm really interested in the cultural implications of AI or the new businesses that need to exist because it is a force in the world. So we've done a lot, whether it's Sublime Security or Outtake, things like that that are basically all around the theme of the Voight-Kampff test from Great Blade Runner, which was the test they used randomly, are you a real or are you a bot?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:28):
The turtle.

Sam Lessin (01:15:28):
That's a huge problem.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:29):
The turtle on their back?

Sam Lessin (01:15:30):
Yeah, so there's a whole set of companies that are implications of AI and how do you manage it and handle it as a society. I think there's a lot to do there. And there's a lot to do in cultural shifts from AI. There's all sorts of interesting trends to follow there. There's all sorts of businesses that will be disrupted. They're not AI businesses, they're businesses that'll be disrupted in interesting ways.

(01:15:52):
So I think there's a lot of opportunity, but again, I think there's a ... I at least draw a distinction between if you're trying to be ... certainly a foundation model company, but any of these things that are like, we're going to win because AI, I'm like, "No, you're going to win because of something else, and AI is going to be a propellant to it."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:08):
Sam, you're a fascinating human. I feel like we could talk for hours. Is there anything before we get to our very exciting lightning round, anything else you wanted to share?

Sam Lessin (01:16:23):
Look, I'm happy to be here. I love your work. It's good to be on your podcast. Happy to bullshit whenever. But no, we're good.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:25):
Okay. Well, with that, we've reached a very exciting lightning round. I've got five questions for you.

Sam Lessin (01:16:28):
Five questions. I'm ready.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:30):
Five questions. What are two or three books that you find yourself recommending most to other people?

Sam Lessin (01:16:35):
Ooh, okay. So let me pull up my list because I got to pull up my Kindle for this. One is I'm reading right now. I got to admit, I like to make fun of Marc Andreessen a lot, but he recommended a book called The Ancient City, which is fascinating. And so I'm in the middle of that right now. I'm really enjoying it. Man's Search for Meaning is great. I'm just going through. What have I read recently? You know what's great?

(01:16:58):
Area 51, An Uncensored History: The Top Secret Military Base. Not very Erudite, great book. And then I honestly think the one serious one I'll make a recommendation on is Lessons From History is one of my favorite books ever. I would really, really, really recommend it. It's a short read, but Lessons From History by Ariel Durant is probably the most approachable, non-obvious book I love.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:28):
I did that one on Audible and you could just listen to it all in a couple hours.

Sam Lessin (01:17:32):
It's a short read. It's not a long book. I honestly think for me-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:34):
A few hours.

Sam Lessin (01:17:35):
... Hours of investment to intellectual return. My one real answer right now would be that I could give you a thousand others from ... There are things like The Banana King. Have you heard this one? Have you seen this one?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:35):
No.

Sam Lessin (01:17:48):
Oh my God, this is so good. What's it called? So The Fish that Ate the Whale. Incredible book. So is The Last Kings of Shanghai, if you know that one. These are all amazing books, but they're longer and there are more stories. Just everyone on the podcast should go read Will Durant.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:02):
Okay. I love it. Favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Sam Lessin (01:18:07):
Oh, I got to say, recent, I think Landman is fabulous. Have you watched Landman?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:12):
Yeah. Yeah. I've watched the latest episodes.

Sam Lessin (01:18:14):
I'm really into it. That would be my most recent take.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:17):
What's interesting about that show is now tech companies are all super into energy and data centers.

Sam Lessin (01:18:26):
Well, I'll tell you a funny story, which I talked to a founder who's in Midland, Texas, which is kind of part of the show, and it's so classic and typical. He's like, all these Silicon Valley people and now think they understand the energy industry because they watched Landman. It's wild, but I totally believe it because I know too many venture capitalists are like, "Oh, I now understand this because I watched Landman." And he's like, "It's totally a thing."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:52):
Yeah, I would feel that. Okay. Favorite product that you recently discovered that you love could be a gadget, could be an app, could be clothing.

Sam Lessin (01:19:02):
Okay, I'll pitch people on, this is a little self-serving, but I will pitch people on June date. So, okay, I actually don't use this product because I'm happily married, but this is cool. And here's the basic idea is if you think about so much of AI right now, this goes back to what businesses do you overhaul that are interesting that have AI implications, but are not AI. So everyone's got this whole virtual girlfriend, loneliness, you're going to chat with your friend, whatever, fine. These guys came out and what they do is they're like, look, if we're really trying to match up humans, call it Tinder 2.0, one of the best sources of information to do that is their ChatGPT histories.

(01:19:42):
So this app is kind of built around the premise of distilling, you ask ChatGPT a structured prompt that they've designed, it pulls out an unbelievably good profile of who you are and then you basically match with people based on what you're actually asking ChatGPT about and the implications of who you are and things like that. And the fun part is I haven't obviously done dates on it, not for me, but I have pulled my profile from like, "Wow, this is shockingly good description of who I actually am." And so I think that's a really fun business.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:13):
It's like that prompt that the ChatGPT folks once had of just visualize my space based on everything you know about me. And it was like, holy moly.

Sam Lessin (01:20:22):
It's pretty good. It's pretty good.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:23):
And so in this dating app, I love this idea. It's so good. So do people read that? Are they able to see that as your profile or it's private?

Sam Lessin (01:20:30):
It's a little abstracted from that, but it's like the matching and the core thing is based on it. And again, I was just like, "Wow, this is good."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:39):
And it goes on dates for you. Okay. So it simulates what a date might be like between you two potentially.

Sam Lessin (01:20:44):
I guess.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:45):
Yeah. Your AI goes on dates for you, receives one high match, each one carefully. Wow, so fun.

Sam Lessin (01:20:51):
It's good. I get it if you're single. I tried with my newsletter at one point, I was like, "Oh, honestly, the people who read my newsletter are pretty weird and specific." And so, "Hey, why don't I just offer a matchmaking service?" Where I'm like, "Okay, if you read my newsletter really and you're here, tell me who you are. I will build a little LLM and try to match with people."

(01:21:11):
Didn't work for me because candidly, you know what happened? Way too many qualified women and not enough men. I just don't have the liquidity. I have a hundred great women who wrote in being like, "Hey, this is what I'm looking for. This is who I am." And you're like, "You were an amazing person." And then the four guys who write in are like, "I want a 25-year-old hot girlfriend." This is not going to work, but June date might have the liquidity to make it

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:34):
Work. By the way, your newsletter is awesome. Tell people where to find it while we're on that topic.

Sam Lessin (01:21:38):
And I actually can't. There's no way to sign up for it. If you send me an email.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:44):
Perfect.

Sam Lessin (01:21:45):
If you send me an email lessin@gmail, I'm fine. Then if I respond, you get automatically added. I basically just, that's how people I'm interacting with get added, or I'll just add you. But it's actually funny. There's not ... Oh, you know you can do actually, I'll get you on it, is if you go to wlessin.com, I have my little bot app up that includes a little LLM that kind of is trained on my writing just because I was having fun building it. If you enter your email address there and talk to it, it will add you. But no, there's not like a signup page for it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:20):
Okay. I love this contrarian growth strategy. No, no, you can't really sign up. Okay, that's great. Okay, two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you find yourself coming back to often in work or in life?

Sam Lessin (01:22:32):
No, but I will say that I have hanging in my gym, which I love from the Facebook Hackathon after the launch of Google Plus. This is going way back in history. They made great posters, which was Carthage Must Burn. And it was just this great moment in work time when it was like, "Okay, game on, Google's coming for us." And I had some of the most fun work experiences. We were working literally 24 hours a day. Past midnight every night was in that period and I love that poster. So Carthage Must Burn. How about that?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:08):
Great. Final question. You are a fellow podcaster. I really enjoy your podcast called More or Less. It's very clever and lead named because of Lessin and with the Morins, Dave Morin.

Sam Lessin (01:23:19):
We love our lessons. My wife and I are contrarians and hate everything by default and the Morins think everything's amazing. So it kind of works from a dynamic perspective.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:27):
I'd love it. And Dave Morin and Brit Morin, just to be clear, and your wife, she runs the information.

Sam Lessin (01:23:31):
Yeah. So she's good at prompting us with it's actually going around the world and then we just bullshit about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:36):
So what's something you've learned from that experience? I don't know. Any surprises about podcasting?

Sam Lessin (01:23:40):
So here's the thing, I think people ... It's kind of a weird podcast in some ways because honestly, I don't think any of us are highly filtered and it's kind of just like talking to your friends for an hour a week, which I want to do. I love the Morins. We don't live that close to them.

(01:23:54):
So it's kind of fun to just have that time set aside and then cut it up and post on the internet pretty raw. Here's the funny thing about it. It serves our purposes way more than I actually expected it to, which is we enjoy doing it, which is the most important part. We would do it if no one was listening. And weirdly, a lot of our friends and people we care about in the industry seem to pick up the pieces they like from it and talk to us about it.

(01:24:19):
And so it's like a great conversation starter. So it's like weird. It's not a huge podcast. It's big enough, but I actually think the thing that's been most surprising to me about it is that even though we don't really have growth strategies and we're not trying to blow it up and we don't get paid for it, it's like weirdly useful is what I would say. Even the fact that it's like ... I don't know.

(01:24:41):
I'm not sure if that's your experience too, and I think your podcast is probably much larger than ours, but it's weirdly listened to and useful by the people that we care about and it's fun despite the fact that it's not like a ... I don't know, it's not all in or something yet. I don't think it ever will be. It's like way too niche, but we have fun.

(01:25:05):
I would happily do it with my friends if no one was listening and then it's like, that's kind of wild that a bunch of people that we actually do care about find the pieces that are interesting. And it actually is helpful from a business perspective because you bullshit about something and then some entrepreneur shows up and is like, "Hey, by the way, here's a better idea." You're like, "That's great."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:23):
Sam, you were awesome. This was such a fun chat. Very different from my regular podcast. I think people will find this extremely interesting and useful, as I thought, and also fun. Two followup questions, where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, check out your find, what should people know?

Sam Lessin (01:25:39):
Look, our venture firm is called Slow Ventures, slow.co. I'm Sam Lessin. I'm kind of Lessin everywhere, whether it's like Twitter or Instagram or whatever you used or just lessin@gmail is my last name, is my email address and I do read it. So I don't know. I appreciate you having me on. It's always fun to see you. It's been too long and I don't know. Come hang out in the pool house sometime.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:02):
Okay. I love this. This is an excuse to hang out. Sam, thank you so much for being here.

Sam Lessin (01:26:07):
Hey, great to see you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:09):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Greg Isenberg (00:00):
I'm Greg Isenberg and I build community. I'm the CEO of Late Checkout, an agency, a studio, a fund where we build some of the most popular internet communities. I'm also an advisor to Reddit.

Sahil Bloom (00:14):
I'm Sahil Bloom. I'm an investor, creator, entrepreneur, writer. I also gave up a grand slam on ESPN in 2012, and I am still waiting for it to land. What is The Room Where it Happens? The Room Where it Happens is the place where the insights are generated. This is the place where the conversations happen, where ideas are batted around, debated, fought over. This is where things actually get created, where you start to have those seeds that are planted and where things are really built. That is the room. It's traditionally been closed. We're opening the door to it. We want you to be here with us as that happens.

Greg Isenberg (00:52):
It's a place where we could have honest conversations about how hard startups are, what's interesting to us, how we can collaborate, how we can build businesses together and what the next big thing is. That's what The Room Where it Happens is.

Sahil Bloom (01:09):
If this podcast were available five years ago for me, I think I would've meaningfully accelerated the trajectory of my own life and my career. And part of that would've been the insights generated. The things I learned from actually listening to people. But the biggest part of it would've been the people I met. The relationships I built with other community members with the hosts, with the guests. That is what is the force multiplier for your career, those networks, how that compounds over time, just as well as any financial investment. That is what I would've gotten out of it.

Greg Isenberg (01:39):
I probably would've met my co-founder. I probably would've met my early teammates. I probably would've found community. I would be 25 times more informed and 50 times more wealthy. That would've just supercharged my career.

Sahil Bloom (01:58):
Greg and I met in The Room Where it Happens. We met through the confluence of a bunch of chance events. We were in a group text thread together with a handful of friends and became as close as we are today because of that. It was The Room Where it Happens. All of these ideas were being generated and that was what sparked us, originally, to start thinking about this and thinking about how we could scale this so that more of you could be a part of what we had experienced and what we had benefited from.

Greg Isenberg (02:27):
The moment that changed my mind about business and opportunity was the first time I ever went to Silicon Valley. I was reading up about all these entrepreneurs, all these investors on places like TechCrunch. And I landed and I expected them to be incredibly great, so much different from you and I. And I started having conversations with them and I realized they weren't smarter than us. They might have had better connections, more money, gone to better schools, but that was it. That was when I realized I could do anything.

Sahil Bloom (03:03):
So a moment that changed my mind about all of this, about business, opportunity, everything, I got invited by a mentor to go to a fundraiser event. I was 24. I was fresh out of school, very green. And I went to this event. There were all these amazing people there, really impressive people that I was, frankly, quite intimidated by. And I was in these conversations with them and just very quickly realized that there was nothing different about them versus me, but they were in these rooms constantly. They were around different, interesting people. They were having these conversations and that was what was making them different. They were able to generate these insights because they were in these room. And that was the moment I realized I had to just find a way to be in those rooms.

Greg Isenberg (03:49):
The gap between what people think business is and what actually happens is what Scott Belsky calls the messy middle. Think of The Social Network, the movie. Mark Zuckerberg starts Facebook and then all of a sudden it's massive. It's this romantic idea that people have about startups and entrepreneurship. In reality, the messy middle, the time in between starting and the outcome is 99% of the process of business and startups and entrepreneurship. And I actually find that messy middle to be the most amount of fun. It's when you rise up, it's when you fall down, it's when you zig and it's when you zag.

Sahil Bloom (04:35):
So in my mind, the biggest gap between what people think business is versus what it really is, is that aspect of just crawling through the river of shit that exists between where you start and where you finish. It's like The Shawshank Redemption. You got to just go through that period. And to me, that's getting up every day and just getting punched in the gut over and over and over again, and being willing to get up and continue to push through and continue to work with your team, solicit feedback, work with others and just get through it. But that willingness to get punched in the face, to get knocked down and to get back up, no one talks about that. Everyone talks about the successes. You love the glamor you love when someone rings the bell at the New York Stock Exchange, when they IPO, they're billionaire, it's great.

(05:23):
No one talks about that middle time when you're just getting punched over and over and over again. What frustrates me most about the current state of podcasts is just that it's one sided. It all ends as soon as you finish the conversation during the interview. It's an interview, you talk to someone, you ask them questions and then it ends and that's it. That's all you get from them. And they might have said something amazing that intrigued you, that sparked your interest. You want to follow up, you want to dig deeper, but that's it. That's all you get and it's over. And so when I think about the opportunity that exists, it's changing that. Fundamentally flipping it on its head, making it a conversation, following up, digging deeper, going further with all the insights. That's how we take this entire thing to a whole new level.

Greg Isenberg (06:08):
I believe the current state of podcasting sucks. A few people have microphones and it's just not fair. What if you allowed a bunch of people to have microphones so they could connect, so they can collaborate so that they can build community. And that's what we're trying to do with The Room Where it Happens. Yes, we're in the room and we have some microphones, but we're also inviting you in. We want you to ask questions. We want to collaborate with you. We want to build businesses with you. And that's why I wanted to create a new, more modern way of podcasting. What am I most excited about with this show and community?

Sahil Bloom (06:46):
It has to be seeing the amazing things that come out of this community. It has to be seeing all of you going off and having these great experiences, having new insights that come from it, starting new things, failing, succeeding, all of that. And what it's going to create out in the world is what I'm most excited about. We get to sit here, have conversations. We get to hang out with friends, talk to some amazing guests, but the thing that's going to be best is when we see you take that and run with it 100 times over to create something much bigger than what we are doing here.

Greg Isenberg (07:20):
Watching where you are today and where you're going to be tomorrow and where you're going to be a week from now, a month, a year, 10 years. We're in this for the long game. And what excites me about... I mean, the reason why I got into community was because I love seeing people progress, advance, do big things. And I know that being a part of The Room Where it Happens, good things will happen to you.

Sahil Bloom (07:47):
So how are we going to ensure this is different than everything else out there? Two ways. Number one, alcohol. We're going to get everyone really drunk with us and it's going to be fun and we're going to get them loose. Because they're not going to be having the same conversation they're having on to every single other podcast, because they're going to be sitting there drinking with us and it's going to be fun. So that's number one. Number two, we want to learn from you. We want to get better at this. We're in it for the long game. This isn't one episode, this isn't one season. We're going to be doing it. So when you're hearing things, if you want us to improve on stuff, if you have ideas, episodes, be a part of it with us, tell us, message us. You're in the Discord, be there with us, help us improve as we grow, and we'll make sure that it is the best thing that we can possibly create.

Greg Isenberg (08:28):
And you're going to keep us on us. You're going to be in our Discord. You're going to be in our community. And if anything feels not authentic, not great, we're in this together, and we want to make this as authentic as possible.

Tom Conrad (00:00:00):
There's this belief that everybody needs to be a founder. I think, in some ways, our industry would be much better off if there were fewer founders. There's an entire category of smart, creative, hardworking, talented, borderline visionary people who can raise that $2 million seed and go off and build some stupid company that's never going to go anywhere. That would be so much better off finding a team that needs their skillset and working on a problem that has a mathematical formula that's going to win on any metric. Whatever metric you care about. You want the acclaim of your peers, you want financial reward, you want outside impact on culture, whatever the thing is that gets you out of bed every morning, you can achieve that in collaboration with others. You don't have to be the person that raises the seed round.

Speaker 1 (00:00:52):
Today, my guest is Tom Conrad. Tom was an engineer at Apple, CTO of Pandora, which he helped take from zero to 80 million users. He's also VP of product at Snap, where he was the right-hand man to Evan Spiegel for two years. He's been on the Board of Sonos for over seven years. He was also part of two infamous product failures, Quibi, where he was chief product officer, which raised over $2 billion and died less than a year after launch.

(00:01:17):
He was also a senior engineering leader at Pets.com, which famously went from nothing to a public company, to completely out of business in 19 months. Today, Tom is the CEO of Zero Longevity Science, which is on a mission to extend the lifespan and the health span of the human race. In our conversation, we dig into what Tom's learned from these famous product failures, also, what he's learned from the many product successes. Tom also shares what he's learned about how to pick where to go work and what to avoid. How important understanding the math formula of the business model is. Also, lessons on burnout and health and leadership and contrarian corner. With that, I bring you Tom Conrad, after a short word from our sponsors.

Lenny (00:02:01):
This episode is brought to you by Coda. You've heard me talk about how Coda is the doc that brings it all together and how it can help your team run smoother and be more efficient. I know this firsthand because Coda does that for me. I use Coda every day to wrangle my newsletter content calendar, my interview notes for podcasts, and to coordinate my sponsors. More recently, I actually wrote a whole post on how Coda's product team operates.

(00:02:25):
Within that post, they shared a dozen templates that they use internally to run their product team. Including managing the roadmap, their OKI process, getting internal feedback, and essentially their whole product development process is done within Coda. If your team's work is spread out across different documents and spreadsheets and a stack of workflow tools, that's why you need Coda. Coda puts data in one centralized location regardless of format, eliminating roadblocks that can slow your team down.

(00:02:52):
Coda allows your team to operate on the same information and collaborate in one place. Take advantage of this special limited time offer just for startups. Sign up today at coda.io/lenny and get a thousand dollars startup credit on your first statement. That's C-O-D-A.io/lenny to sign up and get a startup credit of $1,000. Coda.io/lenny.

Speaker 1 (00:03:17):
You fell in love with building products for a reason, but sometimes the day-to-day reality is a little different than you imagined. Instead of dreaming up big ideas, talking to customers and crafting a strategy, you're drowning in spreadsheets and roadmap updates, and you're spending your days basically putting out fires. A better way is possible. Introducing Jira Product Discovery, the new prioritization and road mapping tool built for product teams by Atlassian.

(00:03:44):
With Jira Product Discovery, you can gather all your product ideas and insights in one place and prioritize confidently, finally replacing those endless spreadsheets. Create and share custom product roadmaps with any stakeholder in seconds. It's all built on Jira where your engineering team's already working. True collaboration is finally possible. Great products are built by great teams, not just engineers. Sales support, leadership, even Greg from Finance.

(00:04:12):
Anyone that you want can contribute ideas, feedback, and insights in Jira Product Discovery for free. No catch. It's only $10 a month for you. Say goodbye to your spreadsheets and the never ending alignment efforts. The old way of doing product management is over. Rediscover what's possible with Jira product discovery. Try it for free at atlassian.com/lenny. That's atlassian.com/lenny.

Lenny (00:04:40):
Tom, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Tom Conrad (00:04:44):
Thank you. It's so fun that I get to be a part of this.

Lenny (00:04:46):
I thought it'd be fun to start with a story about your time at Apple and you building this now very ubiquitous feature of dragging and dropping something into a folder. Which I saw you tweet about or talk about at a talk and the fact that it's still around. Can you just share that story and maybe a lesson from that experience that you've taken away?

Tom Conrad (00:05:05):
Sure. Let's see. I was 15 years old when the Macintosh came out. I remember really clearly my entire teenage years. All I wanted to do was to move from Columbus, Ohio to Cupertino and work for Apple. My heroes were that team of people that had written their signatures on the inside of the Macintosh. We cracked open the first Macintosh case. You would find the signatures of the 20 people or so who worked on the Mac. That was my only ambition, truly.

(00:05:40):
This was a period where no one wanted to work for Apple. That wasn't a thing. It seems like maybe a little obvious today, but it wasn't an obvious ambition at all back then. Anyway, I went to college. It's all I wanted to do. Studied computer engineering at University of Michigan, and as we talk about my career, it is just over and over and over. I'm going to say an incredibly lucky thing happened. The first incredibly lucky thing that happened for me in my career probably was that University of Michigan happened to be a place that Apple recruited from.

(00:06:08):
I didn't know that when I chose the school, but it made it reasonably easy to connect to a hiring manager at Apple. I wrote an actual letter and put it in an actual envelope and put it in the mail and got an internship and drove out in my dad's Pontiac from the Midwest to California. Spent a summer interning and my last day of the internship, I was thinking about really what I wanted to do when I came back. Hopefully came back to Apple after I graduated.

(00:06:39):
I had worked on a product that became shipped. It was called the QuickDraw GX. It was earlier second generation rendering system for the Mac. I'd been that team's intern for the summer. But what I really wanted to do is I wanted to work on the Finder. This is the only thing in the whole world I really wanted to do. I went and found Ron Lichty, who is the manager of the Finder team and said, "I graduate in 10 months. I'd love to be a part of your team."

(00:07:06):
I think he was like, why are you coming and talking to me now? You're literally going back to Michigan tomorrow. I go back to Michigan in May, the phone rings and Ron says, "The college recruiting department just told me that I have a college hiring rep and if I don't use it by tomorrow, I lose it." He's like, "I can't even interview you, you can't meet the team, but you're basically a freebie for me. Do you want this job?"

(00:07:38):
Just insanely lucky moment, got this job. I get to Apple in the summer of 1992 and I have a laundry list of things that I would like to do to make the Finder more usable. I remember sitting in Ron's office and saying, "At the grocery store, when you're carrying bags of groceries out, the door's automatically open for you? I think the Finder should do the same thing. When you're dragging an icon around and you want to put it in a folder, you should be able to hover maybe over the folder icons and drill down into the file system to get to where you're going.

(00:08:20):
Then when you drop the file, all of the folders that opened up between you and your source and your destination would close for you." Ron thought that was a fine idea, so that was the way Apple worked in those days. I just went off and started coding that up. I got to the point late one night, two in the morning at Apple, no one else was there, where I needed some kind of animation to indicate that the folder was about to open.

(00:08:48):
I'm certainly not an animator and I certainly wasn't going to do anything thoughtful in the middle of the night. I just wrote some code that blinked the folder, like selected unselected, selected unselected five times and thought, oh, I'll email one of the really talented visual designers to do something much more interesting. Long story short, apple finally shipped that feature four years later. Sat in the source code repository forever while we did other things.

(00:09:21):
When it shipped four years later, it blinked five times. Roll the clock forward six or seven years, Mac plus 10 comes out, entirely new Finder rewritten from scratch. No spring-loaded folders anywhere to be seen. People complained about it. It got re-implemented. All of the code, brand new. Folder blinks five times when you hover over it. Roll the clock forward another decade, IOS comes along and they added folders. When you drag an icon around, it blinks a few times.

(00:09:51):
I'm not sure what the point of this story is other than maybe it's something about, I think we all do this as designers and product people. We take these shortcuts that we think that we'll go back later and clean up. Sometimes, it's literally been 30 years that little design detail lingers three implementations later and now it's just a part of the way that these Apple products work. Pretty bizarre.

Lenny (00:10:16):
As you were talking, I'm on a Mac right now recording this and I just did it just to make sure it's still there and it is indeed still there. I think it blinks three times and then just opens up for you.

Tom Conrad (00:10:25):
There you go.

Lenny (00:10:26):
Full engineers got royalties on features they build that continue to live on in our product.

Tom Conrad (00:10:30):
Okay, I'll tell you just one other little thing to center you in time about what the Finder was like in 1992. We didn't get royalties, but our names were in the About box. You would go to About the Finder and the seven of us, there were seven engineers at Apple that worked on The Finder. Our names would scroll by the Finder, copyright 1992, yada, yada, yada, one name after another. Totally different era.

Lenny (00:10:55):
It feels like you got what you wanted with the name scribbled on the motherboard.

Tom Conrad (00:10:59):
For sure. I've gotten a lot of the things I wanted as a kid.

Lenny (00:11:05):
Along the same lines, I want to talk a bit about picking where to go work. Clearly you had a sense you wanted to go work at Apple. Over your career, you've landed at a lot of really successful places. You've also landed at a lot of very famous failures that we're going to talk about. What advice would you give people for helping them pick where to go work based on your experience?

Tom Conrad (00:11:25):
When I was a kid, my ambition to work at Apple was entirely about the product, so probably that version of me would say, find a product that you're passionate about and go spend your time and energy on that thing. Pretty quickly you learn that an awful lot of your development and day-to-day satisfaction really comes from the people that you get to collaborate with. Can you learn from them? Do you like them? Do they challenge you in the right ways?

(00:11:53):
Do they give you latitude in the right ways? It's so much about not just what, but who. For a very long time, my advice would've been entirely in the category of life, find something that you love with people that you think are amazing and the rest will take care of itself. Interestingly, I have been lucky enough to have some things that were successful on the metrics, get talked about the most, big audiences, big financial return, et cetera, et cetera. I've also worked on some things that were really notable disasters. When I look back on my career and think about the things that I've done, my professional satisfaction is not well correlated with those external metrics and very, very coordinated with do I love the thing we were building and do I love the people I was working with?

Lenny (00:12:43):
Following the thread of the people. I think one of the hardest things is really knowing what the people are like until you join. I think as a chief product officer joining or VP of product, you have a lot of time that you spend with the team. Most people don't. They have an interview and then they're like, all right, I got to make a decision. Do you have any advice for how to help people get a sense if the people are the kind of people they want to work with?

Tom Conrad (00:13:03):
I think people are really, really good at this. Every single time I've taken a job where it turned out that I was working with people who had a different set of values or working styles than I had, I knew. You tell yourself that, at least in my case, I tell myself a story about why the thing I suspect might be the case isn't the case. But you do this in your personal life all the time. You meet people out at dinner, so you get seated next to them at some industry event or something, and sometimes you come home and say to your partner, oh my gosh, the person next to me was just the worst. Then sometimes you're like, I think I made a permanent lifelong connection with this total stranger who just happened to sit next to me.

Lenny (00:13:55):
It's a very simple piece of advice that I think people don't fully appreciate is just trust your instinct, trust your gut. Just pay attention to what comes up when you're around people at a certain company. Okay, you brought up this phrase of notable disasters, and I want to talk about that. You've worked at two of the most famous notable disasters of product companies, pets.com and Quibi. I think it's really rare someone sees the inside of so much hype and then such a fall at a company. I just want to spend some time in these two areas. Maybe the way to set it up is, what's a lesson you took away from each of these two experiences that you've taken with you to future work and maybe advice you share with people?

Tom Conrad (00:14:37):
Probably the biggest lesson, it's not really about the specifics of the business. The biggest lesson really is these things make you better. In some instances, actually, I think in both instances they became dominoes that opened doors for me in my own ambition and my own professional life that maybe just wouldn't have opened at all if I hadn't gone to those companies and learned those things and had those experiences. Frankly, even in the case of pets.com, even the high profile nature of it.

(00:15:09):
I could have worked at one of a thousand E-commerce websites in 1999. When I went on to some subsequent job interview or something and talked about my experience, they were like, I never heard of the thing that you worked on. But everybody certainly heard about pets.com. It's a pretty funny example too, of how some struggles are timeless. That was 23, 24 years ago now. While as a leadership team, we made I'm sure all kinds of mistakes.

(00:15:39):
One of the things that happened was that there were three overfunded pet E-commerce sites. We all raised in excess of $50 million, which is a tremendous amount of money now. It was a tremendous amount of money then. We all thought it was a zero-sum game. That as one player started to spend on promotion or to spend irrationally on national broadcast television advertising, we all did. It became this unwinnable arms race. There is, I think, a fundamental lesson about having an excess of investment can be its own albatross. Or lead you to make decisions that maybe would be unwise. Then of course, it's just like timing is really important. Chewy is a online pet store worth $9 billion today. They were a private company and bought by PetSmart and then spun back out. But when they were bought by PetSmart, they were acquired for three billion dollars. Biggest E-commerce acquisition of all time. Well, I think it's probably unfair to compare Chewy who executed exceptionally well over a decade, grew their business brick by brick and turned it into something really remarkable.

(00:17:07):
To pets.com, which was in a very, very different moment in time and tried to go to market in a really different way. The critique that is often leveled at pets.com, or at least at the time, was like, this is just a stupid business. They're shipping dog food around. You could never make that work. That's just wrong. You absolutely can make it work. Probably can't make it work when 80% of the country on the internet is still on dial up. It was really, really early.

Lenny (00:17:33):
I saw a stat, I think you shared somewhere, that you took pets.com from nothing to a public company to completely out of business in 19 months.

Tom Conrad (00:17:40):
Yeah, I think that's about right. The other thing that's forgotten in the tale is that we actually didn't go bankrupt. We shut the company down and returned the remaining balance to the investors, which no public company had ever done before. The leadership team just reached the conclusion that given the way market conditions had evolved, there was just no way we were going to be able to get more capital into the company. It was a company that required additional investment to get to profitability. It was better to wind down early, take the money that we had in the bank and get it back to investors than to just spend every last penny on what was a fruitless attempt to salvage it.

Lenny (00:18:29):
Did not know that. Let's talk about Quibi. What went wrong there? Do you think there was a path to Quibi having worked out? Any big lessons that you took away from that experience that you bring with you?

Tom Conrad (00:18:40):
The miraculous thing about Quibi for me was it re-lit my enthusiasm for the industry for doing this work. I had left in, I think it was December of 2018, and I thought that maybe I was just done making software. I had done it for a really long time, for 25 years or something. I had changed a lot. The industry had changed a lot. I thought maybe I just didn't have the same passion for it that I had a decade before. It also seemed like maybe it'd be fun to have another chapter of my life that was just completely different.

(00:19:23):
I had a whole list of things that I thought I might want to do. They're ridiculous. It's like maybe I want to be a pastry chef. Maybe I want to be a landscape photographer. Maybe I want to learn to make bad music to put up on SoundCloud or something. Really the only thing they had in common were they all things that I knew nothing about. People would be like, "Oh, you think you might want to be a pastry chef? Do you like to bake?"

(00:19:42):
I'd be like, "No, I don't know anything about baking." "Oh, you like landscape photography. Do you take photos?" "No, I don't take photos." But I was committed to the bit, actually to the point where when Techwrench interviewed me about my departure from Snapchat, I was like, I'm out. I'm going to do something else entirely. That story is very much out there. But a few months after my last day at Snap, I got a call from Meg Whitman and Jeffrey Katzenberg who were starting up, it was for New TV at the time.

(00:20:15):
The pitch was, we're going to try to take the best of mobile and Silicon Valley and consumer tech and weld it to the best of Hollywood style content production. To build something completely bespoke and purpose made for consumption on the phone. They were looking for both technology leadership and product leadership and wanted to know if I was interested in one or both. I took the meeting, even though I wasn't really taking these kinds of calls from anybody, it just seemed like who's going to pass up the opportunity to have lunch with the two of them?

(00:20:50):
I listened to the pitch and politely declined and told them that I was going to be a pastry chef or something. We kept doing that every couple of months for seven months. We'd go to lunch, they would give me an update on the progress they were making, and I would decline the invitation to get involved somehow. Then late in that year, I went to lunch one more time, and Meg explained that they brought on someone to lead technology and they brought another person to lead product.

(00:21:26):
Both of them really truly for reasons that are completely disconnected from Quibi itself. Both of them had left after about six weeks. Meg's like, "We've raised all this money and we told the world that we're shipping this product in about a year. We got an awful lot to do, and I really could use some help. I would consider it a personal favor if you were to come and spend just a couple of days a week helping." She's like, "I'll continue to look for someone who actually wants the job, but it'd be great if you could help me get this off the ground." My wife is a freelance writer, marketing strategist, and loves her life as a freelance contributor. She's like, "You should do this. Why not? It's two days a week. It's just a few months. What's the worst thing that could happen? Maybe you'll like it?" I'm like, "No. Here's the thing that will happen. I won't do it two days a week. It will immediately be three days, then four days, then five days, then six days. I just know myself."

(00:22:27):
She's like, "No." She's like, "Just on Wednesday night at six o'clock, close your Quibi laptop and be like, all they're paying me for is for Tuesday and Wednesday and then open it back up on Tuesday morning. That's all you've got to do." Well, she's right about most things and she's wrong about this. I fell deeply into it right away. It was just so fun to get to build a team from scratch and to design and build a product from scratch.

(00:22:58):
To take advantage of all of the modern software architecture stuff that had come into being over the course of the 15 years since we had started Pandora. I'm embarrassed about some of what happened with Quibi for sure, but I'm super grateful for the experience. I just really fell in love with the industry again, and was reminded of just how rewarding it can be to build something and to try to put it out there even if you stumble pretty mightily along the way.

Lenny (00:23:35):
Is there something that you took away from that experience that taught you what to try to avoid? What to try to pull towards?

Tom Conrad (00:23:43):
I think I misunderstood or misjudged companies sometimes by thinking about them really focused on the product execution. If you find an interesting problem that people care about and you solve that problem in a really beautiful, elegant, delightful way, that's 10 times better than anything else that they can get in that same space, they'll tell their friends and all the rest will take care of itself. That was always my ambition.

(00:24:16):
Find a thing that I cared about building, do a great job building it really delightful way. Go really deep on listening to people and their feedback and iterate your way to success and breaking through that membrane that we all strive to get across. The really great word of mouth. But I think the thing I've come to better appreciate is that companies are also like a math problem that describes how you take investment and pour them into the equation and out the other side comes returns on some time horizon.

(00:24:54):
Yes, there are variables in that equation that are influenced by the product that you build and all of the little details and decisions that you make about making that product great. But if the equation is fundamentally broken or a big swing in and of itself, no amount of iteration and execution can get you out of the failed outputs of the broken equation. I think Quibi made a bet that you could build an entirely bespoke content library that was sufficiently scaled to get people to subscribe and retain for a couple billion dollars. It was a huge amount of money. But we made 70 shows in 18 months, which is more content than all of the major broadcast networks combined made in a single year. It was a pretty major accomplishment. We made a bet that we would augment those sort of-

Tom Conrad (00:26:00):
And we made a bet that we would augment those sort of episodic and serialized or Hollywood style shows with a bunch of daily content that we produce at the level of network television, nightly news, and so forth, that would be an alternative to some of the sort of daily content that you might otherwise get on YouTube. And that was going to be about a third of the content spend.

(00:26:26):
One super interesting thing that no one talks about is that all of that content was designed to be made day of or day before it aired, so there was no back catalog of it. And it was all designed to be shot in these professional studios that we built out. It was really expensive, like I said, it was like a third of the investment we were going to making content, almost half the investment we were going to be making content.

(00:26:51):
And we launched two weeks into Covid and we couldn't make any of that content, except literally in the garages of the host's homes. And so we had this thing that was supposed to seem really set apart from YouTube, that literally now was being made exactly YouTube content, which is sort of like self-produced at home with very little sort of the support infrastructure of Hollywood. Now, you can argue, I think the content on YouTube is really, really exceptional in this category, and maybe we were never going to do better than that.

(00:27:26):
But I think what was really fundamentally broken with Quibi was that the actual foundational equation of can you make enough premium content that's totally bespoke and made for the service and takes advantage of the nature of the phone, it is enough content to get people to sign up and retain, and can you do that for a couple billion dollars? And I think the answer is no. The library has to be much, much bigger, and you have to have, like any company, you have to have sufficient time and energy to iterate on the content format itself, because our roadmap really wanted to innovate on the content format.

(00:28:06):
And so I think part of what happened is pretty quickly it became clear that the math was just wrong. It wasn't going to take 2 billion, it was going to take 6 or 8 or 10 billion. And the risk reward profile of betting 10 billion on the format was just more than anyone could stomach.

Lenny (00:28:27):
Wow. I really like this metaphor and this mental model of the math formula of the entire business and thinking of it that way. I knew Covid changed the way people consumed content and that hurt. Quibi I think it was meant to be on the go, not sitting at home where you could watch anything you want. But also the fact that the content couldn't be made as well, as you were hoping to make.

Tom Conrad (00:28:46):
Yeah, for sure.

Lenny (00:28:49):
As a CPO, one of the biggest challenges is pushing back, trying to convince the founders of their mistakes, of doing what they want and just powering through it and dealing with it sometimes I guess is there anything you think you could have done looking back, or was the math formula set up for failure from the beginning and it's probably just not going to work out almost no matter what you did?

Tom Conrad (00:29:10):
One of the bets was that we weren't going to just use the apparatus of Hollywood to make the content. In part, we are going to use the apparatus of Hollywood to market the content. So Jeffrey had recruited this incredible Rolodex of literally the world's most famous celebrities to make shows for Quibi. We kind of had everyone either made something for launch or was going to make something.

(00:29:42):
And part of what they're going to do is turn up in culture and talk about their shows. We've heard a lot in the last six months about how hard it's to market movies because the stars can't go out and talk about the movies during the strike.

(00:29:54):
There was this theory that you could apply the marketing technique of Hollywood to get 20, 30 million people into the theater on opening weekend for Quibi. And that was always a very, very audacious take, I thought. Uber has all the money in the world to experiment with paid user acquisition, and they're not consistently a top 10 most downloaded app in the app store.

(00:30:26):
But the theory of Quibi, the math of Quibi, did require us to from day one land in the top 10 and stay there forever. The model would have worked if we could do that. And to the Hollywood marketing apparatus, the numbers that it takes to get there felt kind of small. If you can get 20 million people in to see Shrek on opening night new IP, surely you can get them to take their phone out of their pocket and download this thing and start a free trial.

(00:30:54):
Now, those of us who have spent our life in Silicon Valley making software and really, really tried to get people to show up and download new IP in large numbers know just how hard that is.

(00:31:09):
So maybe if I critique my own contribution to the math equation, maybe I should have beat the drum a little harder about just how unlikely it was that we were going to land the kind of distribution in month one that the model sort of required. If I had to go back and do it again, I think I would spend maybe more time investing and illuminating that aspect of the digital universe.

Lenny (00:31:42):
That is such a good takeaway of just showing the leaders, here's the data, here's the assumptions that we're all betting on, and do you believe this can happen? And they probably would've said, "Yes, this will happen. I'm so confident."

Tom Conrad (00:31:55):
What made it hard was, it wasn't structurally impossible. If you had to be bigger than any app that had ever been made, then you could probably make the case it's impossible. But since you only sort of had the land in the top 10, you couldn't quite say it was impossible, you could just say it was highly improbable.

(00:32:18):
And maybe one of my mistakes was, I guess I imagined that we would launch, and when the likely thing happened that we got millions of people to download the app, which we did, and then when we inevitably struggled to retain those users at high percentages, and we retained at what I think of as a good industry starting point, but we weren't setting any records on retention. I just imagined that what would happen next is the thing that happens in all young companies, you would iterate. You would grind on the funnel until a year later, two years later, six months later, whatever it is. You figured the formula out to get people in and get them to stay and get them to retain.

(00:33:12):
And what I didn't appreciate was just how quickly you go back to the foundational math and then the math really says you just can't. You can't spend two years iterating your way on optimizing the funnels like you would in a startup that had a different cost structure. In a world where you have to spend a billion dollars a year of making content, you just can't afford to not be a hit.

Lenny (00:33:40):
I think it's also important to just remind us, it's okay for these things to happen. People take a bet, as you said, we're going to try this thing, here's our bet, here's our experiment. We're betting on this sort of format in this business. We're going to raise money from investors that know they might lose all their money. And it sometimes doesn't work out. It's part of the game.

Tom Conrad (00:33:56):
It's certainly painful to take money from investors even if they know what they're doing and to not get them a return. I feel a real responsibility to investors to do better than we did at Quibi.

(00:34:08):
But yeah, I mean, there is a risk reward thing that goes along with these investments, and part of the reason they get all the riches on the upside is that they're going to bet on some Quibis along the way too.

Lenny (00:34:18):
So as you were talking, you said that it was called NewTV, and that sparked a memory, and I searched my email. And I actually got an email from a recruiter in 2018, we just kicked off a very special executive opportunity, the CPO at NewTV, a new venture in Los Angeles, with Jeffrey Katzenberg and Meg Whitman, raising a billion dollars, working with top talent. Are you interested in exploring this opportunity?

Tom Conrad (00:34:41):
Lenny, Lenny, Lenny. Your story could have been so much different.

Lenny (00:34:46):
This could have been Thomas podcast. Lenny, tell me about what happened at Quibi.

Tom Conrad (00:34:51):
I would take that free.

Lenny (00:34:54):
I don't know. There's pros and cons. They even sent this whole PDF, a TV in your pocket, NewTV. Amazing. All right. I'm going to read through this and see what they pitched back in the day.

(00:35:05):
Okay, let's move on to things that worked out really well, let's call it notable successes, other products you worked on that worked out great. So I'll list a few of them. And maybe what might be helpful is just we'll just go through each one and share what you took away from that experience, a lesson you learned from working on those products.

(00:35:23):
The ones that come to mind for me are Snap, Pandora, Apple if we want to go there. Also, you built, I don't know exactly what you did there, but you worked on You Don't Know Jack, this game that I loved. I think if you're an elder millennial, you're just going to like, "Oh my God, I love that game." I don't even remember it exactly, but I just remember the visceral feeling of playing that game and it was so much fun. So that's cool. I didn't know that you worked on that. And then there's also Sonos, which you're on the board.

(00:35:49):
So whatever order you think might be most interesting, just going through those and what did you learn from that experience?

Tom Conrad (00:35:56):
I worked at Apple in the interval where Steve was gone, John Skelly, that kind of period, so System 7, System 8, Power Macintosh, that whole era. And we were doing a lot. We shipped a bunch of great hardware. We transitioned the company from Motorola 68,000 CPUs to the Power PC architecture.

(00:36:19):
But, particularly in that transition, we really struggled to ship consumer software features. I mentioned that I wrote three LAN folders and some other consumer features in my first six months at Apple, and they shipped four years later, actually after I'd left the company. I was a little surprised they were still in the software repository even, candidly.

(00:36:40):
But I'll tell you that one of the things culturally about Apple in that moment was, at least I felt like, a person was really rewarded if they could make a kind of broad contribution across functions. So if you were a talented software engineer, but also a thoughtful product designer, and maybe also had interesting input on product marketing, that you could build a really great reputation inside the company by playing all of those positions a little bit day to day.

(00:37:19):
And so when I left Apple after four years, I look back on my time, I didn't ship as much software as I had hoped, and I felt like a little bit like a professional gadfly. I was six miles wide and a centimeter deep.

(00:37:36):
And I went to work for this company called Berkeley Systems. In addition to You Don't Know Jack, they made a flying toaster screensaver, if you remember. You remember the nineties?

Lenny (00:37:48):
How could you forget that?

Tom Conrad (00:37:50):
And when I met them, they were picking off this game development for this trivia game, and were looking for someone to lead the technical team. And so I joined as technical director for the You Don't Know Jack franchise, managed a team of engineers, and it was a completely different culture than what I was used to at Apple.

(00:38:11):
It was certainly the case that I was welcome to weigh in on the game design or the marketing or some other aspect of the deliverables, but my job was to build the software on time with high quality, period. And if I did those things, I'd be rewarded. And if I didn't, I would not be successful. And no amount of insightful feedback on the gameplay or the packaging, or whatever else I might want to do, was going to benefit me and my career at all.

(00:38:48):
And it was such a blessing to be forced to go deep on something, because I spent a lot of time developing chops as an engineering manager, but I also wrote a ton of software. And that's really honestly when I became a software engineer. My college education was insufficient to get me there, and the amount of software I wrote at Apple was insufficient to get me there. But I came out of my Berkeley Systems You Don't Know Jack experience feeling like I could really hold my own technically in a way that just wouldn't have happened.

(00:39:20):
And so I do think that there's something to be said for a culture where there are swim lanes and people are encouraged to be really, really exceptional in their lane. And so I feel really lucky that I stumbled into You Don't Know Jack When I did.

(00:39:36):
And it was also, I mean, it was the first thing that I worked on that had just huge cultural awareness for a couple of years. I mean, it's crazy, they're still making sequels. It has been nearly 30 years, and there are versions of You Don't Know Jack that are in all of the stores, in the PlayStation store, in the Xbox store, in the iOS store. You can play new versions of You Don't Know Jack to this day. It's crazy.

Lenny (00:40:07):
Did not know that. I see the website now and it's a little different, but basically the same.

Tom Conrad (00:40:13):
So I'd say my lesson from You Don't Know Jack was definitely, it really does pay to get good at something and not just be a generalist.

(00:40:24):
And then, I mean Pandora, it wasn't quite the next thing that happened. After You Don't Know Jack was Pets.com, and then after Pets.com there was nuclear winter in the industry and I worked in enterprise software for a while.

(00:40:37):
And after nuclear winter I had this idea that I was going to build a destination for music discovery on the web. And I've been doing enterprise software, the consumer intranet was non-existent for those years, early aughts.

(00:40:54):
But around 2004, things started to thaw a little bit and you started to hear the first signs of the companies that we came to call Web 2.0, Flickr would've been one of the early examples. And one of the enterprise software things I did was a personalization recommendation engine that used a vector space. It's like a lot of the things that we're talking about now in AI, albeit 20 years ago.

(00:41:21):
And so I knew something about recommendation systems in the enterprise space, and I was super passionate about music. I'm not a musician, but I was that kid in college who would corner you and be like, oh, if you like this band, I got to play this for you and [inaudible 00:41:37] with stereo until you would beg to leave.

(00:41:40):
And so I had this idea that maybe I can use the internet to do that at scale, not with just one person, but with hundreds of thousands of people or millions of people maybe. Introduce them to music that they would love but otherwise would miss out on.

(00:41:53):
And I promised that I was going to tell stories about luck in my career, there's been a gazillion of them. But one really dramatic incidence of that is I was sort of biding my time to exit this enterprise software company. I was VP of engineering, a whole team that reported to me. I felt a lot of responsibility to exit in a responsible way. But I was really excited about this digital music company that I was going to start. But I wasn't telling anyone at all because I didn't want ti to get back to the team.

(00:42:25):
So I flew down to Los Angeles to go out to Coachella in the spring of 2004, and completely randomly physically bumped into a guy that I had gone to high school with on the polo field, and hadn't seen him in a decade. And the thing that we had in common in high school was we loved music. And so I tell them the story of, I'm going to start this company to do personalized digital music on the internet. And he said, there's this woman I work with who just left our company to move to Oakland to work for this little company called Savage Beast that are also doing something in music recommendation. Do you want to talk to them? And I said, "Sure, why not?"

(00:43:11):
So I got introduced to Tim Westergren, who was the founder of Savage Beast. Savage Beast was like a seven or eight full-time employees at that point. They made a music recommendation engine that they licensed to other companies to put in consumer products. So Savage Beast's customers were Best Buy, who put it in kiosks, and AOL, who used it on the AOL Music website. And they were looking for a VP of engineering. And I got the offer, thought about it a little bit. I declined because it was kind of this B2B2C thing and I really wanted to do something consumer and I had an idea about the app.

(00:43:49):
And a month later, they called again and said, "We keep talking to people. We really think that you're the person." And interestingly, one of the reasons they thought that I was the person is they were really impressed by the fact that I had run engineering at Pets.com. So I mean, it's just one of those things where these things do pay dividends, even when they're a disaster.

(00:44:07):
And honestly, what I would really say was almost like a lapse in judgment, I said yes, even though it wasn't the product that I wanted to build. And I won't bore you with all of the details, but 90 days later, after some typical early stage founder drama stuff, the founding head of technology and product had resigned completely unrelated to my arrival. And the company had a new CEO, Joe Kennedy, and Joe had this idea for what he called the 1-Click Personal Radio. And Joe is a product marketer and just the best CEO in the whole world. We spent 10 years together building Pandora.

(00:44:51):
And he sort of gave me the keys and just said, "As long as it fits the brief for 1-Click Personal Radio, it's all yours." And I got to build the team and the culture, in collaboration with him and Tim the founder, over the course of the next 10 years, and just every good thing.

(00:45:14):
So I mean, there's just a million billion lessons from Pandora, and everything I am as a product leader and then an engineering leader comes from things that happen at Pandora.

(00:45:24):
But maybe the thing that I think of first is, I think we met our early audience in an incredibly genuine way. For example, when we launched the support@pandora.com was an alias for all@pandora.com. So if you sent a customer service request to Pandora, every single person in the company received it. And because we made a decision to have no customer support team in the first year, the expectation was that whoever sees the request first should respond to it.

(00:46:01):
And so you would write to us and you would get the founder or you'd get me or you'd get the engineer who wrote the feature or you'd get the CEO. And there were no macros to respond to commonly asked question. There was no read the FAQ. And there were no rules about what you could and couldn't say. If the person's like, "I think this feature is stupid and broken," we would encourage people to say, "You know what? I think you're right and I'm really struggling to get our stupid head of product to agree with me. I'm going to CC Tom and maybe we can convince him that this was a bad decision."

(00:46:35):
And we did all of that because we thought one of our superpowers as a young company was that we could just engage with our audience as real human beings, not as a shiny brand that was trying to be something that we could just never be. This period is where the iPod and iTunes are at the peak of their powers. And so there was no way we could sort of out-Apple Apple on the brand front.

(00:47:02):
And so we were just ourselves, and I think it really, really was a catalyst for the word of mouth that developed around Pandora. And we never spent any money on paid user acquisition, literally no dollars in the entire time I was there, because people loved the product and they told their friends about it and that's how it grew.

Lenny (00:47:21):
I saw a stat that you grew Pandora from 0 to 80 million users, from 10 employees to 3000 employees, from 0 basically to a multi-billion dollar company.

Tom Conrad (00:47:31):
We did those things. We did.

(00:47:34):
Also, I think my product stewardship in some ways set the scene for Spotify to walk through the digital streaming door and show us the exit. So Pandora is, again, such a privilege to be able to work on something that touched and continues to touch tens of millions of people's lives every month. But it's bittersweet from the standpoint that I think we had an opportunity that in some ways we misplayed.

Lenny (00:48:06):
My mom is still a huge fan of Pandora, uses it every day for whatever choice.

Tom Conrad (00:48:10):
I mean, it's still going. And the numbers are still tens of millions of people in the US listen every month. So it's a thing. But yeah, it's a little sad that it didn't have quite the staying power that some of these other things that have come along since have.

Lenny (00:48:25):
Just on that topic, do you think there's something that you could have done, someone could have done? Do you think there was an opportunity to become Spotify? Or is it the business model and the math formula was set up in such a way that it was near impossible?

Tom Conrad (00:48:37):
One of the things that was tough for Pandora was that when we started it, digital music was a category that no investor wanted to touch. It was lawsuits. There was no money to be made. There were relationships with the labels that were completely impossible to nurture. And there had been no big outcomes. I think the biggest exit in digital music when we got going was I think Yahoo had bought Musicmatch for like $400 million. And so that was seen as kind of the ceiling on the opportunity.

(00:49:08):
And along the way we found investors who believed in our vision and invested ultimately hundreds of millions of dollars in the company over its pre-public years. But there was never investor enthusiasm for the company in the category that was anything like the investor enthusiasm that a company like Spotify enjoyed just six, seven years later, Snap enjoyed for its pre-public tenure.

(00:49:35):
And I think part of what was different for Spotify is that the comps were not... Musicmatch was 400 million, they were Pandora at 8 billion, but even above that they were Netflix at 100 billion. And so investors just had this new sort of optimism about what you could do in subscription and in streaming, and Spotify really played that to their advantage in a way that we couldn't because we had gone public and the public market investors were still trying to figure us out. So we didn't have access to capital. It was very hard for us to take the same kind of risks that Spotify took.

(00:50:17):
But then I think we just completely misjudged one really important thing, which is that we were really inspired by disrupting terrestrial radio. Terrestrial radio is the predominant form of music consumption in the country. People spend, I can't remember the exact stats, but by minutes consumed, it's something like 10 times more music minutes a month on radio in the aughts and early tens than on owned music. And the advertising supported sort of radio market was a $30 billion category, and recorded music was $8 billion.

(00:50:57):
And so we had this idea that we're going to reinvent radio, and Spotify and Rdio and Apple Music and the 14 others, Rhapsody, which was Spotify before Spotify, they were all going to chase this smaller owned recorded music opportunity, and that we could be left relatively alone over here going after the less sexy but actually bigger market. And I think we just got it wrong. It should have been obvious that inevitably all of your music in any format was going to be delivered as a stream from the cloud. And that the record labels in particular, they were going to set the terms on what the structure was. And the structure that they preferred was the Spotify structure. And we operated under a different licensing...

Tom Conrad (00:52:01):
And we operated under a different licensing regime that they hated, that was a statutory license that we got from the government. And it would've been exceptionally risky for us to come out from under the statutory license and do direct deals with the labels, but it was a requirement to play in the world that they imagined as the future, and we should have imagined as the future, too. And eventually, the company got around to it, but it was too late.

Lenny (00:52:29):
It's interesting that so much of this was rooted in that original vision that you shared of Pandora of the radio, smart radio in your pocket, [inaudible 00:52:37] personal radio that you just stayed on that track, even though there was this other track. But I think it's important to point out, you said it was seven years later. And I feel like there's this interesting trend with the companies you've worked at, pets.com and Pandora, that it's too early, you just come too early at these ideas. And I feel like that tells me Quibi might still happen. There's a Quibi coming seven years from now.

Tom Conrad (00:52:59):
You know what's really funny about that? Just today, there's a headline about a Hollywood-produced show that's launching on Instagram Reels and TikTok that was shot vertical. And the headline is literally something like, "Is TikTok the new TV?" And it's pretty funny that literally, that's what Jeffrey and Meg called it when they were incubating the idea. I mean, I think it's pretty clear that purpose-built video for mobile looks a lot like TikTok. And I don't want to take anything away from all of the innovation in that space that they and the other players are driving that Quibi didn't capture in its initial product definition. But I mean, obviously, we stare at our phones consuming video of all kinds all day every day. So there there's definitely something there.

Lenny (00:53:53):
The PDF that I mentioned that I got from the recruiter, the first page again says, "You have a TV in your pocket." So it's exactly what they're pitching. That's amazing. All right. I think what I've learned, I need to bet all my money on this new Quibi clone because the timing might be right.

(00:54:07):
This episode is brought to you by HelpBar by Chameleon, the free in-app universal search solution built for SaaS. Your help content lives outside your app and is scattered in many places, forcing users to waste time hunting for answers. HelpBar solves this. It delivers answers directly inside your app and eliminates context switching. Users can search or ask questions to get AI- generated answers and lists of the most relevant documentation from all of your help sources, including your knowledge base, docs, blog, and video libraries. You can also use HelpBar to navigate your app and launch actions, such as scheduling a meeting or viewing an interactive demo.

(00:54:45):
The best products today use command-K for in-app search and navigation. HelpBar makes that readily available within your app without engineering or new code. Give users a faster and more delightful self-serve experience that reduces friction and increases in-app engagement. Upgrade your user experience with this modern component and supercharge your product-led motion. Sign up for HelpBar today. It's free and easy to set up in minutes. Check it out at helpbar.ai/lenny. That's helpbar.ai/lenny.

(00:55:18):
Let's talk about Snap briefly, and then I want to have a couple more questions.

Tom Conrad (00:55:21):
At Pandora, I was the head of product and was head of engineering. And our CEO was brilliant, but he was a product marketer. I mean, Joe was all things. He was an engineer by education, and a great marketer, and a great finance person, and just such a utility player at a very, very high level across every discipline. But he was also really, really good at letting his team do their jobs. He really let me run product and engineering. And so not only did I have tremendous latitude to make good and bad decisions about product, I also really got a seat at the table to help lead the company. So rewarding, so gratifying. Best professional experience that one could have.

(00:56:05):
So I leave Pandora after a decade. I take a year trying to figure out what I'm going to do next. But after about a year, I got introduced to Evan. And it's kind of a funny story. A mutual friend sent this introduction over. Evan immediately responded and said, "Why don't you come down to Los Angeles and have a coffee with me?" So I fly down. It's not clear if it's a job interview or what it is really. I mean, I was just lightly exploring things that were out there and was a big fan of what he was doing with Snapchat. So I spent 45 minutes with him, and then I spent 45 minutes with the head of engineering, and another 45 minutes with the head of legal, and then they tossed me into a conference room with a dozen product designers, all in their mid to late 20s, many of which had gone to school at Stanford with Evan.

(00:57:01):
I would come to learn all really, really, really impressive super, super talented people, but it was just 10 of us sitting around a conference table. And it wasn't really clear that they knew why they were talking to me, but we had an hour long free ranging conversation. And so I left, and I thought it was a totally fascinating morning, but I wasn't sure what had happened, really. It was like "Well, with these interviews, it all seemed very ad hoc. Is there a job opening?" It was a little odd. And I went to lunch on Abbott Kinney and got a text from Evan's admin saying, "Can you come back to the office? Have you gotten on your plane yet?" I was like, "I was just ordering lunch. I'll just come back right away."

(00:57:49):
So I go back. Now, it's one o'clock in the afternoon. This entire thing started at nine o'clock in the morning. I sit down in the conference room. Evan comes in with a manila envelope and says, " We loved you. We'd like for you to be our VP of product," and handed me a written offer, all the terms, the stock compensation, the whole thing. I'm gobsmacked. I'm flattered, that this is really playing to my ego. I can't believe that this company that feels like maybe the most interesting thing that's happening in consumer tech, that their notoriously brilliant and mercurial founder has taken enough of a shine to me that he wants to give at least some of the keys to the product kingdom over after such a short courtship.

(00:58:34):
So I leave, and when some of that buzz wears off, I start to wonder if there's some red flags here maybe. So I tell Evan, "Listen, I'd like to come back and meet more of the leadership team and spend more time with you, go a little deeper on what this means." And so we extend our courtship by another week or so, and I'm super impressed by the rest of the leadership team and the product thinkers and the designers and things that I was going to get to work with on a daily basis. And so I take the job full knowing that it's going to be wildly different than Pandora, where I had all of this latitude to do whatever I might want to do, and in the context of Snapchat, at best, I was going to be Evan's right hand, a person that principally executed his vision.

(00:59:29):
And that's certainly what it was. I mean, Evan and I ended up having a really great collaboration, but it was certainly most days, I was executing on his vision, both at a high level, and very much in the details. And Evan's truly brilliant, I mean, and he's also actually a really nice guy. I think in some ways, he gets a bad rep for... He has very high standards, but he's a very kind person, in my experiences with him. But it was a super exhausting job and not as soul satisfying as I wanted it to be. And after a couple of years, like I said, I thought maybe I just wanted to make croissants or something.

(01:00:14):
But one really, really big important lesson that I learned at Snap is about risk taking. And when you have the financial support and the foundational relationship with your investors that Evan has, it really allowed him to take these really big swings, acquire a technology that he thought was game changing, build features speculatively that maybe would be pruned in any other product roadmap planning process because the odds of them having an outsized impact were modest. And it just allowed him time after time to make bets that paid off, and we forget about the ones that don't work when there are so many home runs in those years. And we didn't have... Environmentally, we weren't set up for that at Pandora, but I think in some ways, I wasn't temperamentally inclined to those kinds of big swings. And I think I take bigger risks and encourage bigger swings now because of things I learned from Evan and Snap.

Lenny (01:01:18):
That is an awesome story. It resonates a lot with what Brian shared about how he thinks about product now and just telling people what to build versus very bottom up, "Tell us ideas you have." That impact, the way you run, we're going to talk a bit about you as CEO now, but I guess, do you have a place that you try to be of CEO as, "Here's what we're building"?

Tom Conrad (01:01:40):
As a product-oriented CEO, how much you should lean in to the details versus set direction and create an environment where great people can do great work, I suspect there's not one answer that applies to every company stage. When I was at Apple, one of the reasons that we struggled to ship things is that Apple did a great job of assembling incredibly, incredibly smart and talented people. Just everyone around me at that early stage in my career was so, so inspiring. But one of the side effects of that is we would get in a room and we would turn over some problem or opportunity, and we would talk ourselves out of every good solution because it wasn't perfect. I used to joke that Apple was the only place in the world where a vote of a thousand to one was a tie because that one person would be so thoughtful in their critique that the other thousand people would be like, "Hmm, that's right, that's right." And even though there's been this huge consensus of what the right answer was, we would talk ourselves out of making decisions.

Lenny (01:02:50):
That one wasn't Steve Jobs, necessarily? It could be somebody else?

Tom Conrad (01:02:53):
He wasn't there.

Lenny (01:02:55):
Wow.

Tom Conrad (01:02:56):
So I think what broke Apple out of that mode was Steve came back and they didn't vote anymore. Steve was just making the call. And so I have some sympathy for Brian and Evan, who have these big, thousands of people working for them. And as they delegate, they grow frustrated that there's not progress at the pace that they're looking for, and that there's indecision, and the people on the teams report that there's just churn and no progress, and there's fiefdoms and politics and all the rest, and that as the CEO, as a brilliant product-oriented CEO, they are uniquely situated to come in and cut through all of that garbage and get the trains running on time again.

(01:03:49):
Having said all of that, I also think that it can be a mistake to be that kind of leader in a smaller org because part of the opportunity in a small org is to assemble a group of people that are incredibly talented that believe in your mission and where who you can easily influence with a much lighter touch and set them up to build a culture in an organization that can execute. And so I see my job as CEO is to try to surf that edge of I'm really in the details. So I deeply understand the business and the product decisions that we're making and the processes that we're using to run the business, but not overplay my hand with respect to dictating outcomes.

(01:04:40):
The one thing you'll always have as CEO is, no matter how much you tell the team that when I swing by their virtual desk and say, "I've been thinking about this little detail that's not important right now, but what do you think?" It's like nine out of 10 times, that person is going to go and start working on that thing. And so you do have to be just really careful about the way you engage in some of those details, I think.

Lenny (01:05:06):
There's a really good episode I had with Lane Shackleton from Coda, and he shared this framework called flash tags that they use at Coda, and I think it comes from HubSpot, of you tell people, "Here's what the subpoena is. Is it an FYI? Is it a suggestion? Is it a do this?" There's four of them and one's like, "I will die on this hill. You need to do this."

Tom Conrad (01:05:27):
I try to do a lot of that. I wish I could say that in my experience that that pays off. I spend an awful lot of time, even the stuff I say very clearly, just one person's opinion, focus group of one, "Don't change your priorities to go work on this," it has more of an outsized impact on people's behavior than I intended.

Lenny (01:05:49):
Yeah. Easier said than done. Coming back to your journey, we've talked through the story up until getting to Quibi, but two years ago, you went in a whole new direction, and you're now the CEO of a company called Zero. What is it like to move from just being a product leader or engi leader at a company to being the CEO for the first time? Why did you choose Zero as that role? And what have you learned as CEO that you wish you knew as a product leader or engi leader at a company that listeners might find useful?

Tom Conrad (01:06:19):
It's been a really, really incredible couple of years. In the aftermath of Quibi, I spent a lot of time, as we all do, soul-searching about what I learned and what I might want to do next. And as I thought about it, I realized that I really wanted to move on to something where I can have a direct impact on the culture and values of the company that I was involved in. I really got that opportunity at Pandora in a big way. And I had spent the five years of Snapchat and Quibi working for Evan and Meg and Jeffrey who are all incredible business leaders, but have their own very specific style and approach, and that leaves a mark on the culture that's unique to the founder.

(01:07:04):
And then as we've discussed, I'm always really interested in building things that are near and dear to me, and I was particularly thinking about what can I do that could have a really positive impact on the world in my next chapter. I've built an awful lot of media stuff through the years, video games and streaming services and so forth, and it seemed like maybe there was something that had a little bit more weight to it that I could spend my time on. And so my first thought was I would start something, a company idea I was quietly workshopping for some months. And completely independent from all of that, it's eight months into the pandemic, and my own personal health was at an all time low. I was 50 or 60 pounds overweight, my cholesterol was in the red zone. I mean, I was out of breath climbing stairs, which is something that I had never encountered in my life before.

(01:07:59):
I'm a bit of a yo-yo dieter and I'm always critical of looking in the mirror, but I was never ever really worried about my health, my longevity, and suddenly, I was. And so my solution to that was to go really deep on metabolic health, just thousands of hours of podcasts and videos and glucose monitoring patches and Oura Rings and digital fitness gear and just to try to understand the things that impact health and longevity. And as much as I would like to report that what I learned is that there's some magic pill that you can take, maybe some off label rapamycin or something, the truth is, is that to live a longer and healthier life, you really have to attack what I would call metabolic disease, which will manifest in overweight and obesity and pre-diabetes and diabetes and high cholesterol and all of these things that impact your long-term health.

(01:08:59):
And so I found Zero in this path and was using it to help with my own health journey. And Mike Maser founded the company four and a half years ago, and he and I were talking in this interval about my own experience with the product. I was just giving him product feedback and so forth, and he was telling me a little bit about his own entrepreneurial journey. And somewhere in the conversation, Mike said, "My intention is to step up into the executive chair role and to find a CEO for the company." So again, in my story, just over and over and over, this incredibly fortuitous thing happened. I just knew immediately that it ticked all the boxes, "Here's a chance to lead something that already had some momentum to impact the culture and values in a really direct way and was really, really close to my own personal journey."

(01:09:50):
And so we know we've got a great little company and 27 people, we've got more than a million users on the platform every month. Over a hundred thousand of them pay us with tens of millions of dollars of revenue through the years, and have had double-digit growth even coming out of the pandemic when lots of health and fitness companies saw retreats. And most importantly, it actually works. 75% of the people who use the platform lose weight. People lose, on average, five to 10% of their body weight in the first 60 days. And because of the success that people have, we grow just completely organically. We have no paid user acquisition at all. It's really a word of mouth business.

(01:10:31):
But that's not to say that it's not challenging. All startups are challenging. And what we've really focused on for the last couple of years is we've been really focused on unit economics, really trying to understand how much value can we derive and deliver for every person who downloads and installs the app, how do we convert them through all of the funnels efficiently and get them engaged with the product and get them to retain and drive that up in a really systematic way. And with my whole career, I'm definitely a person who started off thinking software development was mostly an art form, you find brilliant visionaries who have a deep understanding of human behavior, and they craft solutions for problems that other people don't see, and they make them delightful, and they get all the little details right. And when you found product market fit for the art, then you optimize them through a really quantitative take.

(01:11:34):
And so I'm definitely a person that sees both sides of that left brain and right brain equation that's important in software. But here's the thing my eyes have really opened to in the last two years. While companies are definitely the software that they make and the products that they deliver and that there is an art and science to that, as I described, there is also, if you step back, there is an equation that describes the business. It talks about how you turn investment into returns. And I suppose if I had come up with finance and been a business major that maybe that's the way that I would've conceived of companies to begin with. So maybe it's a little embarrassing that I had to be 53 years old before, I think, the scales fell through my eyes and I was like, "Oh, companies are equations."

(01:12:24):
And so when we first started talking about lifetime value and customer acquisition costs and getting those two things balanced and just the thinking about the unit economics of the business, my natural instinct was to go immediately to the leaf nodes of the equation like, "Oh, what percentage of people do we convert from install to registered and from registered to trial," and these very way down at the bottom of all the funnels and to ask the product team like, "Let's try to optimize these." And in the process though of trying to understand where we could take the business as we optimize those various dimensions and trying to understand too which of the dimensions had the most leverage, I started building these ever more sophisticated models that describe the whole business.

(01:13:16):
I mean, in startups, you get to wear a lot of hats. And definitely a hat that I'm wearing that I didn't anticipate at all is I'm the full-time FP&A guy for Zero. And so I built this spreadsheet that aggregates data from all of our business intelligence tools and raw data from our subscription transactions and looks at all of our historical results and all of our expenses and spend and then could use that to predict future scenarios by manipulating all of these variables. And it's just not at all the way I ever thought about products before. And I know that you've got lots of listeners like, "This guy's an idiot. This is a fundamental way to contemplate product work."

(01:14:05):
But if there's anybody out there like me who thought of it as art first and then optimization in the details, it is really, really powerful to spend the time to create the model that describes the whole thing so you can identify what are the high leverage points to focus on. So been doing a lot of that at the company in the last two years and it's really starting to deliver incredible results. Like everything in life, I mean, you sign up for things so you can learn, and that's the big one for me in the last year.

Lenny (01:14:36):
I really love that takeaway of as a CEO coming back to share, here's what you should be thinking about that the CEO is probably thinking about, as a product leader, you may not be, of trying to actually spend the time to think about the business model and understand it deeply because your founders are thinking about it all the time. And so if you're not, you're missing out on here's a way to influence them, here's a way to...

Tom Conrad (01:14:57):
It's so funny too because it's a thing I suddenly understand something that mystified me through my entire career, which was I'd go to board meetings and the investors would ask these probing questions, but they were really never about the product and what the product did and what the product roadmap was and what the features were and what this... It all seemed to operate at this level that was almost completely independent of the details of the "what is the solution you put into the world", which as a product-oriented thinker, was just completely baffling to me. And I now realize that they were tilling the soil that I'm talking about, they were tilling.

(01:15:39):
It doesn't really matter what the screens are and what the features are. I mean, it certainly matters, but that there's another higher order way to look at a company, which is really about the optimization of this equation. And I think particularly, if you sit on 25 boards, it's probably a much more efficient way to evaluate how your companies are doing and where to spend your time and how to help by thinking about them abstracted up at that layer. So I will never stop thinking about software development as being an art form and I will never stop enjoying the days when I get to lean in on the details, but it's been pretty eyeopening.

Lenny (01:16:18):
The other thing that stands out here, one is I think this is especially true for consumer subscription apps, which I've done some research on. And basically, they never work. There's Duolingo, there's Zero, which I didn't know how much scale you guys reached. My math here real quick. So you have a million users, a hundred thousand paying users. You charge at 10 bucks a month. I know there's a discount for an annual plan, but basically, you're making somewhere around a million dollars a month, which you don't have to confirm or deny it, but that's the math I just did, and that's crazy. So congrats. That's a rare successful consumer subscription app. It never happens.

Tom Conrad (01:16:53):
And like I said, every startup is hard, and I never stop being surprised at the new hard things that pop up every day. But we're on a really great run. We've had a tremendous year, and I'm just so, so proud of the team we've assembled. They're incredible for the last.

Lenny (01:17:08):
Part of the reason you're so successful is exactly what you said. There's a huge focus on LTV/CAC, the math formula, because for these sorts of businesses, the crux of it is can you acquire people for less money than you need to spend?

Tom Conrad (01:17:21):
One thing that's really fortunate for Zero is Mike Maser, who founded the company, and I have both been around the block long enough and enough times that we remember 2008, we remember 2000. And so in these moments in the pandemic, there were companies in our category that were raising hundreds of billions of dollars with the intention of throwing it at paid user acquisition. And we made a conscious decision to optimize the value of the organic traffic that we were getting and to drive our growth through LTV expansion rather than top of funnel expansion, which was candidly not in fashion in 2021, 2022.

Tom Conrad (01:18:00):
... in 2021, 2022. It turns out it's much more in fashion these days as companies are called upon to be much more capital efficient than they were during the pandemic era. I guess I feel somewhat fortunate that my natural inclination as an entrepreneur is more in sync with the expectations of the market than it was for a while.

Lenny (01:18:27):
Okay. So you've probably had the longest career arc of anyone I've had on this podcast. You've worked at all of these different companies in a lot of different phases. You're still at it. And I'm curious what you've learned about how to maintain your mental health and avoid burnout essentially through this journey. You mentioned you take some time off. Is there anything else you found or is that a trick of just how to not burnout?

Tom Conrad (01:18:51):
Do you know this Japanese concept called Ikigai?

Lenny (01:18:55):
Mm-hmm. Yeah, but share it. Share it for folks that may not be familiar.

Tom Conrad (01:18:59):
So the idea is it's a Venn diagram and there are four spheres. There's a sphere that's labeled what you love. There's a sphere labeled what you're good at. There's a sphere labeled what the world needs, and there's a sphere called what you can be paid for, and where they all intersect is this Japanese idea, Ikigai. It's the intersection of what you're good at, what you love, what the world needs, and what you can be paid for. If you find that, it's Ikigai. And interestingly, your listeners should go and find this because there are interesting ways to label the other intersections, the intersections where all four don't come together. And what's really interesting is that the ones that are three but not four, I think because they're the ones that are close but not quite to this really satisfying thing. And so it's like when you find those, it's really easy to choose a job or to choose a path where you have three but not four, which is a really great recipe if you're feeling like there's something just out of your reach that's really important.

(01:20:09):
Anyway, it's a great framework to think about your life and your career. So to start, I'm incredibly lucky that it's all Ikigai for me. What I'm good at, what I love, what the world needs, what I get paid for, they have always overlapped. And a big part of it is just what I love is this world. I love software, I love building software, I love writing software, I love using software. People are like, "What are your hobbies?" I don't think I have any hobbies and I think about, "Well, what kinds of things do I do on the weekend for fun?" And it's like I'm teaching myself After Effects or something, which I will immediately forget, but it's just fun to go really deep on some piece of interesting software.

(01:21:02):
So I'm very lucky. And so I think that has been super sustaining for me. One of the reasons I've been able to do it as long as I have without really burning out is that just, it's what I do. And in some ways it's why I come back to it. It's easy to say, "I'm going to become a pastry chef," but left to my own devices, I use software, I make software. It's my hobby, it's my passion, it's all the things.

(01:21:29):
But a couple of thoughts about how one engages with their work. One thing is I'm really not a #hustling kind of leader. There was a woman that I worked with on the Finder just out of college that left a really big mark on me. My own style of work then, I think I mentioned my memory of flashing, blinking the folder animation was a 2: 00 AM kind of thing. I was 23 years old. I woke up at 11 o'clock in the morning. I went to the office, I screwed around and played video games in the Apple Arcade and went to a couple of meetings and had lunch and stood at the whiteboard and pontificated about some nonsense. And then about four o'clock every day I would start writing software and I would write software until 2:00 or 3:00 in the morning and then I would go out to dinner with people from the team in the middle of it and whatever.

(01:22:29):
And so it kind of looked like I spent 14 hours a day, six or seven days a week at Apple, and I was celebrated for this. There was lots of nights where I would work clear through the night and my boss would come in the next morning, he'd be like, "Are you still here?" And I'm like, "I'm still here. Look at this cool thing I did." And I got a lot of attention for that. And then there's this woman on the team who showed up every single morning at 8:30, sat at her desk, wrote a ton of great software, and every night packed her stuff up and left. And she contributed more than I ever did. And I don't think she got the same kind of recognition that I got because of the way she did the work.

(01:23:11):
And when we were building the team and culture at Pandora, I thought about her a lot and really made a point of saying that I just wasn't interested in performative contribution, that it's the work that matters and what I want to celebrate is if you can show up and do it and go home and have other things in your life, because I think that's a recipe for being able to do it on a sustained basis rather than burning yourself out.

(01:23:38):
I think there's some nuance in this. I think 22 year old me was always going to want to work through the night. And so I think creating space that that's okay too is important. And I think maybe in some ways at Pandora it was almost like that wasn't okay. It was like, "You should be taking more breaks. Why are you going this hard?" But I do try to create environments where people have a reasonable balance between their regular life and their technology life or room for that if they choose it. And I do think that that has through the years, has helped me keep at it, but I still work a lot of nights and weekends because I love it. It's what I do.

(01:24:16):
Here's the other thing. I got very, very lucky with the Pandora experience and got this outsized, probably inappropriate financial reward for being a part of it and gave me options that I never imagined that I would have. And so after 10 years I left and I didn't know what I would do, but I did really need a break. It was a really hard job and that was definitely a moment where I needed some time to recover. But I think if you had asked me on that first day, I would say, "I don't know why these people find success and then start another company right away. Why? There's so many things you could do in the world, why would you start another company? It's so hard."

(01:25:02):
And I was particularly in love with the idea that I had access to experience. I didn't really care about things, I didn't want a fancy watch or whatever, a car, but I wanted to see the world. And so I thought, "I'm going to just go and I'm going to live in London for three months, then I come back to San Francisco for a month. I'm going to go live in Mexico City for three months and I'm going to just have this life where I'm soaking up experiences." And after doing that for six months, the thing that I came to realize is that what I care about way more than experiences is relationships. If you're the person who is constantly on a plane seeking out some new experience, it's really hard to form and maintain intimate, satisfying relationships.

(01:25:47):
So I went back to San Francisco, I'm like, "I can't be all over the world if I want to be engaged with friends and like-minded people." And you know what people do on Monday morning? They go to work. And so if you want to be engaged with humanity, where they are on Monday morning is at work. And so more than I had the itch to build things, which I do very much have, I had the itch to collaborate, to be in the game with other people. So that was what took me to Snapchat, took me out of chasing experiences and took me back to building again. And then as we've already described, at a point I thought, "Well, I care about this collaboration, but maybe it doesn't need to be software that I'm creating in the world." And Quibi gave me a chance to fall back in love with that process again. And here we are, more software.

Lenny (01:26:48):
Plus being on a board of a hardware company. What you just shared reminds me of Mark Manson's book, The Subtle Art of Not Giving a Fuck. Have you read this book?

Tom Conrad (01:26:58):
I have not.

Lenny (01:26:59):
Okay. It sold a bazillion copies, and the core of it is that we get joy out of solving problems and we think we'll be happy when we have freedom to do nothing. But it turns out freedom is only helpful to help us discover the problems we just want to keep solving.

Tom Conrad (01:27:16):
Yeah, totally. I think that's exactly right. Yeah.

Lenny (01:27:20):
It sounds like that's the experience you went on. Last question, this new segment, I'm going to call Contrarian Corner. And the question is, is there something that you have a contrarian opinion about, something that you believe that most other people don't?

Tom Conrad (01:27:35):
There's a segment in our industry that believes this very intensely, which is there's this belief that everybody needs to be a founder. And I think in some ways our industry would be much better off if there were fewer founders. I use an entire category of smart, creative, hardworking, talented, borderline visionary people who can raise that $2 million seed and go off and build some stupid company that's never going to go anywhere, that would be so much better off finding a team that needs their skillset and working on a problem that has, as I described, the mathematical formula that's going to win, that has the market opportunity that's the right size, that has the 10X thinking that can really... And I'm a little biased here because while I am a CEO for the first time now, I've never been a founder and I've been lucky enough to find a bunch of young teams that could benefit from my skills and enthusiasms, and sometimes to some success and sometimes to some embarrassment, but always really, really interesting.

(01:28:53):
Yeah. If you're out there and you think that the only possible way you can be successful in this industry on any metric, whatever metric you care about: you want the acclaim of your peers, you want financial reward, you want any of the things that people aspire to, outside impact on culture, whatever the thing is that gets you out of bed every morning, you can achieve that in collaboration with others. You don't have to be the person that raises the seed round.

Lenny (01:29:24):
I 100% agree with that. I'm always telling people, "Don't start a company. It's super painful, very rarely works out. It's so hard." I don't know what's harder, being a product manager or being a founder, probably being a founder. They're both very hard.

Tom Conrad (01:29:37):
Yeah, it is quite hard too. Yeah. Yeah. And just to be perfectly clear, there's something really special about founders. At both Pandora and now at Zero, the actual founders have from time to time said, "Well, you're like a founder." And I'm like, "I'm nothing like a founder. You took all the risk. When I showed up, there was a team and there was momentum and there was money in the bank. I appreciate your desire to say complimentary things, but 'You're like a founder' is not one that I'll take."

Lenny (01:30:08):
With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Tom Conrad (01:30:11):
I am ready.

Lenny (01:30:13):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Tom Conrad (01:30:17):
I really love Elad Gil's High Growth Handbook. It's organized into chapters about foundational company building, building a leadership team, building a board, and in addition to the thoughtful synthesis on that topic from Elad, he has an interview of someone that he does relevant to that section on each of the chapters. Really, really great read and super actionable if you're a leader in a young company. In a completely different end of the spectrum, I love big, complicated science fiction and there's a lot of garbage science fiction out there to be sure, but when you find something special, it's the best. So probably through the years in that category, there's a book called Hyperion by Dan Simmons. That's just a total classic. Everybody should read it.

Lenny (01:31:08):
I read that. I think I read the first couple in the first one.

Tom Conrad (01:31:11):
Yeah. There is a sequel that's exceptional as well. And it's probably worth warning your readers that Hyperion is quite long and has an absolute cliffhanger.

Lenny (01:31:21):
I think they're making a show out of it, which is going to be wild. I don't know how they do a show around that book. I thought you were going to say this other book, A Fire Upon the Deep. Have you heard of this book?

Tom Conrad (01:31:29):
Oh, that's so good too.

Lenny (01:31:31):
Okay. That's also very complicated, but incredible.

Tom Conrad (01:31:34):
Yeah, I had completely forgotten about that. That's a very special book. There's a couple in that series too.

Lenny (01:31:40):
Yeah, I think I only read the first one. Also, Three-Body Problem is the other one that I always think about. It's come up a couple of times on this podcast. Let's move on to the next question. Do you have a favorite recent movie or a TV show?

Tom Conrad (01:31:53):
I consume a lot of video content, both stuff that I'm very proud to talk about and stuff that I'm less proud to talk about, but I really liked the new Damon Lindelof show that's on Peacock called Mrs. Davis. So Lindelof, of course, from Lost and the new Watchmen on HBO, and Mrs. Davis is about an AI that you wear in your ear, like the HER AI and a nun that is hell-bent on the AI's destruction, and it reads like an early Coen brothers movie. It's super darkly funny and really, really thoughtful and unlike too much streaming, I think it's seven episodes, and it is a perfectly encapsulated story that has a beginning, middle, and an end and doesn't need to ever have another episode. It's amazing. Get yourself a Peacock subscription for at least a month to watch Mrs. Davis.

Lenny (01:32:56):
Favorite interview question you like to ask candidates that you're interviewing?

Tom Conrad (01:32:59):
There are two things about interviews. The first is I always encourage people when they're thinking about their interview questions to take any question that they're tempted to pull from their own current experience with the goal of trying to, how would this person solve this thing that I'm working through right now? Because just causing the other person to speculate and oftentimes about your own business, I think you know really well that they don't actually know anything about, it creates this imbalance between the interviewer and the interviewee that feels out of sync with how I think about the collaborative nature of a great interview. So I tell people that almost every interview question should start with, "Tell me about a time in your career when..." to give them permission or to set their expectation that I'm asking them to tell me about something they've actually done that is relevant to the topic that I'm probing.

(01:33:59):
So that's just a structural thing that I try to do. And then usually towards the end of the interview, I ask almost everybody, "Imagine that you had a really great day at work. What was it that you did on that day?" Because what I'm trying to figure out is left to their own devices, what do they go to naturally because it rewards them? Because I think it's really important to find the highest best use of everyone you hire. And sometimes you can get a little bit to the bottom of what's the highest best use if you understand the things where there's a natural reward mechanism because it's like, "Well, I had this great day. I'm going to do more of that tomorrow." "What was the thing?" And it's just pretty illuminating.

Lenny (01:34:45):
Is there a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love?

Tom Conrad (01:34:49):
I have bought every pair of headphones on the planet, in part because Apple's headphones do not stay in my ears. I've sneezed one across the room, I've lost one down a drainpipe. They don't stay, none of them, the wired ones, the not wired ones, the in-ear ones, and it's left me feeling honestly like I am some kind of anatomical freak. I look at other people wearing them, I'm like, "What is going on with their ear that it's just staying there perfect?" It seems inconceivable to me. Nonetheless, I have a pair of AirPods Pro's that I want to love and put up with the fact that I'm going to drop them, lose them, sneeze them across the room.

(01:35:32):
But recently I came across this product from a company called Eartune that they're replacement tips and they just have the littlest bit of compression foam on them. They don't make the AirPods so big that they won't fit in the recharging case or anything, and they work. Miraculously, they stay in my ear. And Apple has this feature called Size Fit or something, go in settings, find your AirPods, scroll all the way down in the settings, and you can run this test where they play some audio and they tell you how good the seal is. And that revealed that my right ear is weirder than my left ear. So I actually have to use different tips in either sizes. Suddenly this sounds like a vaguely disgusting conversation that we're having. Anyway, I'm just really thrilled about my ability to wear Apple's AirPods after all these years.

Lenny (01:36:32):
I think what we're learning is you are a mutant, your ears are different. Cool. We'll link to that product in the show notes.

Tom Conrad (01:36:40):
Okay.

Lenny (01:36:41):
Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to or share with friends, either in work or in life that you find useful?

Tom Conrad (01:36:48):
You can't be a product person without having an eye rolly Charles Eames quote that's at the center of your existence. And for me, the Charles Eames quote is, "The details are not the details. They make the design." And I just really absolutely believe that, that the devil is in the details when you're a product designer and be uninterested in nuance at your peril.

Lenny (01:37:14):
Final question. You worked with the creator of the GIF format. How does he pronounce, giff or jiff?

Tom Conrad (01:37:22):
Yeah. So before all of this, I worked at a company called CompuServe when I was in high school.

Lenny (01:37:29):
CompuServe, I used CompuServe. I didn't know that. That's amazing.

Tom Conrad (01:37:33):
There was a guy on the team named Steve Wilhite who invented Graphics Interchange Format, GIF, and he was a straight out of central casting, 1960s neck beard programmer type, and the first I had ever encountered and very prickly. And it's crazy, but at the time, Steve would take all comers in the fight that it was pronounced jiff. Now he's obviously wrong. It's obviously pronounced giff. It's crazy to me now 35 years later, this is still a topic that pops up on the internet every once in a while. It's somehow like Zelig, I cross paths with the guy who created Graphics Interchange Format and I know his opinion on the topic even though it's an unpopular one.

Lenny (01:38:35):
Got it. So he likes jiff, but you agree it's giff?

Tom Conrad (01:38:38):
It's definitely giff. It's obviously giff.

Lenny (01:38:40):
Okay, great. We're on the same page. We've decided. Let it be known.

Tom Conrad (01:38:44):
Let it be known.

Lenny (01:38:45):
Tom, we've talked about successes, we've talked about failures, mental health, general health, all kinds of awesome stories. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and maybe ask some other questions that I didn't ask, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Tom Conrad (01:39:00):
I'm @tconrad on all the socials, from Twitter to Threads to Instagram. My DMs are open everywhere, and I would absolutely be delighted to hear from any of your listeners on any topic that they choose. And what can you do for me? I would love for folks to download Zero and give it a try and send me some feedback about what we're doing right and what we're doing wrong, and we'd love to have our little product be part of your life.

Lenny (01:39:32):
Awesome. Tom, thank you so much for being here.

Tom Conrad (01:39:35):
Thank you.

Lenny (01:39:36):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

