Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
I want to dive right into talking about your advice on having difficult conversations, where like in performance review season, what do you suggest when someone's being told they're not going to get the promotion?

Alisa Cohn (00:00:10):
Hope for the future is so important. I know this is going to be challenging for you to hear, not going to promote you, but I want you to know this. It's really important to me that you're able to succeed in your career here, and so I want to continue to help you find opportunities to build your skills and to advance.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:24):
You're big on helping leaders understand that their job is not to make employees happy.

Alisa Cohn (00:00:29):
They're trying now to be the leader who everyone loves, but what really needs to happen very often is, we need to drive towards results. This employee continuing to not really do a great job at their job, you don't want to push them because you don't want to upset them. You don't want to give them difficult feedback, so you're just going to keep hoping it works out. Ultimately, that leads to the demise of your company.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:50):
You have some cool advice on just how to make meetings more effective and how to especially end the meeting.

Alisa Cohn (00:00:54):
My three questions to end the meeting are...

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:00):
Today my guest is Alisa Cohn. Alisa is an executive coach who has worked with C-suite execs at both startups like Etsy, Wirecutter, Venmo, and DraftKings, along with Fortune 500 companies like Microsoft, Google, Pfizer, and the New York Times. She was named one of the top 50 coaches in the world by Thinkers50 and the number one startup coach for the past four years by Global Gurus. What I love about Alisa is that she gives her clients very specific and actionable advice. In her conversation, Alisa shares specific language and phrases that you can use when having a difficult conversation with your reports to make these conversations go much smoother and be less difficult. Also, three questions you should ask at the end of every meeting to make the most possible forward progress after each meeting. Plus, why your job as a leader isn't to make people happy and what you should be focused on instead, and a set of questions that she calls the founder prenup that you should talk through with potential founders to make sure that these are the people that you want to be working with for a long, long time.

(00:01:59):
There's also so much more advice. If you're a leader of people or a founder, and especially if you dread hard conversations, this episode is for you. If enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Alisa Cohn. This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing and feature management platform built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams. Companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth and for understanding the performance of new features. And Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most was our experimentation platform where I could set up experiments, easily troubleshoot issues, and analyze all on my own.

(00:03:00):
Eppo does all that and more with advanced statistical methods that can help you shave weeks off experiment time and accessible UI for diving deeper into performance and out-of-the-box reporting that helps you avoid annoying prolonged analytic cycles. Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insights with your team, sparking new ideas for the A/B testing flywheel. Eppo powers experimentation across every use case, including product, growth, machine learning, monetization, and email marketing. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com/lenny and 10X your experiment velocity. That's get E-P-P-O.com/lenny. This episode is brought to you by Rippling, a single platform to build and scale your startup on. Rippling handles all the, can't get it wrong admin work of payroll and benefits giving you back hours every week, but it does a lot more than that. Rippling is a game changer for the entire company with tools for HR, IT and spend, all built from the ground up and designed to work together seamlessly.

(00:04:01):
Just hired someone? Rippling makes onboarding easy. Whether your new hire is sitting next to you or halfway across the world, in just a few clicks, Rippling automatically generates an offer letter, ships a laptop with the necessary apps and permissions, and even delivers a corporate card. An employee needs to update their benefits contribution. When they do it in Rippling, the change automatically syncs to payroll. CTO forgot her laptop in an Uber? Lock it remotely with Rippling. Many startups I've invested in like Sprig, [inaudible 00:04:30] and ClassDojo, use Rippling because it's a force multiplier for lean teams, helping them eliminate major headaches and operate their business more efficiently. For a limited time, Rippling is giving Lenny's listeners three months off. To redeem, visit rippling.com/lenny. That's rippling.com/lenny. Alisa, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Alisa Cohn (00:04:54):
Lenny, it's so great to be here and thanks for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:57):
I want to dive right into talking about your advice on having difficult conversations. I personally dread difficult conversations. I feel like I practice ahead of these things. I'm like, "I'm going to say these things. It's going to go like this," and it never goes as well as I hope. I always say the wrong thing. I feel like this is very relatable. They're called difficult conversations for a reason.

Alisa Cohn (00:05:18):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:19):
I know you work with a lot of execs on this specifically, and what I love is you've actually come up with a bunch of scripts that help people make these conversations less difficult. So how about we talk through some of these scripts that people can actually start applying?

Alisa Cohn (00:05:32):
Let's do that. I love that idea. And also Lenny, as you just said, very relatable and also, so you're not alone. If I could ask you a question, if you're picturing a difficult conversation that you have had, should have, might have, and you're nervous about, it's hard for you, can you sum it up? What's hard about it? Because it's helpful to clarify what is hard about it?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:56):
Great question. I just don't want to make people sad and upset, and I worry about their reaction, how to deal with that, and them just getting really upset and mad and just like, "Oh, man. This really made things worse." So I worry about the reaction, I guess.

Alisa Cohn (00:06:11):
Okay, about making things worse or about their reaction?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:13):
The reaction, just making someone upset and sad. I don't want to do that.

Alisa Cohn (00:06:17):
Making someone upset. Okay, good. And again, you're not alone about that. Just one more question on that. What's the problem if they're sad and upset? What does that mean to you?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:26):
Oh, I love this life coaching we're doing. Yeah, so it's like what happens if they get sad and upset?

Alisa Cohn (00:06:33):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:36):
I feel like it's stuff that I'm going to have to deal with. It's like this drama all of a sudden, this new fire I have to think about. And yeah, it's like the additional work it creates and also just, I don't know. Yeah, it's a good question.

Alisa Cohn (00:06:48):
You can think about it some more, right? I'm not going to put you on the spot right now, but just to say for all of us, the reason they're difficult, to your point, they're difficult. But we're putting meaning on things all the time, every day, all the time, and I think it's important, it's actually helpful in motivating you to have difficult conversations, but also in helping them go well. If you can get to the bottom of what you're putting on top of it, what you're weighting it with, because I can understand that again, you are not alone. I don't want to make people upset. Totally.

(00:07:20):
And also, I would just say on the other hand, when you're enlightening someone or you're working out a situation with someone and it's difficult, if you don't give them the opportunity to hear what you have to say, if you don't bring this up, then you're never going to have the opportunity to help them see something differently or help them improve or help you improve the relationship or whatever it is you're trying to do. And so, I can understand it's a natural thing. I don't want to make them upset.

(00:07:51):
No one wants to make anybody upset, but through that upset on the other side of that, can often be a whole new possibility and a whole new revelation, and actually a lot of joy and freedom. I think that we forget about all the other possibilities that come out of difficult conversations and we just land on these really uncomfortable parts about like, "oh, it's going to be a lot of extra work" or like, "They're going to get uncomfortable or even maybe cry." And I think it's just really helpful to tap into what you make it mean and then also what other possibilities it could mean.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:23):
I love that. And it's one thing to hear that and say that, it's another to actually feel that deeply and feel like I shouldn't be as worried as I am. I think part of it is doing these enough times where you're like, "Okay, it's actually not so hard." And the other is having some of this support. To make this even more real, let's give some examples of what we say when we say difficult conversations. There's like, "You're not getting a promotion that you thought you would, we're going to let you go." What other examples or common difficult conversations that you run across?

Alisa Cohn (00:08:50):
Those are two very common ones. And then of course, the most common one is just difficult performance feedback. Or [inaudible 00:08:56] what we say, quote unquote, "constructive performance feedback," which we never made positive. It only is the sort of things that you're not doing well. I think there are two flavors of that. One is, "You're screwing up" and the other is, "Developmentally, I'd like to see you add something or change something."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:12):
Yes. And as you say that, one of the other fears I have is them just disagreeing and me feeling like maybe it's not right, maybe I'm wrong and feeling shit maybe. I didn't see something and then just looking worse after the whole thing.

Alisa Cohn (00:09:27):
Yeah. And so then I think what's also really helpful to, and part of the process that we can talk about this for sure is getting a difficult conversation is number one, tapping into what's uncomfortable for it, for you, about it. And then number two, also getting your mindset right. So to say the obvious, are you doing this to hurt someone's feelings? No, never, right?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:49):
The opposite.

Alisa Cohn (00:09:50):
That's not the reason that anyone's doing it. Sometimes people are giving the performance feedback or talking about something that's been bothering them in order to express themselves and vent. And actually, that is very helpful to identify for yourself, that's why I'm doing it. And then, maybe not do it then, until you can transform your reasoning. But at the end of the day, the hope is as a manager, the reason that you're giving someone this so-called constructive feedback is because you're helping them get better. You need them to change the behavior. They'll never get promoted if they keep doing that. They'll never be successful if they keep doing that. And so, it's your job as a leader and as a manager, to help them out of that problem and help them do something different.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:33):
The best story I've heard to make that really real for me, I think it was Kim Scott when she came on the podcast. She told a story of, I think it was Bob, where everyone just knew he was terrible and it was like, everyone's was just like knew he was not good and eventually, the boss had a conversation with him eight months into it and told him, "It's not going to work out. You're just doing a bad job." And he's like, "Why didn't anyone tell me? I didn't realize that. If you told me, I would've changed." And everyone assumed he knew. And so I think to your point, this is to help the person. It's not not to hurt them.

Alisa Cohn (00:11:05):
Yeah, a hundred percent. One of my clients, he was running a division and one of his people was not doing it right, not doing it right, not getting the right kind of data, not having to do the right kind of analysis, whatever it was. We were talking about it and I said, "Well, how come you have another feedback with her?" And he said, "You know, she's just going to cry. She's just going to cry. She's older, whatever, she's just going to cry. It's going to be too uncomfortable, whatever." So we worked, we talked and talked and talked. I gave him a script. We really worked it out and he agreed that he would go in and have that conversation with her, which he did.

(00:11:40):
And he reported back to me and he was shaken. She cried. Of course she did. She cried. That's what he knew she was going to do. And so she was upset and she went home early and the whole thing. The next day she came in and she said, "Thank you so much for telling me that. I wish someone had told me that 15 years ago. I think I could have had a different career." And I think that is so meaningful for all leaders and people who are responsible for other people to understand that you're uncomfortable when they start crying, of course, or they have this difficult reaction or whatever. But honestly, the only way you're going to be able to help someone grow in their career and become the best person they can be is by leaning into these tough conversations.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:23):
What I love about the scripts we're going to talk about, which we probably should transition to, is it's again, one thing to hear that and be like, "Yes, okay, I need to do this. I need to get better at typical conversations. I need to have that talk without someone that we should let go." It's another when it's like tomorrow is the meeting and you're like, "Oh, my God. I have to have this conversation now." And so, I love that you actually give people a really simple approach to how to lay this stuff out in various different contexts. So let's talk through some of these approaches and scripts you've come up with. What do you think would be a good one to start with?

Alisa Cohn (00:12:55):
Well, we can start with performance feedback and we can just sort of take a typical example. So first of all, once you've done your work to get your mindset right to kind of know what you're doing it, and then you just really want to really be able to wrap your mouth around the words. So what that looks like is practicing, and the script could be, "You know, Matilda, I want to chat with you about the way you're interacting with your peers. So what I'm hearing from them is that you're missing deadlines on a regular basis and not letting them know you're missing the deadlines, and that also you're not fully keeping your team up to speed.

(00:13:27):
And so they're kind of confused running around. Now, we both know that the most important way you can be successful here and also achieve your goals is to make sure that you are working with your peers in a way that's consistent and that they can count on you and you can count on them. So I wanted to let you know about this. I want to certainly hear what you have to say, but the most important thing is that we leave this discussion knowing how you're going to make sure that you're keeping your peers in the loop and also your team in the loop."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:55):
Yeah, there's so many elements there that are really interesting. Just focusing on what I'm hearing versus just coming from you or something you've done wrong. It's, here's what I'm hearing from multiple sources. I think that helps people. Okay, it's not just you and just like, "Oh, my manager hates me."

Alisa Cohn (00:13:56):
Right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:14):
It's like, "Okay, other people are saying this." And then I love this phrase of, we both know where it's not just me telling you this. It's like, "You also know this. I know you're smart and you also know that this is, something is wrong here." And then this goal of, here's what we need to [inaudible 00:14:31]. You're like very clear call to action, almost action item, like leave this meeting with, "Let's just be aligned on this thing."

Alisa Cohn (00:14:36):
Yeah, thanks for calling those out. I hope, and again, what I'm trying to convey in my tone is also, "You know what? It's Tuesday. We got to have this conversation. I'm sure it's going to end well. I'm not mad." The whole point about my manager hates me, right? "I'm not yelling at you." The more even keeled and even matter of fact you can be about something that's kind of just run-of-the-mill feedback, the better. And I think it's just also what I didn't say before, and I think it's also important is that, as you are recognizing that one of your jobs is to give this feedback, is that you have to build a relationship with people so they can hear you through the lens of, "Oh, Alisa wants to help me." Not, "Oh, Alisa hates me. It's always a problem."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:21):
How did you start that phrase again? Because the starting is always the hardest part for me. How do you kick off the conversation? What was the couple sentences used?

Alisa Cohn (00:15:28):
I wanted to have a conversation with you about some things I've been hearing from your peers about the way that you all are interacting together.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:35):
Awesome. So there's an element of, don't make it feel like a huge deal. Just like, "I want to have this conversation with you about something." And it's just like, "Let's have this conversation and here's what we want to leave this conversation with."

Alisa Cohn (00:15:46):
Yes. And I can't stress enough that it's actually really helpful to also have spent some time with Matilda or whoever saying, "Great job on the way that project landed." Or, "Hey, launches, when they happen on time and they're smooth, sometimes we don't notice anything. I want you to notice, we didn't notice anything. That's fantastic. You did a good job in that launch," or whatever it is. Because then, you've had the conversation with them to give them positive feedback and point out what's working, that builds the relationship so that you have the lens of, "Oh, yeah. When something's working, they tell me. When something's not working, they tell me, too." That's how you build trust as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:23):
They want to be criticizing them [inaudible 00:16:25]. We need to have another conversation what we're hearing about, problems [inaudible 00:16:28].

Alisa Cohn (00:16:27):
Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:29):
Obviously, if you say it the same way every single time, they're going to feel like this is weird. Do you recommend it's this kind of Mad Libs approach or is it make it your own as much as you can? What are kind of the key? Or is it like, here's actually how you want to say it every time?

Alisa Cohn (00:16:42):
In my book and when I work with my clients, I give specific scripts and what I will regularly say when I'm working with my clients is, "Okay, so this is how I would do it," and then I'll land it for them. But they have to make it their own. You always have to make it your own and I don't think it's a problem of doing it the same way every time. It's not like people are going to notice you because you're talking about different topics, theoretically. If you have a formula that can work for you, that's going to motivate you to do it, that is what's important. And what's important is that it's neutral, not loading on or not venting on someone and not unloading on someone.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:19):
I love that we started with this one because it feels like the most common one of just your employee is underperforming and you want to make sure they understand and adjust. What if you're not hearing something from a bunch of people? What if it's just your perception of their writing? You need to work on your writing skills or you're coming in late. Is there another way you phrase it where it's not, "I'm hearing it from other people?"

Alisa Cohn (00:17:43):
Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. So I'll talk about writing. I think it would be something like, okay, "Matilda, part of your job is to be able to create these documents and I appreciate that you do them on time. What I've observed is that they can often be not as structured as I'd like them to be and they also lack a conclusion. So what I'd love you to do is look at these three or four examples of some folks who are doing them really well and see if you can model your writing on theirs. If you need to take additional classes or if you need help in any way, let me know. But ultimately, I want to get your writing to the level where everybody is appreciating what you bring to the table because the level of your writing really reflects the level of your thinking."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:27):
Mm-hmm. Wow, I like that. I'd want to follow your advice if I got that. So the way you started that is what I've observed, which also is not like, "Here's what I think" or "Here's what you just need to do." It's more like, "Here's what I've noticed, here's what I've seen, here's what I've observed about what you're doing." And then it reminds me of, what is it, nonviolent communication, that whole framework of just focus on what you see, not what is wrong with them, not what they've done. I guess, is there anything there you want to say of just the importance of focusing on what you've heard from people or what you've observed versus maybe what people often do instead?

Alisa Cohn (00:19:05):
Yeah, I mean you just really said it and I think it's such an important point, observable facts. The idea that this is not a judgment. This is not... Sort of as less judgy as possible is also very helpful. It makes it neutral. It's observable facts and it's also sort of based on expectations, right? So the writing is, we expect it to be at a certain level and it's not that way. And here are the reasons it's not, the specific reasons, it's not.

(00:19:35):
The way you interact with your peers, it's important to be at a certain standard, and here's why. Because when we all work together, we're going to be able to execute and when we don't, unfortunately we won't be able to. So you staying in sync with them is important and the observation is that they don't feel fully in sync with you.

(00:19:52):
And so every time we talk about this, it doesn't become this, "Oh, I don't know. I just feel..." By the way, some things you have to give feedback on and they are kind of a feeling and those are more difficult, but so many things if you do the work to really think about what is the observable data, I always ask my clients, what's my evidence that this is happening? And you have to spend some time thinking about it, but it's really worth it because it makes the feedback easier for you to give and easier for them to hear.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:20):
Is there anything else along the lines of this specific type of feedback that is worth sharing before we move on to a different type of feedback?

Alisa Cohn (00:20:29):
Well, I think just that the reason, one of the many reasons that people have gone uncomfortable giving feedback is that somebody might get defensive or they might start crying as we talked about. And so I have a script also, which is if someone gets defensive, which is it's like I'm giving you this feedback and you're getting defensive and I say, "Well, let's pause for a second. First of all, I want you to know that I'm telling you this actually, just to make you better because I know how important your career is to you. I know how important the success is to you and it's important to me too as your leader. The second thing is, my observation is that you're getting a little bit emotional. I want to know if we can continue having this conversation now or if we need to kind of pause it. At the end of the day, we really have to have this conversation and I really want to see you make changes, but I understand you might need a few moments to digest it."

(00:21:18):
The importance of that for you is not even what you say, but that you have prepared and you are prepared for if someone has that kind of reaction and that you don't have to, yourself, react to it. You know, "No, I'm not doing that. No, no, no, no, whatever." And you can say, "Yes, you are." Now we're in a fight and that is not cool for anybody. It's certainly not cool for you as a leader. So it gives you the opportunity to recognize that you have another tool in your toolkit rather than just react.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:48):
So if you find yourself feeling defensive or they are just not hearing and just fighting back, the tool is just pause. Let's just pause for a moment and it feels like there's kind of two parts to which you just shared. One is, remind them why this is important to them and why you're talking about this. And then two is, if there's just emotions kind of taking over, give them a chance to like, "Let's just pause and maybe come back to this because maybe you're not in the right state right now to listen."

Alisa Cohn (00:22:18):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:20):
Sometimes people get upset when you mention like, "You're getting emotional," or I don't know. Is that a thing that you deal with of just like, "How dare you say I'm feeling emotional?" I'm just...

Alisa Cohn (00:22:29):
I'm not emotional. Why do you think [inaudible 00:22:31] emotional? Right, exactly. Yes, of course. Now, when someone's crying, they're obviously getting emotional. When they're defensive, it's possible that you might want to use a different word. I can see that this is really upsetting you or this is really triggering you, or I can see that the temperature between us has just changed. You could say something like that. I do think also it's helpful to know your people because sometimes you could realize that actually they can deal with that, but then sometimes you have to really [inaudible 00:23:00] the delicate words that you need to use to pause the conversation.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:05):
Yeah. And I find, to your point, it's helpful to you too as the person giving it. And I feel like sometimes, you may be feeling like I should just pull back and maybe I'm wrong, maybe they're right, maybe I should stop and instead this gives you a chance to know I'm actually, I can't. I need to stay strong about what I believe because I... You put so much thought and effort into this already, it's unlikely you're just like, oh, totally wrong about what you're saying.

Alisa Cohn (00:23:30):
Yeah, exactly. There's something going on. There's something going on. And then also, the whole point about it being a conversation is that actually it's a conversation. Actually, Lenny, if you have a different point of view, I would like to hear it. Let's talk about it, but we can't keep going on like this, where I don't feel I can count on you for whatever it is that we're talking about. So we need to have this conversation and recreate a set of expectations between ourselves. Ultimately, that kind of conversation has the potential to really build the relationship and build trust, and that's another reason I encourage everybody to get over their discomfort and to lean into having these conversations because on the other side of that, is a much better, stronger connection.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:09):
And especially if you do them well.

Alisa Cohn (00:24:11):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:12):
Following this advice. So okay, so again, if somebody's feeling defensive, can you again say how you start that, if you notice that? And then I'll highlight the two elements again of the...

Alisa Cohn (00:24:25):
So the way to pause is to actually say, "Let's just pause for a second because I'm feeling the energy has changed and I can see that you're getting a little bit heated by what I'm saying and I want you to know that I have no intention of upsetting you. I just want to be able to talk to you about the things that are going to help you in your career."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:45):
Awesome. And I love, again, just the reminder of here's why this is important to you, here's the benefit to you and why this will help you. And then it's like, "Okay, let's just maybe take a pause and come back to this conversation if you're feeling like this isn't the best time." Awesome. Anything else along that line before we go to another type of a hard conversation?

Alisa Cohn (00:25:02):
I mean, I can talk all day about this [inaudible 00:25:06], but I'm happy to move on.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:07):
Well, let's pick another topic. I know you have kind of five buckets and types of conversation. Maybe the promotion one. That feels like I think we're in performance review season. It feels like these are happening a bunch. What do you suggest when someone's being told they're not going to get the promotion they expected or wanted?

Alisa Cohn (00:25:24):
Of course that's challenging. So again, getting your mindset right, recognizing they're disappointed, they're going to be disappointed, recognizing how you felt, the time that when you didn't get a promotion or whatever. And so kind of coming to it with some compassion. And also, you have to get your reasoning right. So sometimes people think they should get a promotion because they were here for a year or whatever. Sometimes people think they should get a promotion because they're the only internal candidate who's qualified for this or they might have a sense of themselves succeeding or achieving that is more inflated maybe than you see them. So trying to think about where they're coming from.

(00:25:56):
And then the conversation is just, "Matilda, I know this is going to be challenging for you to hear. I know you were hoping to get that promotion, but I want to let you know that we are going to actually be looking for an external candidate. I want to give you a few thoughts about why. First of all, in discussing this with my peers, I'm realizing that we need someone who has done this role multiple times in the past and has that experience. Number two, I think it's really important that they have an expertise in a specific realm that we've identified as really important. So for those reasons, we're going to bring someone in from the outside, not going to promote you, but I want you to know this. Number one, it's really important to me that you're able to succeed in your career here. And so I want to continue to help you find opportunities to build your skills and to advance. And then number two, when we bring this person in, I'm committed to finding someone who's a great people leader, who is going to help you build those skills."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:54):
So a few elements there that stood out to me. One is just being very upfront and not bearing the lead. Telling them very early, "Here's what I've decided." As you said it, I could see my heart sinking immediately when I feel that. So at least that's over and then it's, here's why. And that starts to help you feel like, "Okay, I get it. I understand at least how you thought about this." And then there's the hope for the future, your painting of, here's how I can get there eventually.

Alisa Cohn (00:27:21):
Yes, that hope for the future is so important and I think sometimes we're such in a rush to kind of deliver the bad news that we forget there's a human being over there who needs hope for the future. And hopefully. If they're a good employee, hopefully they have hope for the future.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:35):
I love that. Is there anything else to that script that you think is really highlighting or do you think I touched on the key elements?

Alisa Cohn (00:27:41):
I think you touched on the key elements.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:43):
Okay. And again, the way you started is, I have some bad news for you or I have some disappointing news for you.

Alisa Cohn (00:27:48):
Yes, because it's just [inaudible 00:27:50].

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:48):
Just get right into it. Yeah.

Alisa Cohn (00:27:51):
Yeah, just get right into it. Yeah. By the way, the other piece on that might be, if it's appropriate, I'd love you to digest this information and then let's talk about it again next week to see what you've come up with or see how you feel about it because you want to send, this is not the script, this is for me to you. You want to send the, I care about you message because that's the other thing. In the workplace, people, they're going through all their feelings, all their emotions, disappointments. They're going to go home and tell their spouse, didn't get the promotion or whatever. It's going to loom large. It's going to be demoralizing.

(00:28:24):
When you, as a leader signal a lot, I care about you, I care about your feelings, I care that you're disappointed, I care about your career, you are always going to be able to help people stay resilient in the face of setbacks and ultimately, do extra work, do the right work for you and be engaged in your company because you've spent the time and energy making sure they know that even when things are not going their way, they have an ally in you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:56):
What do you do if they just disagree, if they're just like, "But I do have those skills and I don't think this is fair." Thoughts on responding to that sort of feedback? I guess, that's the defensiveness stuff.

Alisa Cohn (00:29:06):
Yeah, that's the defensiveness stuff. And again, I hope you've done your homework to identify that actually that person doesn't have those skills and if there is a [inaudible 00:29:16] for example, but I do have those skills or sometimes people, I think more, even more often, they don't respond to what you just said. They will instead explain to you that they've been here for a year or they're the only internal candidate or their peer got promoted.

(00:29:31):
Right, they'll sort of explain to you things which are not part of your decision-making process and then it's helpful for you to say something like, "Yeah, listen, Matilda, I really understand that you were thinking that after a year, you'd get promoted around here. And in the past, I do think because of the stage of our company, probably people have been promoted at that period. That's not the place we're at right now. As we scale, we really need to think about not just what we need for today and tomorrow, but for the future. And that's why I want these specialized skills in here. I think it's going to help the entire company."

(00:30:02):
So that's an example of a discussion that you could have. I do have the skills. That's kind of interesting. I'd love to hear what you see as those skills. And it's not a problem to have the conversation right there then, but if there's a "Yes, I do, no, I don't, yes, I do, no, you don't," that pushback is never productive. And so, that's where you want to probably again take a pause and say, "Listen, I totally hear you. You and I have a different point of view about this. I'm not sure if it's productive to continue to discussing right now. Let's talk about it again in a week. But I also want you to know this is a decision that I've made."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:39):
I love though, when they come back to you and like, "But here's X, Y, Z." And you're like, "That's not what I was saying necessarily." I love that you basically mirror back. I hear what, I understand you believe, I understand you've been here for a year. I understand you're the only internal candidate," like making them feel very heard. That's a really powerful mechanic there. That is a good tool. Is there another script that you think might be helpful to talk through that is a common hard conversation people have?

Alisa Cohn (00:31:05):
Well, the hardest conversation is firing someone.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:09):
Let's do it. Let's get into it.

Alisa Cohn (00:31:13):
[inaudible 00:31:13]. I'm willing to get into it. I just want to say two things about that. First of all, when you're firing someone, the hope is that it's not a surprise to them. You've had multiple conversations with them that they're not living up to your expectations. It's essential because the truth is, you want to create a culture where people are not surprised by being fired. And that's not even true for this one person you're dealing with. That's true for the entire company. So just kind of getting in the mindset of recognizing that if you shied away from those conversations, kind of like, "You're the problem here and you have some catch up to do."

(00:31:43):
The second thing is that before you fire someone, I think it's helpful to have the conversation before the firing conversation because something you said Lenny is like, "Oh, but maybe I'm wrong. Maybe I'm not sure." And that bleeds into, "Maybe I haven't been clear with this person." Regularly with my clients, I'll say, "Okay, have you been crystal clear about what you need from this person?" And what they always do is the hand motion like well, sort of, but well, maybe. Which means no, which means no. You've not been crystal clear or you don't perceive even crystal clear. The way to make sure that you're crystal clear is by having the conversation before it comes to that.

(00:32:23):
What that looks like is, "Listen, Matilda, we have to have a difficult conversation right now. I've talked to you multiple times about coordinating with your peers and not having them surprised about missed deadlines, and I've talked to you multiple times about keeping your team in the loop on different things. After six months of these conversations, I want you to know that the peers continue to feel like that you're operating on your own without coordinating with them. And I continue to hear from your team that they're not fully on the same page. I need you to know that this is very important. I need you to fix this within the next 30 days. Otherwise, I'm sorry to say, we're going to have to find a way to part ways because I can't keep this going with you. I know you have it in you to change. I value all you bring to the table, but if you don't fix these things, we're not going to have a future together."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:19):
That is very crystal clear.

Alisa Cohn (00:33:20):
Yes, crystal clear.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:22):
Yeah. Okay.

Alisa Cohn (00:33:22):
What do you think of that?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:24):
Yeah, that was great. So it starts with being upfront. This is a difficult conversation, just to set expectations. They're like, "Oh, shit." And then it seems like you come back to, again, multiple times this happened, observing here's what's happening. It's happened multiple times. I keep hearing from multiple people, [inaudible 00:33:44] be a problem. And so it's just like, "I need you to know," and you're just very clear. "Here's what will happen if this doesn't change."

Alisa Cohn (00:33:52):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:52):
Yeah. And I love that you also give them a little, there's always that hope for who they are and how you see them as. They're not worthless. It's just like, "You are great at a lot of things. You have these skills. You're great at blah, blah, blah, but still this is a big problem." And it's communicating how critical this is. [inaudible 00:34:08].

Alisa Cohn (00:34:08):
Yeah, and it's a deal breaker. It's a deal breaker. Right?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:10):
Yeah.

Alisa Cohn (00:34:12):
If you have so many talents, but if you can't do these two things, then it's a deal breaker for all of us.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:16):
Yeah.

Alisa Cohn (00:34:16):
And I think it's important to really sort of see that both. Sometimes people think, "Well, but I'm so talented." Yeah, but your talents are not going to make up for these two deal breakers.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:25):
Yeah. And I feel like I know we were going to talk about the firing conversation, but I think this is even more important than that because hopefully, this addresses the problem and you don't need to fire them, which is more valuable.

Alisa Cohn (00:34:36):
Yes. Yeah, hopefully. But even if you do, it's actually easier because you've already had the conversation. Right? They're not surprised. It's clear. We've had the discussion.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:46):
Yeah. So basically the script is like, "There's going to be a difficult conversation. I've seen multiple times this thing and we've talked multiple times and it's still not fixed and here's what I just want to be very clear about." Is there also a script you have for just actually doing the firing or is that less scriptable?

Alisa Cohn (00:35:05):
Well, the script for doing the firing is again, please everybody, talk to your HR professional. Talk to your lawyer. Okay, I'm not a lawyer, I'm afraid. So you have to make sure that you're all buttoned up on what you're going to do. But the conversation is actually very simple, which is just, "Matilda, we talked about this multiple times. The last time we had this conversation, I told you I needed you to make these changes. You haven't made these changes and we're going to part ways. So I have here, Sarah from HR or whatever, and we're going to talk through the logistics of that. I'm happy to have a longer conversation with you, but I want you to know we've made the decision to terminate you."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:42):
Feels very reasonable to me. Is there anything else along these lines?

Alisa Cohn (00:35:46):
I think what I want to say is that the conversations you need to have at work are not just difficult conversations. What I call them is sort of delicate conversations because what I think people also shy away from is just simple praise, specific praise. And I think it's really important to get in the habit of pointing out what your people are doing well as carefully as you need to prepare for pointing out what they need to improve. And sometimes leaders feel like, "Yeah, it's all working. It's all working. I don't have to tell you." Or if I do tell you, it's kind of like "Good job." Right? One time a leader or a manager I was doing in a training program, she said, "I don't like getting positive feedback. I only like getting negative feedback." And I said, "How come?" And she said, "Oh, positive feedback is just like, oh, good job. Negative feedback, you can learn something. You get something from it."

(00:36:40):
So the positive feedback should have the same standard, which is, "I saw the way you ran that launch, it was fantastic. All these different benefits came from it. You're so organized, keep doing that." Or "The way you're keeping your peers in the loop, considering you've only been here three months is extraordinary. I've never seen someone so communicative. It's fantastic. Keep doing that. That's really working for you." If you do that often enough, you do get in the... First of all, it's positive, obviously. You become in the habit of getting better at positive feedback, which is extremely motivating to people at work. It helps them see their progress because that person I just mentioned, she's barely keeping her head above water and she's having trouble fitting in or whatever, but you come around and point out the things that are working. Again, it's very morale boosting. She knows where she stands, and then one day, if you have to give her these difficult messages, you've already sort of laid the reservoir of goodwill.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:37):
I love giving positive feedback. It's obviously so much easier, but to your point, it's like you have to really think about how to do it well. It's not just a, it's not that easy if you do it well, which is a really good point. And [inaudible 00:37:49] needs scripts for how to give really good positive feedback and have great conversations.

Alisa Cohn (00:37:53):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:53):
That's interesting. There's less demand for that. How do I have better great conversations or compliments?

Alisa Cohn (00:37:59):
Right, right. True.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:59):
No man. Today's episode is brought to you by Liveblocks, the platform that turns your product into a place that users want to be. With ready-made collaborative features, you can supercharge your product with experiences that only top tier companies have been able to perfect until now. Think AI copilots like Notion, multiplayer like Figma, comments and notifications like Linear and even collaborative editing like Google Docs, and all of that with minimal configuration or maintenance required.

(00:38:31):
Companies from all kinds of industries and stages count on Liveblocks to drive engagement and growth in their products. Join them today and give your users an experience that turns them into daily active users. Sign up for a free account today at liveblocks.io/lenny. I want to go on a little bit of a tangent, something that it's kind of touches on all the things we've been talking about, which is, you're big on helping leaders understand that their job is not to make employees happy. What is your job instead? Why do people think this is their job to make their employees happy and what should they be thinking instead is their job as a leader?

Alisa Cohn (00:39:09):
[inaudible 00:39:09], I work with a lot of founders and so, don't forget that the entry-level position for a founder is leader, and they have it, they often not had a lot of other experiences being a leader or a manager, and so they're just doing the best they can. It makes sense, right? And they kind of get all this information from other people and their HR leader wants to have a happy engaged workforce and they don't want to upset people for all the reasons we talked about, why you don't want to upset people. Nobody wants to upset people.

(00:39:40):
And so there's this idea of, they're trying to now be now be the leader who everyone loves and makes people happy. So they would often bend over backwards to make people happy, to keep people, their morale up. But what really needs to happen very often is, we need to drive towards results. And the way this system is working is not going to drive us towards results or this employee continuing to not really do a great job at their job and not really pushing themselves. And you don't want to push them because you don't want to upset them, you don't want to give them difficult feedback, so you're just going to keep hoping it works out.

(00:40:23):
Ultimately, that leads to the demise of your company. I mean, ultimately right, as you're a startup? If you're not in a startup and you're a large company, it still is very subpar performance, obviously. And you're dancing around hoping and praying they're going to get there and they don't really know there's a problem. And so, I think it's very misguided for leaders to have this notion that their most important role is to keep people happy, is to create this high engagement workforce. High engagement workforce is great.

(00:40:56):
I think what that comes from is winning culture, which means we're set up for success. We've got the structure for success, we have the culture for success, everyone understands their role, they know the impact of their role. So doing the work to figure out and help them figure out the impact of their role and that when they work together and achieve these milestones, they win and then we celebrate the wins and then we do it all over again. And when you create that kind of a workforce, I think it's much more dynamic, even though sometimes in doing that, you have to redirect people and ruffle their feathers.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:26):
Essentially, the way I think about it is you think making people happy is not having hard conversations, not pushing them, when really, it's almost working backwards from, if we win and are killing it, people will be happy and what does it take to do that?

Alisa Cohn (00:41:40):
A hundred percent. And then the right people are going to want to join your team, people who like to win and like to get results.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:48):
Is there a story, an example of a founder you worked with or that comes to mind of this kind of where they thought this was their approach and then they shifted? Or is there kind of a pattern you see often?

Alisa Cohn (00:41:57):
One company comes to mind. One leader I worked with. Sometimes I think to myself, if I'm writing a book, the book would start with, "It all started with the avocado toast," because he wants to do right by his workforce. And so they have avocado toast at 10 AM, like tea time kind of a thing. And it became this great ritual where people would kind of hang out together and that was great. And then that turned into other longer periods of just hanging out together. Again, these are good things. And that turned into evening socials and everybody was enjoying spending time together, but they continued to be not fully clear on what they were actually supposed to do. And there began to be kind of a cliquey, gossipy culture of who's in and who's out. And that would take up a lot of the socialization time discussions. So rather than talk about expectations about the work and about results, and again, the results were not showing. So it wasn't a lot to celebrate.

(00:43:05):
They started at a culture committee. So they had a culture committee to talk about how we can make people happier around here. And you can imagine there's now layers and layers of things where we're trying to focus on engagement and we're trying to focus on the employees having a great experience. And the leader I'm working with is completely sincere. It actually want to have a great workplace. But I think the misguidedness was that he hadn't done a great job setting expectations. He had not done a great job of quote unquote "codifying their culture" because culture is not just avocado toast and working together and having socials, culture is things like, we go the extra mile or culture is we make sure, or it could be, we measure twice and cut once. Those are kinds of things that are really about the way we get work done around here. And certainly, a focus on results is like, are we following the process to then get the revenue and to then build a profitable company or are we just kind of hanging out together?

(00:44:07):
So he had to come to terms with his own discomfort of addressing this with employees and his own discomfort in being a corporate drone of, "Oh, expectations and in the workplace and how we do things." And it turned out that's the whole thing with coaching and with working with people is that you kind of see what their underlying assumptions and beliefs are and there's a reason everyone does what they do. So there's a reason he's doing what he's doing. We had to come to terms with that and then he had to really courageously make some changes about the way he was operating. And ultimately, they had to part ways with one or two really toxic people who were creating this gossipy culture and making people feel not included and not focused on results. And then when they all got on the same page, they were able to gain a lot more traction.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:56):
I feel like a lot of leaders and founders can relate to this, of wanting to create a great culture and keep it nice and friendly and everyone's a family and then things don't quite work out often in those cases. And there's a shift to, "Okay, we actually need to make a business that works."

Alisa Cohn (00:44:56):
Right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:12):
It always reminds me, Sheryl Sandberg came to talk at Airbnb once and people are asking, "What do you do with all this...? We're just constantly in chaos. Things are always reorging or changing, just never... I'm on different teams every six months. Our goals are shifting. What do you do with all this... Our culture's changing as we grow." And she's like, "That is a sign of hyper growth and success. And the opposite is even worse when you are not growing and you don't want that. And so you should be happy this is the challenge you're running into."

Alisa Cohn (00:45:40):
I love that. It's so true.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:42):
So along these lines, you talk about how a lot of founders have to come to terms, and it's not just founders, it's just execs and leaders you work with, have to come to terms with, "Here's what I thought leadership was going to be and how to be a great leader, and here's what it really is." Is there anything more there that you find is commonly what they're wrong about or what they miss and what they have to realize?

Alisa Cohn (00:46:01):
Yeah. And I think as we grow as leaders, we all have to realize our own blind spots and the difference between what we thought and what is actually going on. So I worked with a founder who she wanted to be was a visionary leader, which is fantastic. I would love that. And she was an incredibly visionary person, very inspirational. But what she didn't see is that what her company needed was somebody to structure and hold people accountable and help them create goals and achieve milestones and course correct when they got off course. And she'd be very frustrated when all those things happened. People got off course, people didn't have goals, people weren't structured to work together. But what she didn't realize was that was, in one way or the other, her job to make that happen.

(00:46:49):
Now, maybe she needed to have, and I would talk to her a lot about this, a partner, like a COO or somebody else who could be the person who would be sort of managing the internal while she got to be more visionary, inspirational, but ultimately, it was her job to make sure that that was in place. And she didn't sort of see that and she did not adjust her style. And so there's a lot of wheel spinning that happens from that. Even though, by the way, she was an incredibly inspirational person and incredibly inspirational leader and she meant so well. There was nothing malicious about it. It's just that she didn't see the situation for what it was and then adjust.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:30):
It reminds me, we had this coach on the podcast, Joe Hudson, and he had this phrase that I think a lot of people use, but it just stuck with me. What you resist, persists. So if you hate confrontation, you're going to have much more confrontation. If you hate structure... Actually, this reminds me, Joe Gebbia at Airbnb. He was very anti-process at the beginning of Airbnb. He's like, "We're not going to have a process. I hate process. We're going to run... That's the big company stuff." And then it just chaos constantly. And then eventually it's like, "Okay, we need to have some process to how we build things."

Alisa Cohn (00:48:02):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:03):
And so it's interesting. A lot of people have to realize the thing they think was bad is actually, I see why people do it this way.

Alisa Cohn (00:48:10):
Yeah, totally. Actually, I'd like to say something about that because so many... Founders are kind of mavericks and they come into a situation or they start at this company and they want to do things their own way and that's fantastic. Otherwise, they wouldn't be a founder. That's actually fantastic. And so many of the founders I've worked with want to reinvent leadership. Right? They want to have it with no process, they want to have no hierarchy, they want to have autonomy, whatever it is.

(00:48:37):
And my feeling is like, "God bless. You should absolutely try to do that." But at the end of the day, what happens is, they kind of invent for themselves the understanding that they need to have process, hierarchy, roles and responsibilities, goals, OKRs, whatever it is. And I think it's helpful sometimes to go through that fire of thinking we can do it a different way. But ultimately, I think that the ways to structure a group of people and get them organized so that they can win, are kind of well trod. And I would say that it's helpful to get through that stage quickly so that you don't have to constantly reinvent the wheels of leadership.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:19):
Such an important context. Obviously, one of the... The most successful founders come up with, have first principles thinking into how to do stuff, and oftentimes they find something no one has ever thought about. So it's always this balance of try a bunch of stuff, a lot of it won't [inaudible 00:49:34]. Some of it was, what will help you win. And I think that's a really good point. I want to get into a couple more tactical things that you often work on with founders. One is, running meetings. Meetings come up a lot on this podcast. People hate them, people love them. There's some are great, some are bad, most are bad. You have some cool advice on just how to make meetings more effective and how to especially end a meeting to help you move forward. Talk about what your advice is there and just generally any advice for better meetings.

Alisa Cohn (00:50:01):
Yeah. I'm one of the few people that loves meetings. Or I should say I don't love meetings. I love the potential for meetings. We have all this smart people in the room. We have the potential to talk about these great things and make decisions. And unfortunately, they don't go that way. So what happens often, I mean there's so many downfalls with meetings, but one thing that happens is, we keep meeting. Either we make decisions or we don't make decisions, but then we come back to meet again and we don't have any continuity from the last. So then we re-meet, we re-decide, and that is a big problem. So my three questions to end the meeting are, what did we decide here? Who needs to do what by when? And who else needs to know? And if you can capture those, articulate those as deliverables, I promise you, you're going to have better meetings.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:51):
Okay, so it's, what did we decide here? Who's going to do what by when? So basically, action items with dates. And then, who needs to know about what we decided here? Is that how you put it?

Alisa Cohn (00:51:01):
Yes. Who else needs to know? There's so many executive teams that I've worked with and at first, they go into their room, they have their meeting, they make their decisions and then they leave and they don't tell anyone. "I made this promise for my team that you guys need to kind of go do." Or, "We decided on a policy of some sort and we forgot to tell everybody." And again, no, absolutely no maliciousness, just that they forget or they're too busy and there's not part of the protocol and the process inside of the company that encourages and really insists that people share important information, so cascading that down.

(00:51:37):
But even the first question, what did we decide here? If you really go around the room at the end of a meeting or six people in the meeting, let's say, and you say to everybody, "What did we decide here?" And they all write it down, you will get six different answers, even though we're in the same meeting. I love that it's so powerful, but also, so helpful to really raise that up, to surface that and then to figure out what to do about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:58):
I love that you highlighted that. I was going to say exactly the same thing, that everyone in their head has the thought of, "Here, oh yeah. Here's what we decided." And to your point, it's often not the same. So is the advice here, is this like a template or something you fill out at the end of a meeting or is it someone's job to make sure these three things happen or how do you operationalize these three questions?

Alisa Cohn (00:52:19):
I like it that it's someone's job, the person that I sort of think of as the meetings are. And typically, that's somebody who enjoys follow-up, who enjoys putting lists together and putting things into boxes and whatnot, and there's usually someone like that on the team. And so then it's kind of exciting for them to be the follower upper. But one way or the other, so you could use a template. I think that actually baking it in as a ritual to the meeting, because the other thing about meetings is that we never have enough time. We go right to the end and we don't leave the five or 10 minutes at the end to make sure that we ask these three questions and make sure that we have an understanding of what the follow through is on these meetings.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:57):
What I'm imagining is, say it's the product managers. Put this doc on the screen in the meeting as the meeting's ending and just have it filled out basically, and just confirm, "Does this look good to everyone?"

Alisa Cohn (00:53:09):
Love that. That's a great way to do it. By the way, with... Well, I just would say what's interesting about that is that if we ask people what did we decide here, I think there's value in just asking that question in particular because somebody might say, "We decided," I don't know, "Something." And other people would say, "No, we didn't. But that's actually a good idea. It sort of crystallizes what we did talk about in a more comprehensive way." I think there's value in raising the differences and I think there's value in stitching those together. So just putting it up on the board is good, especially if you're running short of time. I worry that somebody might not weigh in and say, "Actually, I have a very different point of view of what we decided here." So maybe it's also about building the culture to break in and say, "No, that's not what I see. Let's spend some time on that."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:03):
Let's actually spend more time on this because this is really, I think, really this specific detail I think could be really powerful if you do it right. So say you're the PM in the meeting, who do you ask? Do you say to the room, "What did we decide here?" Or do you look at the most senior person? Otherwise, it feels like it could just lead to a whole discussion the last couple of minutes, which I guess could be valuable, but who do you point this question to?

Alisa Cohn (00:54:24):
Yeah. So I picture this for let's say, a six-person executive team meeting, which means everyone go around quickly and say, "What did we decide here?" Now, if you're in a meeting with a large executive team, which I do work with sometimes or non-executive team, like a group of some sort, then you probably want to get a few people just to... I would just even say as a facilitator, two or three people, "Okay, two or three people, what do we decide here?" And if you can kind of get common, great. That's fantastic.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:52):
Got it. Okay. So if it's a small meeting, go around the room and everyone just shares, here's what we decided here. And they could just be like, "Yep, he's got it or she's got it." Awesome. Okay. This is great. So the advice here is, next time you have a meeting, especially an exec meeting, just at the end of the meeting, you, the listener of this podcast, just ask, "Okay, everyone. Let's just make sure we're on the same page. What did you decide here? Who needs to do what by when?" And then everyone chimes in and you're writing this in this doc, and then what else? Who needs to know about what we decided here?

Alisa Cohn (00:55:22):
Yeah. Lenny, I love that because also, do you have to be the leader of the meeting to do that? No. You could just be the person in the meeting and just chime in and just start it yourself. And if you do that and everyone kind of picks it up, it can become a ritual just by virtue of your own agency. So I love that you just encouraged everyone to do that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:42):
And this is how you become a leader, is you just start doing these things and people are like, "Oh, Alisa is so helpful. She's just on top of it. Every time she's in a meeting, the meetings go better. We get things done." So I think just doing the thing that is useful to everyone is how you move up.

Alisa Cohn (00:55:56):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:57):
Amazing. Okay. Another topic that I know you spend a lot of time on is something you call the founder prenup. And what I love about this is, a lot of the problems that a company trickle down from the founders having their challenges with each other. And I started a company in the past and I don't think people realize how significant this decision is in your life. It's basically, you are marrying someone in a business context and you're stuck with this person for a long time and you basically came up with a prenup, which is a set of questions of just things you need to talk about to make sure you're aligned before you start this company. Is there any context around this thing before we talk through actually the questions that you recommend people talk through?

Alisa Cohn (00:56:41):
Well, I just want to reiterate what you just said. Exactly right. And it turns out that according to Noam, Noam Wasserstein, 65% of startups fail because of conflict with founders or the founding team. So it's really essential to get this right, and I agree that people step into this relationship with a lot less care than they should. And bad things can happen because you haven't done the work of getting to know each other before you decide to co-found.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:12):
Yeah. It's so easy just to like, "Yeah, I'll start a company. We have this cool idea. Let's just do it. It's going to be so awesome." And then you don't realize how much you're committing to and how often things don't work out because of that quick decision. And oftentimes, it's like friends and then it becomes even more challenging because I want to be friends, but we're in business together. So yeah. Let's talk about what you recommend folks talk through as much as we can on this podcast.

Alisa Cohn (00:57:36):
So I do have kind of an extensive questionnaire, so we just touch on a few things, but one thing I think first and foremost is, what are your values? And I think it's really essential to do some sort of values clarification exercise. You can find a ton of them online. You can find a list of values and just pull out your core values and just compare them with each other because when you are aligned, it's great. Or when you're adjacent, it's also great.

(00:58:01):
I might care a lot about excellence, Lenny, you might care a lot about learning. Fantastic. Those are great values that we can kind of, go together. I might care about excellence and you might care about work-life balance. Wow, let's talk about that because I think it's going to be really important as we go through our startup journey that we understand both of us, what does work-life balance mean and what does excellence mean? Because those two things can at times be at odds with each other, just as kind of an example.

(00:58:30):
So talking through those core values in advance and updating them regularly, even as you go down the path together is so essential. Just so you know where the other person's coming from. Because the other problem is, someone acts in a certain way, you don't know them that well maybe, or maybe you've known them as an eighth grader. A lot of founders do know each other from their youth and they've matured into different kinds of people. And so you think they're acting strangely, but actually, they're acting in accordance with their values. And so getting a handle on that upfront can solve, I would just say, solve a lot of problems before they start.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:08):
So signs that your values don't align. It's basically you both can't be true is almost the way I think about it as we talk. It's hard to be the excellent, focus on excellence and also not work long hours, which it's possible, but it's hard. Those are challenging and worth the conversation.

Alisa Cohn (00:59:26):
Yeah, worth the conversation because in fact, as you say that, I'm like, "Well, I guess you can do that. Right. You can do that." And so therefore, that's where the conversation has to figure out how you're going to marry these two values, which might be at odds or might be aligned, but let's talk through what work-life balance means to you and let's talk through what excellence means to me, and let's see if we can have a meeting of the minds about it or at least I know where you stand.

(00:59:50):
One of the founders I worked with, he would text or Slack his co-founder on weekends and the co-founder wouldn't respond. And that was extremely frustrating to the person, to the co-founder I was talking to. And it turned out, after they finally addressed it, it really was about wanting to have some downtime and some, quote unquote, "Balance." Nothing wrong with that, but because they didn't talk about it, both sides made [inaudible 01:00:20] big assumption about it and then it caused this conflict that didn't have to happen if they'd had the conversation in advance.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:25):
Comes back to where we started of having these conversations is necessary and almost helps the other person because this small issue could become a huge issue over time, if you just start assuming and it keeps happening and it keeps scratching and scratching at you. And letting that person's [inaudible 01:00:45] is screwed up because you're, "I can't do this with you anymore." Right? So it's just another reminder of how it's good for the other person for you to engage in a difficult conversation.

Alisa Cohn (01:00:54):
Yes, very true.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:55):
Okay, what else? So values. By the way, is there a values framework you most love that you can point people to or there just a bunch and don't worry too much about which one you go [inaudible 01:01:05]?

Alisa Cohn (01:01:04):
I mean, the one I use is super simple, which is on the thing called the internet. There's a lot of lists of values and I think when you see a list of values, you can pull out the ones that are most meaningful to you, and that's a very simple and helpful and free tool.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:19):
Got it. So you just Google list of values, there's a PDF, and just circle the ones that are most and pick whatever small number, don't... Half of [inaudible 01:01:27]-

Alisa Cohn (01:01:26):
Actually, well, just to give you the process, right? It's helpful to pick 20, for example. Great. And then you winnow them down to, let's say, 10. And then you do the difficult work of winnowing them down to three to five that you feel are core to you. And that's a good exercise for everyone to do actually, every year because things can change. It also forces you to make the difficult decisions about when it comes down to it, what are the things that really are important to me? The more you know your values, the more you can operate in the world with just more clarity for yourself.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:58):
Awesome. All right. So values. What else?

Alisa Cohn (01:02:01):
Yeah. So another one is, vision of the company. So when this company is successful, what does that look like? And what that might look like is, we're in control of our destiny and we are able to operate this business independently and we have a lot of freedom. What that might look like is a big venture outcome that we all read about. And if you are both assuming that you both think the same thing but aren't talking about it explicitly or talking about the trade-offs you need to make inherent in that, then what often happens if you have differences is they come home to roost while it's too late or when it's too late.

(01:02:40):
So an example is the two co-founders I worked with, one of them would said to me wistfully, this is like five or six years into the company, and the company was going well, but it was challenging and they had all their growing pains and like you mentioned about Sheryl said all the chaos. And he said to me, "Gosh, I don't see why we have to grow. I just wish we could actually have fewer employees. And I used to love it when I knew everybody's name and I would just much prefer an environment where we didn't have to grow." Well, unfortunately, they were already venture backed and also, the other co-founder had a very lofty ambition for a very big company. And since they hadn't talked about that, it was way too late to even have that conversation and it was a very painful reckoning for both of them to realize they were not on the same page.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:33):
Totally, see the value of this one. I could totally see how people would have different goals. I imagine it also changes over time, so there's probably an element of, if something has shifted for you, you should probably also have that conversation. I don't want to build an IPO venture scale business, I just want to build something chill. So basically, a line on what is... How would you phrase that? What does winning look like to you?

Alisa Cohn (01:03:52):
Yeah, what does success look like?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:54):
What does success look like to you?

Alisa Cohn (01:03:54):
Or what's the vision for the company when it reaches its full potential?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:01):
Okay. Great. What else?

Alisa Cohn (01:04:01):
Another one is, it's sort of a two part question. How do you handle conflict? So how do you handle conflict? But then, you might want to ask your spouse, someone close to you, "How do I handle conflict?" Because you might think, "Oh, I handle conflict with such an enlightened person. I'm so neutral about it. I'm so great at bringing things up." But the person who's close to you might say, "You seethe until you're ready to bring something up and it's really uncomfortable in the seething period." So it just gives you a little more self-awareness about how you actually handle conflict.

(01:04:42):
And that's really important because I might be the kind of person who wants to bring up conflict and talk about it immediately. The other person might be a person who totally wants to talk about the conflict but wants to let it settle first and wants to also go through their own thinking process about what's important to them and might actually feel like they've resolved it themselves without having to have a conversation with you. And if you're the person who's like, "Let's talk about it, let's talk about it, let's talk about it." And they're like, "I'm working through it myself." Now you have conflict over the conflict and it just turns into dynamic that's not necessary.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:22):
As you go through these questions, it's absurd to imagine people don't do this when they find a co-founder and work through stuff, and I know nobody does. The percentage of people that do this sort of work ahead of time, it's very low. And so I love that we're helping this percentage go up, but it also reminds me of just how crazy it is people don't have these conversations and how it explains why so many founder relationships don't work out. So these are awesome. What else? I know you have a whole list and we'll link to it, right? There's a PDF we can link to?

Alisa Cohn (01:05:22):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:53):
With the questions or-

Alisa Cohn (01:05:54):
For sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:55):
[inaudible 01:05:55] post. Awesome. Let's do a few more.

Alisa Cohn (01:05:57):
Another one is, how do we decide when we disagree? And that is a very good thing to explore because there's actually a lot of different ways to decide when you disagree and they're all good. And if you have it sort of upfront and it's just for an ongoing discussion, but if you have it up front like when we disagree, because that's definitely going to happen, let's assume that the person who cares the most can win that argument. That would be a great way to do it. It might be, the person who's got the best perspective and the most expertise can win that argument. It might be, we'll go back and forth when we really disagree. First you win and then I win, like that, back and forth.

(01:06:41):
There's so many different ways to handle it and if you talk about it upfront, you'll be much more likely to be able to actually put that into practice when you do disagree because you will definitely disagree. There's no way around that. And that's not even a bad thing. You're smart people. You have this dynamic tension in the relationship. You bring different things to the table. You've got different perspectives. Disagreeing is normal. Working through it and having a practice and a process of working through it, will help it be a good conversation rather than this sort of sulky difficult conversation.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:12):
I love it. Maybe one more?

Alisa Cohn (01:07:14):
Yeah. So another one is, what kind of company culture do I think is important? People definitely don't talk about this before they found the company and they assume they're on the same page. So one founder might be, "I want to have this great company where everyone loves it and we're all loving together and working hard together. And it feels like a..." To use your word before, "It feels like a family." By the way, that's great. That's fantastic. "I want to have a get it done, results-focused culture where we're just executing the hell out of everything and that we're just focused on winning."

(01:07:52):
By the way, those two can actually exist together. But if you're pushing in one direction without the other and your co-founder is pushing the other direction without yours, it really can feel like two different companies. And that's... When I go into a situation at one of my client sites, often I will hear from the employees, "It feels like we have two different companies and two different cultures depending on whose team you're on." And that, of course, leads to lack of coherent working together and certainly even just lack of different standards and expectations.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:24):
Awesome. Okay. To kind of start to wrap our conversation, I want to take us to a recurring segment of this podcast that I call, Fail Corner. We've talked a lot about failure at this point and just all the ways people fail. I'm curious if, in your career or life, there's a story that might be helpful for folks to hear when things didn't go great and you've failed, and if you learn something from that experience. And the reason this is something I do is I feel like people listening to this podcast, everyone's like, "Sounds so amazing, everything's always going great. They're killing it." When in reality, that's not actually how things go. So these end up being really helpful for people like, "Oh, wow. Even Alisa had a really hard time sometime." Is there a story that you could share?

Alisa Cohn (01:09:04):
Absolutely. I mean, so many examples. I'm going to give two quick examples. One is, when I first started my coaching practice, I just kind of started and so I just did everything I could to get clients, to build a business, to build a practice, to build my brand, all the things. And I was working so hard and I think I'd had this conversation with somebody that didn't go very well. And I just thought, in my mind's eye, I thought, "Well, what will become of me?" That was my voice in my head for quite a long time, "What will become of me?" And I was living in Boston at the time. I got onto the floor, my hardwood floors in my Brookline condo, and I just balled in the fetal position. I just balled and balled and balled for an hour. It wasn't 10 minutes, it was an hour.

(01:09:50):
And I was so frightened and just upset. Am I going to be able to make this work? And it was a while and I got into the couch and took a little stress nap. And then I got up from my stress nap and I just started making more calls and doing more things. And that was definitely a rock bottom moment for me. And I think what I learned is, you have to literally pick yourself up from the ground and pull yourself forward. And when you keep taking action, action, action, win or lose, win or lose, you'll get where you need to go. And that turned out to be true. But in those moments, I was not thinking that was going to turn out to be true.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:32):
Wow. Amazing story. I imagine many people feel those moments and it's empowering to hear that it can all turn out really well, even when you're lying in the floor crying for an hour. An hour is a long time to cry on the floor.

Alisa Cohn (01:10:45):
It is a long time to cry. It really... I thought about it because most people just cry for 10 or 15 minutes. I was crying for an hour. I'm positive. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:52):
Great story. You said you had another story.

Alisa Cohn (01:10:56):
Yeah. I'll tell you a second story, which is more focused on actually my work life. So one thing that I do is I do coaching of course and I do off sites. And this was early, early days of my coaching career and I was doing this off site and it wasn't going well. And I was debriefing with my client during the breaks and at one point she said something like, "I just think we should end this offsite. I just think we should just decide it's over and it's not working." And I felt horrible, obviously, humiliated, certainly, and just like that's a failure. That's like, "Oh, fail." And I know that what I took away from it was that I can improve my skills in every aspect of running an offsite.

(01:11:40):
So getting aligned with the client in advance, making sure that I had the right activities getting us to our goal, being very goal-oriented and focused, and making sure that I had kind of understood the rhythm of what it takes to bring people together. So I took some training on that. I worked my mentor on that, and I got so great at offsites after that experience. I'll tell you that was a real low because in the moment, in that moment, I'm not thinking, "I'm going to get great at offsites." In that moment I'm thinking, "Oh, my God. I'm going to get... What will become of me?" But I turned it into, in my mind's eye, or I should say, I turned it into the ability to build my skills. And I just want to tell everybody, even at your lowest moments, anything that you're learning from that, can then be turned into fuel to build your skills to get great at the thing that you're not great at.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:31):
What I also love about this is there's this feeling of imposter syndrome, is specifically this fear that I do something wrong and it'll all crumble and everyone will see I suck and I never... I don't know anything and everyone will see it. And I love both these stories are like, it doesn't go well and doesn't crumble. You build from there. And no one's like, "Oh, Alisa's terrible forever." No, it's like move on to the next thing. And then you use that as fuel to become really good at this thing that didn't go great.

Alisa Cohn (01:12:57):
Yeah, that's really well said.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:00):
Amazing. Alisa, we covered a lot of stuff. Is there anything that you were hoping to cover or you think might be useful for folks to hear before we move to our very exciting lightning round?

Alisa Cohn (01:13:10):
The only last thing I want to talk about, just sort of circling back to your role as a leader, I was one time working with the CEO who was handling the fact that this launch was not going well, as in the launch wasn't happening. [inaudible 01:13:25] foot off, foot off, foot off. And his point of view was, you need to have patience with it as it goes. And my point of view is, because I've talked to a lot of the people around, was that there was a massive process problem going on that he was not kind of touching into and really investigating because the product manager wasn't experienced, was kind of hiding it because he knew he didn't have the skills, was fighting with engineering, it just wasn't working.

(01:13:53):
And when the CEO was telling me, and we really had a long discussion about this where I kind of enlightened him about some of the issues that he needed to get involved and fix, he kept thinking, "I need to have patience." So what I want to say to everybody is, sometimes you need to have patience and sometimes you need to look at the process. And I think you, as the leader, need to have the wisdom to know the difference, but also your finger on the pulse to recognize, is this an issue with patience or an issue with process?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:22):
I guess, is there a sign that you're like, it's probably a process thing and you're just ignoring a glaring problem that everyone else sees?

Alisa Cohn (01:14:30):
I think the sign is when, if you search your mind, you don't really know how this thing is going to come together. There's no plan in your mind. You haven't touched in with people or talked to people about what's going on. You kind of hear this uncomfortable silence about it. Those are symptoms that you just need to dive deeper and just be a little more in touch with what's going on and talk to some folks and look at some data. And by the way, it might not be a massive process problem. It might just be one little thing that needs to get unstuck but you, as the leader, need to recognize that and figure out a way to make that unstuck. And if there's, of course, a big problem that needs to somehow be just surfaced.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:09):
So if there's this hope this'll work out versus I see a path to this working out, it's probably a problem. Awesome.

Alisa Cohn (01:15:16):
Yeah, well said.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:17):
Is there anything else that you wanted to share or touch on that you think might be helpful?

Alisa Cohn (01:15:21):
We talked a little about the co-founders prenup, which I think people would think, "Well, I'm not a co-founder, I don't need that." I just want to invite everyone to also think about a different tool that I have, which is called the Personal Operating Manual. And it helps prompt you to talk about working style together because you may not be co-founders, of course, but you're working on a team with a bunch of people and they all have their different working style.

(01:15:42):
So it's kinds of questions like, what communication style do you like the best? How do you like to work? Do you like large uninterrupted blocks? Do you like meetings here and there? When I'm trying to get a hold of you for something important, what's the best way to do that? What is one of your pet peeves or some of your pet peeves? How can I get a gold star with you? Also, this is my favorite. What's your delegation style?

(01:16:10):
Do you want me to check in with you regularly, like once a week as I'm working down the path of a project? Or do you want me to just let you know when it's done and just tell you at the end that it's been complete? So lots of different ways people assume other people work because it's like your style, but actually it's just your style. So those kinds of conversations can be great for working together and also be a great team activity.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:34):
So this kind of what goes into these READMEs people put together, here's how to-

Alisa Cohn (01:16:37):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:37):
... work with me. I really love the gold star concept because I feel like people want to know how do I be super awesome? How do I be really successful working for you? And I like that visual of the gold star and the pet peeves. I feel like a lot of people will identify that. What are my pet peeves so that people don't do these things because they don't know, right? They don't know until you tell them.

Alisa Cohn (01:16:55):
Nobody knows what's your operating style until you tell them. And the more you can showcase, the more everybody will be able to do it right for you and you'll be able to do it right for them. And then you'll be able to have better workplace harmony and save your conflict with things that are really important. Not just because like, "Oh, you didn't text me when I wanted you to text me."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:13):
Being clear. What do you know? Is there anything else that you think might be helpful to share before we get to a very exciting lightning round?

Alisa Cohn (01:17:20):
No, just that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:21):
Well, with that, Alisa, we reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Alisa Cohn (01:17:24):
I can't wait. I'm ready.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:26):
Here we go. First question, are there two or three books that you find yourself most recommending to other people?

Alisa Cohn (01:17:33):
So we already talked about Kim Scott, the wonderful, amazing Kim Scott and her book, Radical Candor, is one I recommend a lot to people. It's fantastic. Working Backwards by gosh, Colin Bryar and Bill something, is about sort of the Amazon way of working backwards from the customer. Super geeky and tactical. I love it. I slurp it up like Harry Potter. It's so good. And I definitely recommend to my clients about Amazon's Management Science. And the third is Walt Disney by Neil Gabler because it really shows how Walt Disney, sort of it's everything about his youth and how he turned into a very bad entrepreneur and ultimately into a fantastic inventive entrepreneur. And it shows all the origins of how he invented these different pieces that now make up the Walt Disney Company.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:26):
The first two recommendations we've had on the podcast, Kim Scott and Bill Carr, is the other-

Alisa Cohn (01:18:29):
Bill Carr.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:30):
... co-author. He's been on the podcast and people love that episode. I haven't had Walt Disney on. I got to work on that.

Alisa Cohn (01:18:37):
Or the writer, Neil Gabler

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:38):
Or the writer. Yeah, yeah. Good tip. Okay, next question. Is there a favorite recent movie or TV show you really enjoy?

Alisa Cohn (01:18:44):
Yeah, I enjoyed Inside Out 2. I thought it was fantastic, the idea [inaudible 01:18:49].

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:48):
I could see why you love it. I feel like it's for all coaches in the world.

Alisa Cohn (01:18:51):
Totally. Just the idea that like, oh yeah, we're all this complex stew of emotions and it's okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:56):
Mm-hmm. I also love that movie. Next question. Do you have a favorite product you recently discovered that you really love?

Alisa Cohn (01:19:03):
Yes, the Ninja Creami. So good.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:07):
Say more.

Alisa Cohn (01:19:09):
The Ninja Creami turns anything into ice cream. So you can actually make ice cream. Good, God bless. But I take my protein shake, which is okay, and turn it into ice cream, which is delicious. And it takes 10 minutes and very little prep, and it's simple to use and it works as expected, which so many things do not. The Ninja Creami, go get it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:28):
That's the first for the Ninja Creami. And I love, the holidays are coming around, so this is going to be good for people. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to you find useful in work or in life?

Alisa Cohn (01:19:41):
This quote by Joseph Campbell animates my life, which is, "If you can see your path all the way through to the end, you are following someone else's path. Your path only becomes clear moment by moment as each foot hits the ground."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:57):
Wow, that's so good. It's so empowering because it helps you realize if you don't see where it's all going, that's normal and that's good. Wow. Great one, good one. I need to do something with all these mottos. They're so good. I need to create a poster or something.

Alisa Cohn (01:20:14):
That's a great idea. Or your newsletter.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:16):
Here we go.

Alisa Cohn (01:20:16):
Send them out.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:18):
Yeah, that's the easy path. Okay. Last question. So I'm curious, and not to create more competition for you, but I feel like a lot of people think about becoming a coach of some kind, like a product coach, exec coach. If someone is thinking about going down that path, is there one piece of advice you could share to help them pursue this path, even explore if it's right for them?

Alisa Cohn (01:20:38):
If you think you want to become a coach and you immediately want to build up your coaching skills, listen to people more deeply and ask deeper questions, not just respond to what they just said, but why do you think that? Or where is that coming from? And you will see if you enjoy that process of really going deeper with people. I think that would be helpful for everyone to do. But certainly if you want to become a coach, I think that's essential to be able to get really beneath the surface.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:13):
I love how your energy just changed into coaching mode when you said that. I love that. That was such an interesting thing to see and that was great advice. That's easier said than done. And it's interesting, you could tell people are so good at that specific skill versus not. And so I love that that's the thing to work on, is ask better questions, think deeper about the person and what they're coming from. Alisa, this was incredible. Two final questions. Where can folks find you if they want to reach out, maybe work with you, what kind of people do you work with in case people are interested in that, and finally, how can listeners be useful to you?

Alisa Cohn (01:21:47):
Oh, thank you. Well, I work with executives at startups and also at large public companies, so feel free to reach out if you want to have a conversation about coaching. And you can find me at alisacohn.com. And actually, I'm going to take some resources and put them at a special link, which is alisacohn.com/lenny. If you want to download the Co-Founder Prenup. I also have a Personal Operating Manual and a few other resources I will put there. So alisacohn.com/lenny and you can also join my newsletter from there.

(01:22:20):
And I think in terms of helping me, I guess there's two things I want to say. My life's work genuinely is to make a difference. When I became a coach, it was because the music in my head was to make a difference. And so I hope I've made a difference for all of you today and I would invite you to try one thing that makes you uncomfortable, this week. As soon as you hear this, this week, try something that makes you uncomfortable and feel free to let me know on LinkedIn or even send me an email and let me know what you did that made you uncomfortable.

(01:22:51):
So that would be very meaningful to me. And the second thing that would be very meaningful to me is if you would go find my podcast called, From Start-Up to Grown-Up and give it a listen. Maybe give it a rating and review because as you know, Lenny, the way people find your podcast is when other people are interested in your podcast.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:09):
From Start-Up to Grown-Up. I love that title.

Alisa Cohn (01:23:11):
Thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:12):
Alisa, thank you so much for being here. This was awesome.

Alisa Cohn (01:23:15):
Thank you so much for having me, Lenny. It was great.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:17):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
Boz, the CTO of Meta, said something about you. "Working with Ami, she could have the most profound disagreement in the world and she would respond, fascinating, you have to tell me more why you think that."

Ami Vora (00:00:09):
I really enjoy being right and then it turns out in the working world, that did not serve me so great. I think the hard part is sublimating your ego a little bit and saying it's more important to get to the outcome than to be right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:19):
I love this very tactical piece of advice when you're trying to come up with a metaphor or analogy, think about what you want your users to feel when you're using the product.

Ami Vora (00:00:27):
If we all agree that the feeling of something should be, I'm sitting in Dolores Park with my friends on a sunny Saturday, then people will just naturally build something that feels more consistent.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:36):
There's also this metaphor about the hill climb.

Ami Vora (00:00:38):
For me, the hill climb is all about the difference between a local optimum and a global optimum. You're standing on top of the hill, you're looking down, you can see rolling hills, the sheep, the grass, whatever, but then, way off in the distance you can see a mountain. And the thing that gets me through the valley is remembering what the summit feels like.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:59):
Today, my guest is Ami Vora. Ami is Chief Product Officer at Faire, which connects independent retailers and brands around the world, and I believe is the most successful and biggest B2B marketplace startup out there. Prior to Faire, Ami was employee 150 at Facebook, where she launched the first Facebook developer platform and was later head of product for the $55 billion global Facebook ads business. She also oversaw the introduction of ads on the Instagram platform and most recently, she led product and design for the largest messaging app in the world, WhatsApp.

(00:01:34):
In our conversation we cover a lot of ground, including building your strategy skills, how to disagree with people skillfully, being a successful woman in tech, using metaphors and imagery to rally your team and get your point across, setting up effective goals, plus a bunch of jokes in the lightning round that you don't want to miss. This was a really special and authentic conversation that I'm very excited to bring to you. With that, I bring you, Ami Vora.

(00:02:03):
Ami, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Ami Vora (00:02:06):
Oh, thank you. I'm so happy to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:08):
So, when I asked you about your goal for our conversation today, you said the most amazing thing, which I love. You said that your goal is to be as authentic as possible and to show that people can be pretty messy and imperfect at times, yet still be very successful. I love that so much. Let's definitely try to do this. Is there anything else you want to add on that?

Ami Vora (00:02:28):
Yeah, I mean, maybe I'll just say a couple more words on that. Actually, I feel like when I was coming up, when I looked at people who were successful, they seemed to have everything figured out, especially the women. They were all super women, where they respond to every email in 10 seconds, they didn't seem to sleep, they always wore high heels. They were just perfect and I was just like, oh, I guess I'm never going to be successful. That is not me. I love to sleep, I waste time doing absurd things all the time.

(00:03:00):
And I'll tell you how glamorous my lifestyle is, I'm currently working out of my bathroom. I'm talking to you from my bathroom, which is where I work from because I love my house, it's a great house, wasn't meant for work from home, three kids, two parents remote work, and it was just the place with the most closing doors between me and my children when the pandemic started. And so it just took me a while to realize that actually, it's all fine. No one's got it fully figured out, you never know how someone else is living. Most of us are winging it and learning as we're going and learning through trial and error and it's all normal. It's all fine and I can do it and you can do it, and everyone.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:43):
I so love hearing this. This is something people often want to hear more of on this podcast, because there's all these stories of here's all these successes, here's all these things I did and everything, it just always seems to work out. And we try to, we have this failure corner on the podcast where people share story failure. So I love just setting that frame for this conversation of just super being real and being clear that there's a lot of things that go wrong behind the scenes that people often don't hear about.

Ami Vora (00:04:08):
I for a long time felt like I was held back because I don't have a plan, but I realized that probably the most important thing is to just acknowledge that that is true for me. That I'm not going to be a person with a plan, and actually the thing that has consistently served me is to do the thing that feels right, go to the place that feels like home, work with the people who feel like my friends. Just work where when I put on the code of the job, I feel like, oh, this is a place where I could really be lucky, I could be creative, I'm in the right spot, as opposed to feeling like, oh, there is an end state that I know of and I'm just going to have to work my way to that end state. Whenever I get in that zone of, there's only one outcome and I just have to get there, I'm not my best. I'm not bringing the creativity and the luck and the excitement in the same way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:03):
Let me tell you about a product called Sidebar. The best way to level up your career is to surround yourself with extraordinary peers. This gives you more than a leg up, it gives you a leap forward. This worked really well for me in my career and this is the Sidebar ethos. When you have a trusted group of peers, you can discuss challenges you're having, get career advice and just gut check how you're thinking about your work, your career, and your life. This was a big trajectory changer for me, but it's hard to build this trusted group of peers.

(00:05:34):
Sidebar is a private highly vetted leadership program where senior leaders are matched with peer groups to lean on for unbiased opinions, diverse perspectives and raw feedback. Guided by world-class programming and facilitation, Sidebar enables you to get focused, tactical feedback in every step of your career journey. If you're a listener of this podcast, you're already committed to growth. Sidebar is the missing piece to catalyze your career. 93% of members say Sidebar helped them achieve a significant positive change in their career. Why spend a decade finding your people when you can meet them at Sidebar today? Join thousands of top senior leaders who have taken the first step to career growth, from companies like Microsoft, Amazon, and Meta by visiting sidebar.com/lenny. That's sidebar.com/lenny.

(00:06:26):
This episode is brought to you by Anvil. Their document SDK helps product teams build and launch software for documents, fast. Companies like Carta and Vouch Insurance use Anvil to accelerate the development of their document workflows. Getting to market fast is a top priority for product teams, and the last thing that you or your developers want is to build document workflows from scratch. It's time consuming, expensive and distracts from core work. You could stitch together multiple tools and manage those integrations or you can use an all-in-one document SDK.

(00:07:00):
Most product managers will tell you, paperwork sucks. Anvil's document SDK helps teams get to market fast, incorporate your brand's style and give you back time to focus on your company's core differentiated features. For your users, paperwork often starts with an AI powered web form styled and embedded in your application. From there, you can route data to your backend systems and to the correct fields in your PDFs via API. Complete the process with a white labeled e-signature.

(00:07:29):
The best part about Anvil is the level of customization their SDK provides. Non-technical folks love Anvil's drag and drop builder and developers love their flexible APIs and easy to understand documentation. Build documents software fast with Anvil, that's useanvil.com/lenny, to learn more or start a free trial. That's useanvil.com/lenny.

(00:07:55):
Let's actually spend some more time here. I wasn't planning to go here yet, but this is really great and important advice. I've just, basically you're saying that a lot of your success has come from following people that are awesome. Can you just talk more about that, just what it is you've followed and seen that has helped you land in places that have worked out so well, because clearly you've done incredibly well.

Ami Vora (00:08:14):
I mean, I think a lot of us are just like, you have a spreadsheet in your head of the axes and certainly when you're choosing between jobs, for me it feels like, oh man, the rest of my career hangs in the balance of making the exact right decision and getting the exact right job. And you work through all of this spreadsheet mass of, if I took this job, here's what it would do for me, here's where I'd be in five years, etc. And I have that engine in my head also, but what I try to do is work through the spreadsheets and then tear it up because none of that stuff is actually going to determine how good I am at the job. The thing that'll determine... In my track record, the thing that has determined it is when I walk through the doors, do I feel like I'm lucky to be there?

(00:09:03):
So for me, it's actually a lot more emotional. I try to just put on the coat of the job. When I wake up in the morning, I'm like, what would it be like if I were doing this job? What would I think about on my commute? Who would I have lunch with? Do I like them? What problems am I going to solve today? And that gives me an emotional response, which is just much more telling than the spreadsheets of, here's where I'm going to be in five years.

(00:09:31):
And for me, the thing that has led me to the places where I do my best work is a feeling of being at home, which is all about trust and trust with the people around me. Can I walk through and feel like these people are going to have my back, they're going to let me take risks, I'm going to enjoy spending time with them? And that's where I feel like I've always just been able to try more things and do better because a big, trust is a big unlock for me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:56):
I love this metaphor of putting on the coat of the job, of just feeling out what it would be to work there. I imagine that was something that you did before you joined Faire, which I want to talk about, but let me transition a bit to talking about Meta and specifically, Boz. The CTO of Meta was on this podcast a few months ago and he said something about you that I want to read.

Ami Vora (00:10:17):
Oh, kind.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:18):
Okay, so you've heard what he said about you?

Ami Vora (00:10:21):
[inaudible 00:10:21].

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:20):
Okay, cool. So let me read this and then I want to learn from you how to do this. So here's what he said. "Working with Ami, it was like watching an alien because she could have the most profound disagreement in the world with somebody and they would say something that she thought was not just wrong, but crazy wrong, and she would respond, 'Fascinating, you have to tell me more why you think that.' And she meant it from the core of her being. She saw this schism and rather than reacting as if it was a threat, she reacted with the most genuine and profound curiosity. I just watched it absolutely tear down walls between points of view. Embracing curiosity in those moments of challenges completely changed my life and I owe that to Ami Vora."

Ami Vora (00:10:58):
Oh man, I love Boz, what a great guy, and so kind of him to say that. I mean, I will say that this did not come naturally to me. I really enjoy being right, I love to be right. I think most of us love being right, and at least in my childhood, part of my identity was built on being the person who was right and being the person who knew everything.

(00:11:22):
And then it turns out that in the working world, that did not serve me so great, it wasn't great to walk into things and be like, all y'all are wrong, I am the only answer, everyone please to listen to me and stop talking. And what really happened was that someone pointed out to me that not only... One of my old managers pointed out to me that not only was I spending a lot of energy trying to think through every possible thing by myself so I could be totally right, I was often not really coming to the right answer. Other people have a bunch of information that I do not have. And so I'm just ignoring that, I was letting my ego overtake my desire to get to the best outcome, which is just, that's a silly trade off and an unnecessary one.

(00:12:12):
The thing that changed there is me just saying it's more important for us to get to the outcome and I very selfishly just like to learn more things. And so by deciding that I already knew everything, I was cutting myself off from learning the things that other people were really good at and it's so easy to just open the door instead and say like, hey, you seem to know something that I don't know yet. Why not tell me about it? I'm going to get better. We'll probably come to the right outcome. Maybe you'll have a better time. Why not?

(00:12:45):
And so it was a little bit just accidental evolution in that direction. But it's made work and life so much more interesting to just be like, hey, what does this person know that I don't know yet? It means that every meeting you walk into, you're probably not going to get bored and I get bored a lot, but if you assume that every person there knows something that you don't know, then it's not just wait to get to the right answer, it's like, discover the thing that they know that you don't know and it becomes just a little bit of uncovering.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:18):
For people that want to learn to be good at this the way you are, a couple things that I take away from the historian and the way you're talking about this is, one is there's an enthusiasm of, I disagree with you, but I want you to know I really care about what you think. So there's an energy of like, please tell me what I'm missing. There's also this assumption that a lot of disagreement is rooted in, we just have different information, so tell me what I'm missing. Can you talk a bit about just how to, what you've learned about actually do this well?

Ami Vora (00:13:45):
Yeah, I mean, I think the hard part is just sublimating your ego a little bit and saying it's more important to get to the outcome than to be right. And I think all of growth is a battle with yourself, but this is one of the hardest ones because we all want to be right, we all want to protect ourselves and it served us, many of us for so long to be right. I just try to think about the feedback loop of, I think all of life is feedback loops, so I just started to think about the feedback loop I'm creating of like, I was curious about something. I learned something new, we got for a better outcome. Probably the other person felt better as well as I felt better. It's all positive feedback and you do that a couple of times and the positive feedback far outweighs the desire to be right because now we're more right, we're more right together. And so just building that as a practice of just noticing how much better things can get when you can be open to them, has been really fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:43):
What do you think of this phrase that he used that he remembers? Is that a phrase that you find useful? Just fascinating, you have to tell me more why you think that.

Ami Vora (00:14:52):
I do think that is a word that I say a lot. I do say that a lot, because it's true, it's fascinating that someone to look at the same movie that I was looking at and come away with a totally different understanding of the plot. I could sit in the same meeting as other people and they would leave with just a different retelling of what happened, and that to me is fascinating. Isn't that surprising, that we can all see the same, what we think are the same facts and walk away with a totally different narrative? And when you really go deep into that and you just understand how people see the world, and that is helpful. I'm curious about things, I like to know more things, and so that just helps me know more things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:36):
I feel like the hardest part of this for people is you hear someone say something, say, okay, so our mutual friend, Dan Hockenmaier, he's in a meeting and he just says something that you are just like, no, because he's got influence. He's a big deal at Faire. Most people have this visceral reaction of like, oh no, I really don't think that's a good idea. Is there something you've learned about controlling that bodily reaction of like, oh, and then just being positive about it?

Ami Vora (00:16:00):
Yeah, I do think it is just that feedback loop. It's not like I don't have the visceral reaction, it's just that instead of interpreting it as this is a visceral reaction, I got to shut something down, it's like, this is a visceral reaction and it's a chance to learn more. Just reinterpreting some of the feelings in ways that are more about opening than about closing stuff down.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:23):
Got it, so it's kind of like a thinking you do of like, okay, hey, let me frame this and think about this [inaudible 00:16:28].

Ami Vora (00:16:28):
For me the most important thing is just taking a pause. I think when you just take a pause, your body calms down, your mind gets a chance to breathe a little bit, and then your response is going to be better, but you got to take the pause because the immediate visceral reaction, is not always... It's going to be primal, it's going to be protective. It's just when you take a pause you're like, this is all fine, let's just learn.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:52):
I feel like more people are going to start using this phrase, fascinating.

Ami Vora (00:16:55):
Fascinating.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:56):
When they hear something [inaudible 00:16:58].

Ami Vora (00:16:57):
It's kind of my tagline. There were a few years where I had to be careful about not saying it because whenever I said it, people would be like, she disagrees. So I've had to use a thesaurus and expand my words I use.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:12):
No, that's such a good word. Maybe we'll make that the title of this episode.

Ami Vora (00:17:12):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:16):
What a great title that would be. So we've been talking a bit about the bodily reaction to stuff and our lizard brain almost, reacting to things. It reminds me of this metaphor that you called the dinosaur brain and how it applies to product reviews. Talk about what that is.

Ami Vora (00:17:31):
Okay, so a lot of people on my team, they're coming in to do product reviews and they're worried about it. They're stressed out, they don't exactly know what to show, and the normal temptation is just to show as much information as possible because that way you come in and you think, hey, the people in this room are super smart. I'll show them the information, they will come to the right conclusions. They'll probably make a better decision than I'm going to make. So my job is to catalog the information and present it.

(00:17:59):
And one of the first things that I talk to people about is, okay, for the purposes of this conversation, I'm going to put myself in the capitally executive bucket because that makes what I'm about to say less offensive. Assume that executives have a little tiny dinosaur brain. We all have a little brontosaurus brain and we can really only hold three facts at the same time. We will never be able to go deep in the way that you are able to do on everything that crosses our desk. And so the best service you can do is actually do the work of making a recommendation. That's the way we're going to be complimentary. The breadth that I normally have to look across means that I'm going to be better at things like pattern matching or giving you more context or telling you stuff that's happening in the company or the industry. But what I'm not going to be better at is looking at all the information that you looked at and coming up with a meaningful outcome. That's what you're going to do and my little dinosaur brain is going to be like, okay, that sounds like a very reasonable pattern, I've seen other patterns that look like this. Okay, that sounds like an outcome, however, it conflicts with this outcome over here. I can tell you about that. Does that make sense?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:17):
Yeah, and I love that you put yourself in that bucket. You have a dinosaur brain also, it's not other people.

Ami Vora (00:19:22):
It's a pretty bad, bad look, but it's really true. As you get more breadth, you are less and less able to go deep on everything that deserves going deep and you just end up doing a different service than the people on your team, and recognizing that as complimentary has been really helpful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:38):
You have this phrase, my manager owns context, I own the recommendation. Kind of along the same lines?

Ami Vora (00:19:42):
Exactly, very similar. And I think the thing that was helpful for me there is that really unlocked what I was looking for from my managers because otherwise I wanted them to be exactly like me. If I assume that I need to bring them information and then they would come to the same conclusion that I would come to, that's very narrow. They have to be able to look at the exact same information and process it in the same way and come out with the same idea. Whereas if what they're doing is complimentary to me, then I can learn from everyone. They're going to just have a different view, they're going to have new information that I don't have, and it gives me a lot more space to take accountability.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:20):
Is there any other advice that you could share along these lines of just product reviews? So, the big takeaway here is just keep it simple and have a recommendation.

Ami Vora (00:20:30):
Keep it simple, have a recommendation. I also think that, I think we misuse product reviews sometimes as ways to get decisions and actually, they should be ways to calibrate on principles. So what you don't want is to come to a product review for every single that you want to make. Instead, what you want is to come to a product review with one decision, but the goal of that decision is to walk out with principles about how to make these decisions in the future so that you don't have to come to product review, but you still have this consistent and coherent product that you're building.

(00:21:04):
And so I think when you flip the frame of reviews to being less about, okay, I'm going to bring this information to an exec, my manager, whoever, and they're going to decide every piece, you're not actually building that much more capacity in the system. You're getting fast decision making, but you're not changing who can make really good decisions. And I think you always want to change the org to constantly make better decisions, and a way to do that is when you bring these sorts of questions, what you talk about is, why did you make this decision? What are the trade-offs you have in mind? Who are you optimizing for? What timeline are you thinking about? What's the risk level we're willing to tolerate? And then you don't have to come back. You have enough information that you can take those principles and run with them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:51):
Is there a framework or a process you use for product reviews that might be helpful for people to hear? Just like a agenda or a way of thinking about just how to set up a product review for success? Because a lot of people are trying to set these up at their companies and they're like, I don't know if we're doing this optimally.

Ami Vora (00:22:05):
Yeah, I think everyone's got... I think there's so many different takes on frameworks. I don't have a single system. I mean, actually I think Boz has written about a bunch of this, and I probably most agree with him. Where there's different kinds of product reviews, it's like, what are you trying to solve? What's the timeline on which you're thinking about for these? Is it a philosophy? Is it a strategic shift? Is it a day-to-day product decision? And then keeping it extremely short and pointed and then making sure you walk away with principles, not answers.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:36):
I think there's a lot of nuance and importance there of what you just said, which is start with the problem you're solving. What are we trying to do here? And the timeline, I think that's also really useful and important for people to hear.

Ami Vora (00:22:47):
I think the temptation is always to err toward writing more, and what I always really recommend people do is write whatever you need to write and then cut out almost all of it. What you really want to bring to any forum, whether it's a product review or a written inform or anything else, is the minimal amount of information that you need to make a clean recommendation because then you are forced to be opinionated. Otherwise, the opinion can get lost in all of this information. You can hide behind, well, all of these analyses seem to suggest, and instead you should probably just say, looked at all the data, there's three analyses that suggest this. There's one that suggests that, we think that one is inaccurate or worth taking the risk on. Let's go. Any objections? Let me know. Any new context? Let me know. That really forces you to deeply understand and take an opinion on the material.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:43):
Final question, who do you like to invite to these product reviews and your thoughts, rules, policy?

Ami Vora (00:23:50):
Yeah, I mean I do think that usually fewer people is better. It leads to a sense of being informal and that is really useful because it lowers the bar on how complete or strong these conversations are and I'd rather have a less formal conversation faster than a formal conversation and lose three weeks in the process when we could have been building. I think it needs to be cross-functional. I think one of the things you want is cross-functional accountability. So we want it cross-functional at the leadership level and cross-functional at the team presenting level. And I think those are normally the groups.

(00:24:25):
I think the thing that gets hard is you often cut out the middle, where if it's a working team presenting to the senior leaders on something important, it's really hard because it means people's managers are not in the room and can't help the conversation or other things. And so in order to do that, you have to really have a bunch of implicit trust inside the team that everyone will get the context later, that everyone's going to be kind to everyone else and you don't need a ton of air cover, and that the managers trust their team to present in the best possible way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:02):
That is always a stressful place for a manager to be, where their success is riding in that meeting and they're not there and they-

Ami Vora (00:25:07):
It's so stressful, it's so stressful. I think anything you do to make it less stressful is useful. But then there've also been times in my career where I would keep the room itself small, but because we were all trying to calibrate on specific principles, I would record or broadcast the reading to anyone who wanted to see it, just so they could all see the principles by which we were decision-making and get calibrated on that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:32):
So through your career you've transitioned from being the person pitching the products and being reviewed to the person reviewing and being on the other side. Is there anything being on this side of it that you think is helpful for people earlier in their career to know about that experience, from your angle now?

Ami Vora (00:25:53):
I mean, I think for what it's worth, I think I still do a fair amount of product pitching in the past few years because there's always someone else to convince.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:59):
That's true.

Ami Vora (00:26:01):
Especially if you want to do something dramatically different. Really, I think the biggest service for people who are starting out a little earlier is that point around bringing the recommendation, really having the opinion and standing behind it with conviction and doing what they need to do to build that conviction for themselves.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:22):
Awesome. You've done this a number of times already in this conversation, and so I want to spend a little time here, which is using metaphors and imagery to make your point and get people to understand what you're trying to say. So you have this code of putting on the coat of the job and this dinosaur brain, and so someone told me that this is just a skill you have where you use metaphor and imagery to rally a team, get your point across, get people to understand what you're trying to say. There's also this metaphor, someone told me I need to ask you about the hill climb metaphor. Does that ring a bell?

Ami Vora (00:26:52):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:53):
Okay, what is that all about?

Ami Vora (00:26:55):
For me, the hill climb is all about the difference between the local optimum and a global optimum. That sounds very abstract, but I think a lot of the time when we're doing our job, when we're doing life stuff, whatever you're doing, you try to just get better and better and you optimize your current system and then you feel really good about it, and that is great. You're standing on top of the hill, you're looking down, you can see the, I don't know, rolling hills, the sheep, the grass, whatever. But then way off from the distance you can see a mountain, one that's even higher than you can't even see the top of it, and you have to decide, are you going to take the risk of climbing down your hill, crossing an unknown chasm, and then climbing back up, just to get to the same level you started at with more climbing to do to get to that summit? And that is really hard.

(00:27:51):
I'm thinking of things like, maybe the first time I saw this was like a lot of companies were really good at desktop and you could see the mobile mountain way out over there, but to get there you had to really make a lot of trade-offs in your core desktop business that you were not totally sure were going to pay off when you made it to the mobile mountain, and you had to do a ton of work. You had to fundamentally rewire a lot of what you're doing without a guarantee that you're going to get there. I mean, you can see it in life when you think about new jobs or new moves or new relationships, anything that you think about. You are giving up something that is working pretty well without knowing whether you're going to make it to the top of that next mountain. And that's been really helpful to me just to place where I am on different things, where you get the inkling that there is a much better way to do this, there really is.

(00:28:48):
Is it going to be worth going down into the valley, climbing up, keeping climbing? Is that going to be worth it? Most of the time the answer is yes, but it's helpful for me to know, boy, this feels like a slog. It is supposed to? Because I'm still in the valley and the thing that gets me through the valley is remembering what the summit feels like. When you're on top of it and you're like, this is great, it was absolutely worth it. My life is better in these ways, we're able to solve these problems in these ways. It was worth it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:19):
I love that. It feels like a big value of the metaphor, which I love is that to set expectations, it's going to be really hard for a little bit or we will slow down what we're trying to do now, but the idea is there's a bigger hill and a bigger mountain.

Ami Vora (00:29:32):
It's a bigger hill and it's worth it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:34):
On this kind of broader idea of metaphors and imagery, is there something there that you've learned of just like, this works really well, I'm going to invest in becoming better at this, or is this something that's come natural to you? Anything you can share about that skill and approach?

Ami Vora (00:29:46):
I think this one came from, I worked for a manager, his name was Eric Antino, and he was just a master of the metaphor and analogies. And so whenever I would bring him something, he would be like, how is this product going to make you feel, and when is the last time that you felt this way? And you can say, oh, I felt this way when I was hanging with my friends in Dolores Park and he'd be like, cool, tell me what it feels like, why that's the analogy, what ramifications come out of that?

(00:30:18):
And one thing I like to do is try to build an emulator for different people in my head, because I've just had the good fortune of working with an amazing number of very different leaders, and so he's one of the people I tried to build an emulator for where I'd be like, okay, I see this thing. I don't know how to solve this problem. How would Eric describe this? I've tried to build one for Boz, which is all about principle of decision making and principle of trade-offs. There's a few other people where I'm like, I don't know how to solve this problem. Can I load this other person into my head and how would they approach it? And that gives me a fresh lens on it.

(00:30:55):
And I really like metaphors and analogies because I think especially as you scale a team, narrative becomes increasingly important. Narrative can carry so much weight and water where otherwise it's similar to the product review point, where either you can tell everybody exactly what to do at every point or you can create a story that we all agree on. And when we all agree on that story, people just know better what to do. If we all agree that the feeling of something should be, I'm sitting in Dolores Park with my friends on a sunny Saturday. You know what the iconography, the designers know what iconography should look like. You know what the communication and join pattern should look like. You're not going to build something cold and corporate, you're not going to build something strobe light, you're not going to build something flashy, but you don't have to go and make all those individual decisions. You can buy into the same story and then people will just naturally build something that feels more consistent.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:56):
This is such a powerful and important skill. Is there an example that comes to mind where you did this really well, say at WhatsApp or Facebook of the story that carried a lot of water for you and the team?

Ami Vora (00:32:08):
Yeah, I mean I think the product metaphor we arrived at for WhatsApp was face-to-face communication. Our goal there was to make it so that every person in the world could feel connected to the people they cared most about, even when they were separate, even they're distant geographically for whatever reason, we were always going to be apart from the people you cared about. And we really had to build something that would work for literally everyone in the world. People who are carrying these high-end devices in western markets who are very tech comfortable and savvy, and people in the low end markets who were carrying these low end devices, they weren't that familiar with technology, it was maybe their first time online. We had to build something that worked for everyone.

(00:32:57):
And the most universal form of communication is face-to-face. When you talk to someone face-to-face, you're not thinking, how do I present? What tool do I have to learn? You just open your mouth and words come out, and that's the feeling that we wanted to create. And that involved a lot of the app stepping back from communication, creating spaces that felt really intimate so people wouldn't have to think to themselves, what kind of space am I in? They could immediately map where they were in the app to the, okay, I'm sitting around in my kitchen table and people are joining and leaving calls just like they're walking in and out of my living room, but it is a family space and the family is there. Or, in one-on-one disappearing messages, you're like, cool, this is my close friend. We don't need to keep track of everything that we're saying. We're here for a little bit of banter, a little bit of relationship, a little bit of quick, what's your wifi password and stuff, and whatever's really important, that's what we'll hold onto and the rest is just day-to-day, normal intimacy.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:58):
That is super interesting. WhatsApp, one of the main differentiators and benefits is it's super fast. And I see completely how it connects this idea of you're just like, ideas, we want you to feel like you're talking to someone.

Ami Vora (00:34:09):
And it's all really a small thing. It's like a typing indicator is like someone who's about to take a breath, give them a second to talk, the two check marks lighting up or someone's face lighting up when they hear you, it's just a recognition of being heard. These are all super small things, but I think they add up to a feeling of being there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:29):
That is super interesting. So I love this very tactical piece of advice that you just shared of just when you're trying to come up with a metaphor or analogy, think about what you want your users to feel when you're using the product and when else have they felt that same feeling? So interesting. And then this other point you made of making this emulator of a person in your head.

Ami Vora (00:34:49):
I mean, it sounds a little wild now that I think about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:51):
No.

Ami Vora (00:34:51):
That's robotic.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:52):
It makes total sense.

Ami Vora (00:34:55):
I get very bored a lot. It's another way to make sure meetings are really interesting where you're like, okay, let me see what that person is going to say next. Let me put myself in their shoes. Let me think about what they're reacting to and why they're going to think that and how they're going to see the world. And again, it just gives me more toolkits because it means when I'm stumped on something, I can be like, what would Rob Goldman say? He'd say, look at the dashboard. Have I looked at the dashboard? No. Okay, let me go look at the dashboard. You can load up these different skillsets that people have been so generous with sharing with me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:28):
What would be the Ami emulator? What are people thinking when they loaded it?

Ami Vora (00:35:33):
Fascinating.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:33):
Fascinating?

Ami Vora (00:35:35):
Fascinating, probably the number one, no joke.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:37):
Is there an emulator you most often come back to that you find most useful in just in your day-to-day? Who's the person that like, oh yeah-

Ami Vora (00:35:44):
I think those are the three. I think it is like Antino's story. Story, metaphor, analogy creation. I think it's like Boz's, if we played this out, what principles are we using? And if we kept on using those principles, what would happen? And it is Rob Goldman, who's an amazing metrics growth product leader being like, look at the dashboard. I mean, look at the dashboard, which is a great central rooting part of my life.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:16):
This was so fascinating, fascinating.

Ami Vora (00:36:19):
It revs up.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:20):
I love this topic of just metaphors and stories and visions and things like that. It's something that a lot of people are wanting to get better at. Is there another example, per chance, that you could share of maybe using a metaphor to rally team, get things done?

Ami Vora (00:36:34):
I mean, I think taking a sub part of WhatsApp or when we talk about video calling. I really, one the metaphors was sitting around in your family room when you think about how to make calls work, where when you're sitting in a family room, you're not scheduling it, you're not, I don't know, having this cold corporate feeling, the way you do with a conference where there's heavyweight interactions, and instead there's just, you can join and leave. It feels lightweight, it feels like the space exists even when you're not there. And so just creating things like joinable calls, like that feeling of people popping in and just paying attention to whoever's there and letting them leave, but the call can flow on without a super heavyweight action that everyone needs to take. I think that was another one where we were just able to agree on the feeling and then you know what to build.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:27):
I was just using WhatsApp to do video call with my mom. They were traveling to Italy and so-

Ami Vora (00:37:30):
That's great, that's exactly [inaudible 00:37:33].

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:32):
I experienced it, it felt great.

(00:37:35):
Let me go in a slightly different direction. One of my favorite posts of yours is called execution beats strategy every time, and I think another way you phrase it is, execution eats strategy for breakfast. I think you put that somewhere. I'd love to hear about this because I completely agree. I think a lot of people obsess with strategy and vision and got to get this right and forget that most of the work is execution. So yeah, I'd love to hear just your take and insight here.

Ami Vora (00:37:58):
Yeah, I don't know if I coined execution eats strategy for breakfast, I think a lot of things eat other things for breakfast, but I'm a believer. I do think execution eats strategy for breakfast and that's something we used to say a lot at Meta. It was just the most important part and I was well-trained in that. That was one of the key lessons that I learned there, and it's because when you have... Look, strategy is super fun. You get to think about all this pie in the sky stuff. You get to think about if the world operated in rational patterns and you could predict the future, what is going to be the second and third order effect? You get to use your brain in a really fun, philosophical way, but customers don't care. Customers don't care about your fancy strategies and your five-year plan. They care about the product that's in their hands. And so anything that distracts you from thinking about the product in your hands I think, or maybe worse, takes you away from solving customer's problems today, I think is a distraction.

(00:39:03):
And I think one of the things that you learn is if you have great strategy, perfect strategy but poor execution, you don't win because your strategy never makes it to the market. And what's even worse is that you have learned nothing. You don't know whether it was your strategy that was wrong or whether it was your execution that was wrong, all you know is you didn't win. Whereas when you have a pretty good strategy, a good enough strategy, you're in the right direction and you have perfect execution, you still don't win immediately, but you know your execution was great. So then you learn, what do you need to do to improve your strategy? You've got the execution machine, you go back, you update your strategy, you relaunch, and you keep on doing it until your strategy is perfect and then you do win. And that's the lesson I repeatedly learned.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:50):
Is this advice a reaction to what you said, where people, PMs let's say, are just like, I want to work on strategy, we got to spend all this time, get the strategy nailed, and it's just like, okay, we also need to execute and that's maybe even more important.

Ami Vora (00:40:02):
Yeah, I do think it's very glamorous to work on strategy. It's so fun. It's so fun to have the word strategy in your [inaudible 00:40:11]. I don't know, we've built a mythology around strategy being the most important thing. And execution is not glamorous, it is not like white-boarding by yourself and pointing to things and coming out with the grand vision. It is the nuts and bolts and sometimes boring, sometimes grind it out work of like, you got to bring the donuts, you got to look at the dashboards, you got to rewrite the spec. You got to just do a bunch of the grinding, but that is what leads to the customer's outcomes. That is what the customer is eventually going to feel. They're never going to see the whiteboard, they're going to see that someone took the time to fix this bug.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:53):
This episode is brought to you by User Testing, transform how you build products and experiences with User Testing. Get fast feedback throughout the development process so that you can build the right thing the first time, make better decisions that lead to better business outcomes.

(00:41:11):
Companies are being asked to do more with less. They need to move quickly to build experiences that meet changing customer expectations and do so faster than ever, all while minimizing risk and costly rework. With User Testing, you have a trusted partner in experience research. They empower user research, product and design teams to make higher confidence decisions with human insights. Learn more today at usertesting.com/lenny.

(00:41:39):
Is this advice you give to your PMs on your teams? I guess, how do you think about this when they're trying to move up the ranks, become better product managers? Is this just a common thing that you often share, like yeah, strategy is going to be amazing, important. You got to get good at it, but also make sure this is going great.

Ami Vora (00:41:57):
Yeah, I think about it a little bit in terms of proportion of time you should expect to spend. So I mean, there's no point next being on that strategy, you can't have a bad strategy. So you should spend some time, maybe it's like 20% of your time, but the bulk of your time should be confirming that strategy actually makes sense for the customers. Getting it out there, building the machine to constantly make it better, as opposed to a perfect strategy. You go away, you build it for a year, you ship it, the market has changed. Customers have changed, their needs have changed, competition, just the whole landscape has changed and you probably could have solved those problems more easily had you headed in the right direction, but done it with more ongoing customer feedback.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:39):
In terms of this proportion, I imagine what you see is as you get more senior, more of your time spent on strategy, less time on execution, right?

Ami Vora (00:42:46):
I don't 100% know that that's true. I think again, even at high levels, maybe the strategic directions become more important to get mostly right, but I think still most of your time is making sure they can make it to market. I think you should still be spending your time understanding what's slowing people down and unblocking it. Understanding, how is the market changing? Understanding what the broad customer feedback is, just constantly improving the system that you are building. I think that's, I mean, how much time can you spend thinking about the future, as opposed to actually trying to create it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:29):
That is really interesting advice because I think most people imagine as you get more senior, I'm going to have more time thinking about vision and strategy, not have to be in the weeds building things. And I love this point you're making of even as a senior exec, you're still, it's executing in a different way, but it's still execution.

Ami Vora (00:43:44):
A different way, yeah. You're focusing on the execution of the system a little bit more, but you got to stay connected, I think, to the customer and to what you're bringing to them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:54):
I love that. Obviously, strategy is also very important. You have this great quote that I'm going to read here. "For strategy to be useful, it actually has to change our behavior as a team to create better customer outcomes." Can you talk about that?

Ami Vora (00:44:08):
Yeah. I mean, I think again, some of the joy of strategy is the philosophy and excitement of thinking about all the long-term stuff that will happen, but I try to always come back to, what's going to change for the customer? If we have all of these conversations and we come out with this shiny five-year plan, but then we change nothing about the products that we're building or how we are building, what was the point of that exercise? It made us feel good, and there's something to making us feel good. That is good, it's important for teams to feel good and connected and this is a good exercise for that, but it's so much more powerful when it's an exercise that translates into us doing something differently, whether that's prioritizing different products, whether that's changing our portfolio allocation, like moving people to the things we think are most important now versus things that are going to be less important right now. What's the change, or coming out with a strategy that'll align people because we have the story, we have the narrative, we have the sequence. What's going to change for our customers as a result of this strategy exercise?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:12):
Many people want to get better at strategy. Often their performance feedback is become more strategic, think better about strategy. What has helped you become a better strategic thinker? Is it just doing it? Is it a person that influenced you heavily? Is it a book? What has helped you and what do you often recommend to people to get better at this skill?

Ami Vora (00:45:30):
I think I got that same feedback quite a lot, actually, of needing to think bigger and be more visionary, etc. And I still do, frankly, actually, there's moments where I retrench way too far into execution and worry a little less about long-term strategy. So it's definitely my bias still.

(00:45:49):
The biggest thing that held me back from talking about strategy was I didn't feel confident that I knew enough to declare a strategy. It was actually almost like a self-confidence, imposter syndrome thing, where there were people who could just say, I know how the world is going to develop in the next five years, and let me tell you, here's where we're going to be, this is the dot on the map. And I was always like, how could anything could happen? Who would I be to say I know how the world's going to develop and here's where we're heading?

(00:46:21):
And so for me, a lot of it was actually learning the things that made me feel confident in my own opinion. And there's a bunch of things that do make me feel confident in my opinion. When I talk to specific customers and I feel like I can build an emulator for them, like a customer on my shoulder where I can say, oh, I talked to this person working in this job, here's what they would say if I showed them this product or this strategy. So, I think talking to customers is a big unlock for me and feeling like I have unique knowledge of the customer. I think working through different product iterations of, if we thought this was the right outcome, what would it really look like from a product perspective or a product portfolio in three to five years? And which of those seems right or rational or it will go the way I think the world goes. I think asking for other opinions. Sometimes I run surveys to the leadership team where I'm just like, what percentage of our revenue is going to come from small businesses versus big businesses in three years? And if we all agree on that topic, we should just take it as the truth and we should just fill it. If we disagree, then we should talk about it and we should talk about the strategic ramifications if we chose one path or the other path.

(00:47:35):
So for me, it was getting more comfortable having an opinion, honestly, about how the world was going to go, and also feeling comfortable that we would be able to change it when we learned that maybe that wasn't exactly right. We would have the machine, the execution machine behind it to try it out and then change and iterate and improve with customer feedback.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:59):
At which point in your career was this overcoming this fear and uncertainty? Was it sometime within Facebook?

Ami Vora (00:48:07):
It was sometime within Facebook. It was really when I was stepping into the bigger ads jobs, getting to be Head of Product for Facebook ads. I got feedback, I got a lot of feedback over the course of my career and some of the stacking of feedback was basically like, you could be the smartest person in the room, but it doesn't matter if people don't like you, which is very complicated feedback and I wouldn't give that feedback to anyone else, but I took it very seriously. It was coming from so many different places, it was coming from people I'm really trusted. And so I went out of my way to be more likable, which for me ended up being shrinking myself a little bit and not being so aggressive and not being so opinionated, being more unobjectionable.

(00:49:07):
And the weird part is that it worked for a long time. People were more likely to work with me, they were more likely to say nice things. I mean, I take this to extremes. I wore earth tones for two years because I was just like, I got to fade back a little bit. And then at some point I actually had to do a leadership job and my team was like, well, what do you think? What's your opinion? And I was like, you've been telling me not to have an opinion for so long. And so it took a little bit of work to get back to, oh yeah, I have a lot of opinions, I have a lot of thoughts. It is okay for me to express. It is needed, my team needs me to have these opinions and thoughts and be a leader who can take ownership and be visible.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:52):
Thanks for sharing that. Do you think that was the right approach, going and indexing far to the other end and then realizing that maybe that's too far, or do you think you would've done things differently looking back?

Ami Vora (00:50:05):
Yeah, it's one of my Roman empires. I think about this every so often, way too much, I think. Especially because I talked to other senior women who received similar feedback and chose not to act on it or did act on it, and what happened to their paths were different. I think where I landed is I wouldn't give that feedback to someone else. And the way I do give that feedback, actually, because I think there is a lot of really useful information in that. The way I do give that feedback is, you do need to be able to work with a broader range of people and the way to do that is to expand your tool sets. You're not going to make yourself smaller, you're not going to be any less of who you are, but you are going to build new tools, new keys to unlock new different kinds of doors. And that is only going to make you bigger and more powerful and more expansive. But the end outcome is the same, is that you can work with more different styles of people, more different styles of problems.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:08):
I love that framing. There's an episode that's going to come out before this episode with this professor from Stanford, Jeffrey Pfeffer, who teaches a class called The Path to Power, which is how to become powerful in the world. And he actually has a big lesson that many people hate hearing, which is, you don't need to be authentic in the workplace, what you're trying to achieve, you're trying to achieve stuff and you can do... You need to use tools that you need to use to achieve the thing you want to achieve. So sometimes don't be exactly who you are and act in a slightly different way, which is basically what you're describing.

Ami Vora (00:51:42):
More tools. I think that's a theme that's coming up, is just like, I'm all about more lenses, more keys, more tools in general because why not? Why not have access to more different styles of things?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:54):
Something that you were talking about subtly is the being a woman in tech and being a female leader. I imagine you've gone through some stuff that isn't what something men would've gone through. Is there anything there that you want to share or anything you've learned about just being really successful as a woman in tech?

Ami Vora (00:52:13):
I think we've talked through some of them. I think one, you get a different style of feedback and a lot of the ways to interpret that feedback. I think to this day, I get feedback that is about walking a very narrow tightrope where not only do you have to change a bunch of things and do a bunch of things that are important, you have to make people feel a certain way about how you do them and the ways that they want you to make you feel are diametrically opposite. Some people are going to be like, be more directive so that way everyone knows your thing. Some people are going to say be less directive so people can come to their own conclusions. Some people are going to say move faster because there's always more you can do. Some people are going to say move less fast because otherwise you're going to end up steamrolling people.

(00:52:57):
And a lot of it is personal, there's a bunch research about how women get a lot more personal feedback that is less about the content of their role and more about their style, I think that is still true and there's often a kernel of truth in it. For me, this is forever work. I do have biases toward execution and being directive and things like that, but I think learning how to interpret and respond to feedback has been a really important point for me and making my choices of, just because I'm getting feedback doesn't mean I immediately need to respond to all of it. There's a step in between where I can choose, is this feedback I want to take action on in this exact way? Am I going to look for more themes, take action in a different way, or am I going to say this is who I am and I understand the trade-offs, I'm going to do a better job of giving people context on the decisions I'm making and why I'm choosing these trade-offs. But actually this is part of how I want to operate and I'm going to keep on operating.

(00:54:01):
And then I think we just give women weird advice. Here's a hot take. I think we tell women things like, you need to find a mentor and you need to find a sponsor, and that's just another set of hoops that we have that we tell women to jump through that I don't think we tell other parts of the population to jump through. I think we tell women to unlock your future success, you've got to find somebody who has made all the same life decisions you have and who you look up to and relate to, but who also had an hour every month to be an oracle to tell you all the things you do in your life. And it feels like yet another burden where you're like, I don't know how to do that.

(00:54:45):
I had the extreme generosity of so many wonderful leaders who helped me on my way, but I didn't feel like I had this mentor and for a while it was just like, oh man, if I only had a mentor, I would know how to do all of this stuff and it felt like another weight that I needed to carry, which I didn't. I had everything I needed, people were so kind and generous, but I didn't recognize it that way because we talk about it differently.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:09):
Thank you for sharing all that. I wasn't planning on going in this direction, but this is such important advice for say, young women that are just getting started in the same product. Is there any advice you'd want to share to help them get to be the next Ami?

Ami Vora (00:55:23):
Oh, I mean number one, no next Ami, they're going to be their next themselves. That is maybe the most important thing, is everyone will only tell you their own story. That's all anyone can do, but the thing that I tell people is, don't dampen who you are and your strengths, just continue expanding. Whenever you run into a problem, just add more to the things that you can do, the tools that you have, the way you can express yourself. Just keep on adding and growing and don't shrink yourself, ever.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:57):
I love that. I want to move to a different topic. There's a few things I definitely wanted to touch on while we had our time together. One is that I hear, now this is going to be a total tangent, but I think it's really important and I'm excited to talk about it. I hear you're really good at setting goals and aligning incentives really well for teams. One of your colleagues told me you're best in class at building product orgs and figuring out how product orgs can best work with other teams. I'm curious if there's any tricks or lessons you can share here about what you've learned about how to do this well.

Ami Vora (00:56:27):
Yeah, I mean I think one thing is to try to decouple all the things we're trying to do. Sometimes when you give people direction, you're like, okay, everybody just go get revenue or everybody just go get GMV. And it seems obvious because that's the thing you have to do as a company, but there's only a few places where you are guaranteed to get that and it's measurable and you can do it. And that leads to what I call toddler soccer, where everybody just runs to the same surface or the same customer set or the same exact product where you can do this and it's measurable and you end up, everyone's tripping on each other, everyone's trying, nobody really gets contact on the ball, there's no coordination. I have three kids, I've watched a lot of toddlers play soccer. [inaudible 00:57:18], it's a very fresh, very fresh metaphor.

(00:57:20):
And instead, one of the things I like to do is just detangle, okay, as a company, let's think about our customers. Let's think about all the things they're going to need in their journey. Let's think about how we will know how we will match our own metrics to customer success. Let's play the entire field. What would it look like if we could detangle it so that every team we had internally had a different goal that ladders into a goal framework that's actually the thing that we need to do to solve the full customer impact? And then you don't have the same swim lanes problem. You have plenty of room for people to make progress on their lanes. They all know how they fit into the bigger picture, and it just opens up a lot more growth for every team and it makes sure that we're solving the customer problem end to end.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:11):
Is there an example that you could share to make this even more concrete from say, WhatsApp or Facebook or Instagram or anything like that, where you can share some of these goals that you've like, oh, this worked out really well? I know it's probably private information and partly-

Ami Vora (00:58:25):
It might be trickier. I mean, maybe going back to the GMV example. Maybe instead of motivating everyone on GMV, you motivate them on GMV per surface and you divide up the surfaces, or maybe you motivate them on actually different goals that underlie. When you think about GMV, what are all the various engagements, customer engagements that lead to GMV? Can you goal on those input metrics, can you goal on number of people who visit, number of people who convert, number of people who reorder, number, etc? Rather than going strictly on the output.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:59):
So the core advice here is each team should have different goals that are part of this metrics tree that ladder up to revenue, GMV, something like that?

Ami Vora (00:59:07):
Whatever, yeah. The thing that best matches the overall customer outcome that mirrors the company outcome as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:14):
Got it. And there's always this balance between it's actually the best metric versus it's something they can move and understand and it's easy to watch and it's movable and things like that, right?

Ami Vora (00:59:24):
Yeah, and you have to have faith that it is actually connected to that output metric. You don't want to create a metric that's disconnected just to make a team feel good. It really does need to solve the customer problem and that's reflected in company's performance, but you can usually break it down into smaller pieces and I think that breaking down into smaller pieces and assigning those out to teams, that's really helpful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:46):
Is there anything else along these lines of things you've learned about helping teams work together and not play toddler soccer, beyond having different goals that all ladder up to the one that really matters?

Ami Vora (00:59:58):
I think there's value in also acknowledging that teams are going to have different incentives. Even inside a team like cross-functional teams on the same pod or whatever, are going to have different incentives, they're going to come in with different information, they're going to have disagreements. And certainly, different teams inside a company or different pillars inside a company, different products inside, they're all going to have different incentives, and I think sometimes that feels like something is going wrong when people disagree, but actually, that's just a sign of healthy tension and knowledge.

(01:00:34):
I think the thing that makes tension healthy is one, when you can acknowledge it and say, yeah, of course there's tension. You're bringing different information than I'm bringing. We should be disagreeing. No one's a bad person, no one is coming in with poor intent. Everyone's doing the thing they are supposed to do and that is a useful thing to do. And then you have to agree on an outcome that you're aiming for. If you disagree on what the company outcome is or what the customer outcome is, then you've got some structural stuff you need to work out and normally you just have to escalate it, but if you agree on like, we're all trying to move this metric by changing this customer experience, then all you're doing is having a conversation about the best way to do that using the different information that everyone is bringing. And I think that's super important to just have as a rational, open, explicit discussion, as opposed to trying to hide it or pocket vetoing or something else. Because you assume that when someone disagrees with you that, I don't know, there's something emotional or wrong about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:37):
But it's fascinating.

Ami Vora (01:01:40):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:41):
There's a piece of advice I once heard from the Head of Product at Airbnb once where we were trying to find, reorg the business and try to figure out the best org and his advice and something he realized is, there's never the best org, there's just the best idea we have at the time with the here's the things we know are not going to be optimal about it and let's build processes around that.

Ami Vora (01:01:59):
I think that's my take on leadership in general. Especially as you get more senior, you can only make bad decisions. At some point someone can bring you a problem, you can recognize a problem and you can solve it, and there's so much happiness in solving that and tying a bow around it. But as you get senior, the only problems you'll see are ones that are fundamentally unsolvable because otherwise, someone would've solved it before they got to you. And so all you're doing is choosing which branch of suboptimal you're going to put your name on and describing the principles you're using and the context and the fact that it's suboptimal, but it's still the best thing. I think that's a really hard thing, is just to recognize and acknowledge that increasingly people only see you do, make suboptimal decisions and from a distance they're just like, why is that person only making bad decisions? And it's because those are your only options. All you can do is choose the least bad, the best possible for the time, for the problem that's consistent that makes sense with the framework, and that's been a tough thing to learn too.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:10):
You said somewhere that as you get more senior, you get worse at everything because the problems get harder.

Ami Vora (01:03:14):
Yes, exactly. I mean, it's a kind of dark view of leadership where yeah, you can't fully solve problems, you have to say no a lot people are unhappy with you. I thought as you get more senior, everyone listens to you and they like you and you could just say a thing and then it happens and that is not at all accurate. It really is, most of the decisions you make are not going to be perfect.

(01:03:42):
And I think I'm all about just normalizing and acknowledging those hard truths because otherwise, I feel like I'm failing. And if I just know that something is normal that it's part of the job, then it's not me. It's just like, okay, this is a fact of the job that I have to get accustomed to if I want to have this kind of impact. And there's something about having the impact, being able to serve the customer, being able to be part of this team, there's something about it that is so worthwhile that it's worth being terrible at everything and being visibly terrible at everything because that is the best way that I have to have that kind of impact in the world.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:21):
I think this is really important for early ICPMs to hear because they see their CPO and founders making all these decisions and they're like, what the hell? That's a terrible idea, why are they doing this? What you're saying is just like it's the best... Options are limited and then-

Ami Vora (01:04:38):
[inaudible 01:04:38].

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:38):
... nothing's going to be optimal.

Ami Vora (01:04:39):
Yeah, no org is optimal. It's definitely not. You can optimize for the people you have and you can optimize for the products you have, can optimize for the customers you have and you can optimize for the technology you have. Those are the options that you have, and in every one of those you trade off everything else. And so you just have to know, there's not going to be a perfect where all of it works and that's okay. That is part of the fun of it. That's part of getting to do this work, is continuing to improve, but it's hard. It's hard when people, it's hard, especially when you want everyone to think you're so great at everything.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:12):
This idea you mentioned of as a senior person solving people's problems, feeling really good, reminds me. Rolling to this, there's this Harvard Business Review article from the '70s or '80s or something about monkeys on your back. Have you read this or heard of this?

Ami Vora (01:05:24):
Oh yeah, yeah, I did.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:26):
Where it's basically like as a manager, [inaudible 01:05:28]-

Ami Vora (01:05:28):
You're trying to get monkey off of your back on people's backs?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:28):
Exactly.

Ami Vora (01:05:28):
Right, right, right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:32):
People come to you, Ami, here's my monkey, please take it for me and feed it for me and take care of it. And your job as a leader is to keep the monkeys on people's backs and help them figure out how to feed this monkey themself.

Ami Vora (01:05:43):
It's a weird one.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:43):
To get it off their back. It's very visceral. I want to talk about Faire and your current role as a final section of our chat. First of all, what was it like starting something completely new after 15 years at Meta at the various properties of Meta?

Ami Vora (01:06:00):
Yeah, I mean, I was so lucky. I had such an amazing run at Meta. I got to work with amazing leaders, truly great products. And I came to Faire for the same reason that I've been anywhere, because I believe in the people and I believe in the mission. A lot of my family in India is in wholesale and local retail, which is what Faire does, and so it was also a very personal thing for me too. I felt like I knew those customers. I'm a huge fan of small businesses, I got to work with a bunch of them in previous jobs as well.

(01:06:30):
I would say coming to Faire, I mean, one of the things I always think about is that especially as you are more senior, ramping on anywhere feels terrible because you expect to be as good at your new job as you were when you left your last job, but you forget that at your last job, you were there for years, you had years to build up the vocabulary and the cultural context and the network and the product knowledge, and then you're stepping in somewhere where you know none of that, but you have the same expectations of yourself of being able to have an impact and improve things and help your team. And so I always just try to remind myself, it's going to take time and what's most important is not for me to try to come in and change everything immediately, but to learn enough to be able to change things like 60 or 90 or 120 days in the future. And so that breathing helps a little bit.

(01:07:29):
It was also really interesting because Faire was entirely new to me. It was a new business model, it was a whole new set of people. It was a whole new set of customer problems. And so every interaction I just had to learn so much. I had to learn, who is this person? How do they see the world? What's the problem they're talking to me about? What's the customer impact, I think? So it was just a dramatic learning curve, which I always really love.

(01:07:54):
Maybe the last thing I'd say is, again, I was super lucky at Meta. I think I always had this maybe deep-seated insecurity that maybe I was only good at Meta. Maybe there was something about that network of people and how great they were and how well I knew those products, and maybe I wouldn't be that successful somewhere without that scaffolding. And so leaving and being able to go somewhere else and lead through change and a new place, a new customer set, a new business model, that's also been really, really affirming for me, honestly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:34):
Well, you have a lot of fans at Faire from the people I know there.

Ami Vora (01:08:36):
[inaudible 01:08:36].

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:36):
And so clearly, things are going well, at least as far as I can tell. Something that I think is, Faire definitely has, and a lot of companies have, is a very product minded visionary founder. And CPOs classically last a year or two, and then they're like, ah, this sucks. The founder just tells me what to do and what's the point of this role? And it's so frustrating. I'm curious just what you've learned about, at least so far, about working with someone like that as a CPO and not just being this middle person between what the founder wants to do with the team, this building.

Ami Vora (01:09:09):
Yeah, I mean, this is going to sound so naive, but I literally didn't know how important it was for me to have such a great relationship with the CEO, because I always had great relation, I was lucky, I had great relationships with a lot of people at my previous jobs. I was like, oh, of course it's going to be fine, everyone's going to let me do what I want, whatever. And I think I just got really lucky because Max is an amazing CEO, who's also super growth mindset and super open to talking over ideas, even when they involve a lot of change.

(01:09:42):
So when I was onboarding, one of the things I always like to do is write a list of observations. I go out and talk to, I have one-on-ones with a lot of people, and I write, here's the themes that I'm hearing. Here's what's going well, here's what's not going well. And that's a way for me to both share what I'm seeing and build some credibility and trust that way, but also for people to give me feedback and be like, oh, you're wrong about this, just so I can correct my starting point of knowledge.

(01:10:10):
And with Max, I also wrote a parallel document of hot takes. So once a quarter or so for the first year, I'd write a document that was just like, hey, for sake of provocation, if we wanted to fundamentally change a few things, here's ideas on what we could fundamentally change. And Max, very, very well could have just been like, hey, can you please just run product? That's you're job, can you please do that? And instead, he and the entire rest of the executive team were like, yeah, let's step through these. Let's talk about which of these we should try, let's talk about maybe context you don't have for why these don't make sense or why we don't do these. And that was such a gift because I was able to build such a great relationship, a trusting and complimentary relationship with Max and the rest of the exec team, and also that he took seriously things that he really didn't have to that I have so much respect for that, and I think I got really lucky in just finding a great CEO and exec team.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:18):
Is there anything you learned about this vetting process? Say you're a founder looking for a head of product, A CPO, any advice for how they might vet this person to make sure they are good fit and will last?

Ami Vora (01:11:32):
What I'd say to everyone else is, make sure you just have a mind meld with a CEO. Before you decide to take the job, spend a day together, understand how they think and how they operate, and whether you're going to work together in a way that feels really high fidelity and high trust and you're going to have room. I mean, I'm not a founder by any stretch and so when founders ask me what should I look for in a head of product or CPO, I say something a little bit different, which is, make sure that you really need the level of seniority that you are hiring. I think that a lot of founders think, I need a CPO, I need a VP of product, I need someone who's really senior, when often the founder has a bunch of the vision and knowledge, and what they really need is somebody to build the product. They don't need somebody who's going to scale the team or build systems like they've got enough of that. And so that to me is part of building that complimentary relationship where the founder and CEO know what they need and on the CPO side, they know that they can mind meld enough with the CEO to actually have an impact.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:41):
Last question. You started as an intern in the PR department, I think, at Meta?

Ami Vora (01:12:47):
Oh, I started as a temp, actually.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:51):
At temp, okay, amazing. And then you ended up leading Facebook ads and then WhatsApp and many other things. Can you share that story of just how you joined and how that happened?

Ami Vora (01:12:59):
Well, I had quit my last job. I knew that what I wanted to do was be involved in all the wild stuff happening in Silicon Valley in the mid 2000s. So I'd quit my last job, I was traveling around the world a little bit. I was living in New York, an extremely blissful lifestyle. I was unemployed, I was doing whatever I wanted. It was some of the best time I've had in my life, and eventually I needed a job, like you do. But it was 2007 and the only place I wanted to work was Facebook. You could hear the way people talked about these products. People would say Facebook is more important than than my car. It's like how I connect with the world. It was such a magical product, and you could hear that.

(01:13:51):
And I knew some people at the company and I convinced one of them to introduce me to everyone at the office. I'd made a trade, I said, I'll buy you a fancy coffee at Coupa Cafe in downtown Palo Alto, and in exchange just introduced me to everyone, everyone you know, take me around the office. So everyone I met, I said, "Hey, I'm Ami, I really want to work here. I'll do whatever you need." And the only call I got back was from the Head of PR, Brandy Barker, who said, "Look, we can't hire you. We didn't interview you. We don't have headcount. You're not really qualified." It was just like 10 reasons. I was like, okay, thank you for calling me. And she said, "But we need a temp to review our press releases, so if you want to come join a temp agency, we'll tell them to send you here." And that's what I did, I moved out to California and I slept on people's couches and eventually they hired me full time and I didn't look back.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:50):
And now you're on Lenny's podcast, what a run. It's interesting, this reminds me of another path to power rule from the Jeffrey PFeffer podcast, of networking is one of the best ways to acquire power in the world. So it's interesting that now that seed has planted in my head. Anyway, just A plug for that other episode also.

(01:15:06):
Ami, is there anything else that you wanted to share or leave listeners with before we get to a very exciting lightning round?

Ami Vora (01:15:13):
Sometimes people ask me who are working in product, what's the one thing they should do to be successful at product? And maybe the thing I would say is, especially as an org scale or a company scales, there's just a lot of distractions that get between you and the customer. And so the one thing that I would just advise everyone to do is just think about the customer, talk to the customer, be an advocate for them. It's such a shortcut to everything else you need to do in order to be successful, but it's so easy for that to get lost when you're thinking about, okay, how do I get alignment on my team? How do I figure out my roadmap? How do I convince people to join the company? There's all these different things, but fundamentally, we're here to create value for the customer. And the closer you can get to that, I always found myself the happiest because I'm building that feedback loop with the customer, but also more successful.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:09):
Well, let me actually follow up on this because this is really important and interesting. There's a PM part of my brain of like, okay, but we also got to move some metrics and sometimes that metric isn't going to be moved by, we need to do something specifically for the customer, but it's something that will help the business. Is there anything there of just that balance of like, we need to move over this conversion metric, versus, let's focus fully on what does the customer want and need? Any thoughts there?

Ami Vora (01:16:34):
Yeah, I think we often make things adversarial that are not actually adversarial. It is very rare for customer value to be different than a company value on a long enough time horizon. There might be short-term divergences, but really, to solve, to create value for the customer, you got to be around as a business, otherwise you are creating zero value for the customer. And so I think really, just starting with the, what are the end goals and where does stuff diverge in the very short term versus the medium term versus in the long term? It shouldn't, and really thinking about where you are in the journey and how to place that. That always helps me because our metrics should absolutely be about long-term customer impact. It's very rare if those aren't, and then you're still able to be successful.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:26):
It comes back to our chat about metrics and how to do those well.

(01:17:29):
With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round.

Ami Vora (01:17:32):
Cool, I'm ready.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:34):
Here we go. First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Ami Vora (01:17:39):
The Year of Yes, by Shonda Rhimes. I almost never read nonfiction. I love Shonda Rhimes, made an exception for this one. It's about just saying yes to things and finding your voice when you do feel like you're sometimes the first or the only or the different, and what that feels like. And it was very life-changing for me, actually.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:00):
That's an awesome pick. No one has recommended that one yet. Reminds me of an episode of Matthew Dicks, who has a Ted Talk about saying yes to everything.

Ami Vora (01:18:00):
Really?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:07):
He just says, Chris, to say yes to everything and his life is incredibly interesting as a result. Next question, do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show you really enjoyed?

Ami Vora (01:18:17):
I watch a lot of witty workplace comedies from the mid 2000s. So I watch a lot of The Office or 30 Rock reruns. Things are just very comfortable that I already know everything, there's no surprises. I'm not great with new stuff right now.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:33):
I heard they're bringing back The Office. There's a reboot happening.

Ami Vora (01:18:36):
Oh really? Let's see.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:38):
Yeah, exactly. Is there a favorite product you've recently discovered that you love, either digital, physical, anything?

Ami Vora (01:18:47):
Maybe a physical product that I really like. I drink a lot of coffee and tea through the day and it's just, I don't know, a calming ritual. And so I have a Fellow's electric kettle, that was my big work from home upgrade. So I have this life for kettle, I have a pour over kit. I have these lovely colorful mugs that I like, that has actually just made my day-to-day a lot better, is just a little feeling of luxury.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:16):
I love that. I think we have that same kettle. I also drink tea during every episode I have here.

Ami Vora (01:19:19):
Oh, yeah. You know it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:21):
So we're on the same page. Next question. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often think about, come back to, share with friends or family, in work or in life?

Ami Vora (01:19:30):
It is definitely not a motto. I feel like I know people have mottos and I'm so impressed. I'm like, you know what you are, you know what you need. I am not that person, but I have a piece of advice that someone gave me very early in my career. Actually, it was Chamath, he said, "You can either have more energy or less ambition." And I was like, oh, that's a little harsh, but also really true. And I think about that, it's another of my Roman empires. I think about it all the time where I'm like, okay, if I want to have this kind of impact, I'm going to have to do the work, I'm going to have to try new things, I'm going to have to feel uncomfortable, and sometimes I don't want to do those things. I don't want to do all of that work, and then I can't be mad if I'm not having the impact. Those two just have to go together. I also have to get lucky in all these different ways, but the two have to go together and that's been just a good governor, a little bit, of how I think about what I'm putting in.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:26):
I love that quote. By the way, if people don't know what you're talking about when you talk about the Roman Empires, there's a meme on TikTok where somebody said that every man thinks about the Roman Empire at least once a week. Right?

Ami Vora (01:20:39):
It's made me think about, what are all the things I think about repeatedly without really having trigger or reason? And there's still a lot. I don't think about the Roman Empire though. That is not one of them.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:49):
I also don't think about the Roman Empires, something's wrong with me. Okay, final question. You can blame your colleague Barr for this question. He tells me that you are very good at jokes, you tell very good jokes. Do you have a joke that you want to share by any chance?

Ami Vora (01:21:06):
I love jokes. There was a year at Facebook where I posted a joke of the week to the company and they're all terrible.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:15):
To the company.

Ami Vora (01:21:19):
Yeah, exactly. All right. Here's my favorite joke.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:22):
Great.

Ami Vora (01:21:24):
Why don't sharks eat clowns?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:26):
Why?

Ami Vora (01:21:27):
Because they taste funny. I'll tell you one more and you can choose one, you can choose which one. All right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:33):
No, we're not cutting anything.

Ami Vora (01:21:36):
What did the zero say to the eight?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:38):
What did the zero say to the eight? Something like us. Okay, no, I don't know.

Ami Vora (01:21:43):
Nice belt.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:44):
Nice what?

Ami Vora (01:21:45):
Belt.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:46):
Belt. Oh, I got it.

Ami Vora (01:21:51):
[inaudible 01:21:51].

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:53):
I get it, I get it. I'm going to tell you a joke. I just heard a standup share. How do you turn an egg into a vegetable?

Ami Vora (01:22:02):
I feel like if you put a letter on it'll turn into a vegetable name, but I can't think of the letter.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:06):
I love that you're really trying to analyze it and get there because I don't know if it's ever possible to actually get the answer. Okay, so how do you turn an egg into a vegetable? Squash.

Ami Vora (01:22:17):
That is definitely my level of joke, definitely.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:20):
They're like, this is for your kid. Go home and do this joke.

(01:22:24):
Ami, this was everything I hoped it would be. I'm going to read again the goal you had for this podcast, I 100% think we achieved it. To be as authentic as possible and show that people can be pretty messy and imperfect at times, yet still be very successful. I think exactly what this podcast ended up being. Thank you so much for being here.

(01:22:40):
Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and learn more, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Ami Vora (01:22:46):
Oh, thank you, Lenny. It's been such a pleasure. I write a blog on Substack at amiboard@substack.com. It's called The Hard Parts of Growth, it's just about how even when you're working in great places with great people at great companies, sometimes things are hard and that's normal. And so you can find me there. I do the same, I crosspost to LinkedIn so you can find me there. And how can people be helpful to me? I don't know, just by being great, by being kind and nice and making the world slightly better. Yeah, I think that's what we can all do.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:17):
I love that, and I will link to your Substack in the show notes, so if where people want to check it out, and I'll recommend it. I haven't done it yet, but I'm going to recommend it for my Substack.

Ami Vora (01:23:25):
Thank you, Lenny, so much. This was such a fun conversation. I've really enjoyed it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:29):
I loved it. Ami, thank you so much for being here. Bye, everyone.

Ami Vora (01:23:33):
Bye.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:35):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Anneka Gupta (00:00:00):
When people say, "I want someone that's strategic," what they're really saying is, "I want someone that can come up with and articulate a compelling and simple why behind the decisions and the direction of the company and product." So that's number one. And the second piece is, "I want someone that's going to champion and be a change agent to do things that may be hard but actually best for the long-term interest of the product or company, even though those things are not going to be easy to execute on." And I think if you have one without the other, ultimately people are not going to see you as strategic.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:40):
Today my guest is Anneka Gupta. Anneka is Chief Product Officer at Rubrik, a lecturer on product management at Stanford University's Graduate School of Business and on the board of Tinuiti. Previously, she was President, GM, and head of product at LiveRamp, where she spent 11 years and joined as one of their earliest employees. A bunch of former guests recommended Anneka Come on this podcast and you'll soon see why.

(00:01:03):
In our conversation, Anneka shares a ton of powerful advice on navigating difficult personalities, giving and hearing hard feedback, bringing humor and gratitude to every situation, managing your energy versus managing your time. Super tactical tips for how to become more strategic and how to make better decisions, and also how to break into product management for people that are trying to become product managers. There's something in this episode for everyone and I am excited for you to learn from Anneka. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing feature episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Anneka Gupta. Anneka, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Anneka Gupta (00:01:51):
Thanks for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:52):
So, I want to start with a question that I've started to ask guests that come on the podcast that have had extraordinarily successful careers and also just consistently successful careers. So here's the question. What do you believe are one or two skills or mindsets or habits that you think most contributed to your success that you think might be helpful for other people to learn and build to help them have more successful careers?

Anneka Gupta (00:02:18):
So it's funny, before we kicked this off, you talked about the post-it that you have on your computer that says have fun. My one mindset that I really have leaned into after someone actually gave me advice on this is to figure out how to have fun in my job, even in the most difficult of times. The reason why I say that is because when you're hit with really hard times, it's easy to operate from a mindset of scarcity and to look at everything as an unachievable hurdle to overcome. And when I was able to switch my mindset and say, "Well, I'm actually going to figure out a way to have fun with this," it actually changed my entire for how to deal with super difficult situations.

(00:03:03):
This advice specifically came up to me when I had a scenario where I had to essentially change out all of my direct reports in very short order, and I figured that out. It was a super daunting situation. I didn't know how I was going to manage and at first I felt so scared by what was ahead of me and how much change I was going to have to go through in a very short period of time. But when I got this advice, I started to try to reframe my thinking and it actually really made it so that I was able to get through that hard time and opened my mind up to so many more opportunities. So, now I try to embody that in every situation that I come across where I'm faced with something super, super challenging.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:45):
I love this advice. It's something that I've recently seen also in public speaking. If you can just reframe your thinking from "I'm scared of this" to "This is going to be fun. I'm going to have so much fun doing this. It's going to be like this energy and anxiety I'm feeling is me feeling like it's going to be a lot of fun." So, spending a little more time here, how do you actually do this? So in this case, you shared an example of basically you have to fire a bunch of people, not something one can quickly think about how to have fun with that. How did you do this? Is it just in your mind you're like, "I'm going to have fun with this," or is there something tactically people can do to make something fun?

Anneka Gupta (00:04:18):
I think there were a couple of things that I did and I've continued to do. One is figure out and really look at the situation and ask myself, what can I learn from this situation? What can I get out of this that's a positive outcome even though it is incredibly challenging to be facing it right now? So that's one thing that I've done. The second thing I think that has been really helpful is in going into meetings or other situations where I was trying to figure out how to collectively solve some big challenge, figuring out how to bring humor into the meeting. Just starting it on a light note and that elevated my own mood and way I was approaching the meeting, but also adds a level of levity to the situation for other people as well, which I think as a leader is super important because it's not just about your own mindset, but how are you transferring that mindset to the people that you're working with and the people that are working for you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:12):
Got it. So part of it is just like, "How do I add a little humor?" Part of it is just thinking, "How do I make this fun?" Is part of this just like this is not as important as people make it out to be and we could just have a little fun with this thing. It doesn't have to be like we're not curing cancer.

Anneka Gupta (00:05:28):
Yeah, definitely I think that helps. Reflecting on this too, I feel like a lot of it comes down to the amount of emotional and mental energy I can bring to solving a problem. And there's always so much going on in life, like personal life as well as professional life, trying to figure out how can I architect my day and time to maximize my energy and be able to bring my full self to work and to these difficult so that I can have that mindset to look at things more broadly versus operating from a place of scarcity. That may come down to simple things like making sure that I have lunch. Sometimes when things get so busy you're like, "Oh, I'm just going to grab a protein bar and I'm going to skip lunch." But I found that that really decreases my energy.

(00:06:15):
Or, trying to do things that are really difficult late in the day. Five to 6:00 PM is my worst time of day and I know that about myself, so I'm not going to schedule in my most difficult meeting or writing up a strategy deck or something for that period of time because I know that that's not going to be my best and it's actually going to make it more difficult for me to get the work done. Being able to manage my energy levels and figuring out how to schedule my time for my energy has really allowed me also to figure out how to have that abundant mindset in all situations.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:50):
This episode is brought to you by the Enterprise Ready Conference, a one-day event in San Francisco, bringing together product and engineering leaders shaping the future of enterprise SaaS. The event features a curated list of speakers with direct experience building for the enterprise, including leaders from OpenAI, Vanta, Checker, Dropbox and Canva. Topics included advanced identity management, compliance, encryption, and logging essentially at complex features that most enterprise customers require. If you're a founder, exec, product manager or engineer tasked with the enterprise roadmap, this conference is for you. You'll get detailed insights from industry leaders that have years of experience navigating the same challenges that you face today. And best of all, it's completely free since it's hosted by WorkOS. Spots are filling up quickly. Make sure to request an invite at EnterpriseReady.com. That's EnterpriseReady.com.

(00:07:47):
Today's episode is brought to you by Command AI. If you're like me and most users that I've built product for, you're probably used to chatbots at the bottom right of websites where you ask a question and it says something like, "Check out these three helpful articles. Did that answer your question?" And then you click away and then a few seconds later you get bombarded with some other useless pop-ups. For those of us who work on software, no one wants their product to feel like this. Command AI is an AI power toolkit for support, product, growth and marketing teams that embeds in your company's product.

(00:08:19):
The AI support agent can deflect upwards of 80% of support questions providing actually useful answers, and it can magically co-browse with your users to show them around your interface. They do pop-ups too, but their nudges are based on in-product behaviors like confusion or intent classification, which makes them much less annoying and much more impactful. Command AI works with web apps, mobile apps and websites, and they work with industry-leading companies like Gusto, Freshworks, HashiCorp, LaunchDarkly, and over 25 million end-users interact with Command AI interfaces. To try out Command AI, you can sign up at command.ai/Lenny and experience a custom demo of how it works in your app. That's command.ai/Lenny.

(00:09:06):
I'm going to go in a totally different direction. Before we were recording, we were also chatting about founder mode, and this is recently. This episode we're recording shortly after Paul Graham put out his now classic, instant classic founder mode post. And he had some really interesting takes on ways to think about founder mode, both from product leader perspective, from a founder perspective. So, there's kind of two questions I want to ask, but just broadly, what's your take on founder mode?

Anneka Gupta (00:09:33):
Well, first of all, I think Paul Graham did an amazing thing by putting a name to something so many of us have seen in practice. And while he didn't in his article say this is exactly what this is, I think many, many people that I talked to were like, "Oh yeah, I recognize this." I recognize people that I've worked for, CEOs, that have done founder mode, great founders that have done founder mode poorly. And it opened up a level of discussion that I think is really valuable for everyone to be having, whether you're a founder or you're someone that works for a founder.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:04):
Okay, so I'm going to ask two questions around this. One is from the perspective of working for a founder and founder mode, the other is being a product leader in founder mode. So, first of all, imagine you've worked with a few founders that operate in founder mode. As a CPO, as head of product, that's often a difficult place to be between the founder and the team that are building the thing. What have you learned about how to effectively work as a product leader with a founder in founder mode?

Anneka Gupta (00:10:30):
So, I think when a founder's in founder mode and if they're doing it well, what they're doing is really deeply understanding the business and then figuring out when to use their power as a founder to either tweak things and send something in a slightly different direction or fundamentally innovate and completely change directions or completely innovate in a totally new area. Now I think the way to use that effectively as a head of product is to recognize that they have that power to figure out how to use that power to get the things done that you know are best for the company. So, I always think about I have all the people around me. Whether they're people on my team, my peers, or my CEO, these are different resources I have to go get a initiative done or get work done in the company.

(00:11:23):
And as having a founder that can effectively operate in founder mode means that I can go and have a conversation with the CEO and say, "Hey, look, we have this huge opportunity and these are the things that aren't working, and I need your help to help figure out how we can move the needle more substantially in the direction that we need to go." And so activating that founder, that CEO to really be able to push the initiative that I think is best by making them an ally in doing so. I think one aspect. The second aspect is, which often happens, it's very difficult for many people and I've had this happen to me many times, is when a founder is like, "Well, I have this idea," and then you may or may not agree that that's the best direction to go in and how do you navigate that kind of situation?

(00:12:10):
So, one is actually taking a step back and objectively saying, "Well, why are they pushing this?" Maybe it's the wrong mechanism to go actually get done a strategy that's quite important for the company. So having a really deep understanding about why are they asking this, what are they ultimately trying to get at and what is the objective that they're trying to get at and is this the right way to get at it? If the answer is no to that, then you can go have a conversation. If you know what the objective is, you can go have a conversation with that founder and say, "Hey, look, I know this is what you're trying to do, but maybe instead of looking at option A here of how we go about tackling this, we should have explored these three other options instead." And that can help you and help navigate that conversation.

(00:12:53):
Now sometimes it's difficult to even get to that kind of understanding of the objective because someone might be just super set in their ways of, "Hey, I really want to go after this opportunity. It's my pet project." Then you have to decide as a head of product, do I really want to fight this or do I just give in on this, let it go? And also make sure that we get the stuff done that's most important to the company. You have to make that judgment call as a head of product and decide what is really going to make or break the company. What's the hill that I'm going to die on and is this something that I can shift or is this something that is not worth shifting? Of course it comes down to the personality. I've been very fortunate that I've actually had very few of those situations where the founder has been like, "Hey, I really want to go in this direction and I haven't agreed, at least with what we're trying to go after, regardless of the mechanism behind it."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:47):
I really love the point you made, especially about how the founder could be this lever to get things done. When you identify something needs to change, the best way to change that is just have the founder go in there, tell everyone, "Hey, we're going to do this thing differently." It's such like a positive spin on how to leverage founder mode where a founder actually has a lot of power to change that other people in the company don't. Okay, so let's go from the other side. So, I was talking to Nikhyl Singhal who runs the Skip, which is a community you're part of about you. And he said that you're a leader who excels in founder mode, that you operate in founder mode a lot. And so as a product leader, what have you learned about just how to think in founder mode, operate in founder mode, leverage that approach to leading teams, leading product teams?

Anneka Gupta (00:14:32):
Yeah, I think it's often easy as a leader to say, "I'm not going to roll up my sleeves and get into the details of the business or ask a lot of detailed questions about the business because you want to empower people and make them successful." What I've found is that understanding the details of the business and asking questions and understanding to the utmost extent you can, what's working, what's not, what are the financial goals of the business? Are we on track to get there? How are we making decisions? Getting into that level of depth is super important, and then you can decide as a leader, what do you want to do with that information? So there's a lot of information that I collect about what's happening in the organization, the decisions that we're making that I don't do anything with at a point in time.

(00:15:20):
That's my choice to make, but I want the information because in understanding the depth and what is happening, I can decide where I actually think I need to go in deep and make either very significant course correction or a small course correction. Then the way that I think about how do I bring my team along for that so they don't feel like I'm coming in and stomping all over the work that they're doing or trying to re-adjudicate a decision, one, is how do I get in there early?

(00:15:51):
One of the tactics I use is I ask people to present their strategies for things that I think we may need to do a course correction on, and I have them come in and then I ask them questions and then I make suggestion. And I'm able to do that in a forum where it doesn't feel like I'm coming in and rewriting the entire strategy, but I'm giving them there an opportunity to present their best thinking and then trying to figure out how do I take that and make that better and make them feel like I'm making it better versus stomping all over and dismissing the work that they've done.

(00:16:23):
I pick a strategic set of areas. So I think about what is most important for the business? What's going to kill the business if we don't get right and what are the biggest opportunities for the business that we need to go after regardless of how difficult it is for us to actually execute on that? By doing that, then at least I have clarity in my mind and I can provide clarity to the team about what is most important and rally the troops around making that stuff happen if that is what is essentially right. And I'll have all the context because I've asked all the questions of why this is right for the business, why is this going to help us with increased margins or get better growth or get into a new persona if that's what we're trying to do as an overall organization.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:04):
So in that example, and I love this tactic, you have your team come in, you ask them, "Tell me what the strategy is for this thing that you're working on." What you've seen work is instead of like, "No, this is broken, this is wrong, this isn't going to work." Your approach is ask questions and hope that they see the flaws or gaps. Is that how-

Anneka Gupta (00:17:24):
Yeah, it's ask questions, but you can't always lead someone somewhere with asking questions. It's also sharing a hypothesis. So I might have a particular hypothesis about the business where I might see something like, "Well, I was talking to security leaders in our customer advisory board recently and I heard this piece of feedback and this is what it made me think about our strategy, what do you think about that?" And then let them say like, "Okay, yeah, actually I see this or maybe I have some follow up questions."

(00:17:54):
It actually opens a whole discussion where I'm still able to provide my perspective and point of view but not completely shut down the discussion. Because what I always worry about is a leader is I'm going to come in and say something, and because I'm one of the more senior people in the room, no one is going to say if they have a concern. And the reality is I'm not always right far from it, but I want to be able to seed an assumption and then have a discussion based on that and then figure out what the right outcome is about what we should do next based on that discussion.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:27):
Speaking of strategy, you shared with me that at one point in your career you got this feedback that you just weren't strategic enough and that that comment led you to research and dig into what does it mean to be strategic, and also just to level up your strategic mindset and the way you think about strategy. What did you end up with recognizing as being strategic? What is that in your work and in your research? And then how did you actually get better at this work of being strategic?

Anneka Gupta (00:18:57):
I got this feedback once in a performance review and then I actually got it as well a few years ago when I was interviewing for head of product roles and I thought I had made a lot of progress on it, but when I reflected back, I think it actually all came back to the same themes. Which was I think when people say "I want someone that's strategic," what they're really saying is "I want someone that can come up with and articulate a compelling and simple why behind the decisions and the direction of the company and product." So that's number one. The second piece is, "I want someone that's going to champion and be a change agent to do things that may be hard but actually best for the long-term interest of the product or company, even though those things are not going to be easy to execute on."

(00:19:45):
And I think if you have one without the other, ultimately people are not going to see you as strategic. If you're really good at articulating the why, but you're only bringing small ideas to the table, then that's not strategic. If you're championing big ideas but you can't articulate the why behind them in a compelling and simple way, then you're not going to be seen as strategic either. So, that's the formula that I've come up with. This is what it means. And so I focused a lot on how do I make sure I do both of these things? How do I champion a few things that a really big ideas that are going to help change the direction of the company, and then how do I articulate that in a simple and compelling why?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:26):
That's such a cool simple way of thinking about this. Is there an example from your work that might illustrate some of this from a project you worked on or a product you built?

Anneka Gupta (00:20:35):
I can take some recent examples. We've been doing a lot of strategic planning for where do we want to be as a company over the next three years, and Rubrik operates in the cybersecurity space. It's a very fast moving landscape. There's a lot of places that we could go as a business, and one of the ways that I've exhibited this, and this is what I recommend to other people too, is sometimes it's really hard to come up with the compelling and simple why behind something and sometimes it's also really hard to come up with a really big idea out of thin air. So these things can be very challenging. The first step that I found as very useful, and I use this tactic every single day in meetings, is just summarization. So, bringing people together, lots of different voices into a room and hearing what they have to say and at various times in the conversation summarizing what people are saying and summarizing what that means in terms of the direction that we could go in.

(00:21:34):
And then that's a checkpoint of saying, "Okay, this is how I've synthesized what is happening. Is this correct or do we actually need to do another turn because we don't all agree with where we're landing here?" That summarization, even though I may not be adding a new idea into that, I found people actually view that as strategy. They view the effective summarization as strategy. So I think that's one element. Then what I've also found is that when I summarize what other people are saying and especially multiple different stakeholders, then I can think about offline and not in the context of right in the meeting, sometimes in the meeting too I guess, is how do I make this idea one click better? It's not about how do you do something radically, radically different, but taking ideas and then making it slightly better, slightly better.

(00:22:25):
When you think about that, especially from an outside-in perspective of what are the customer problems we're trying to solve and how are we going to take this to market, and don't worry about how difficult the technical implementation is going to be, then you start to get to these big ideas that can really be the change agent ideas. So, I've started doing this more and more and I think especially in the past three to six months, and I'm seeing a material difference in terms of the number of big ideas that we're going and pursuing overall as a company and also the quality of the strategic thinking that I can bring to the table, and it's been really exciting and rewarding.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:02):
There's so much you're sharing that resonates with other podcast episodes. For example, this idea of just going one click better. I had Roger Martin on the podcast where this book, Playing to Win, which is one of the more popular strategy books, and he has this concept of betterment as a way to work on strategy. A lot of people go huge with a big strategy and vision, and his advice is just find the thing that is the biggest constraint and bottleneck to your business right now and just make it better and that's your next step. And then just keep doing that and you'll end up in a much better place over time, even though it feels like you're just doing one little thing. And so I love this idea of just picking one thing and making it one click better. There's going to be an episode that comes out right before this with Alex Komoroske, and he has this concept of the adjacent possible and it's just find the next thing that's possible and focus on that versus some big lofty thing. So I'm just sharing a bunch of stuff, that's not a question.

Anneka Gupta (00:23:56):
That totally resonates though.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:58):
Okay, okay. Okay, great. And then the summarization idea, I love it. So tactical, basically any PM can do this just in a meeting just like, "Okay, let me just summarize to make sure everyone's on the same page." Funny enough, this is the feedback I get on this podcast and I haven't been doing this in our conversation yet, but I often try to summarize the person's point and everyone's like, "Oh, I love that you do that. That's so helpful." So I totally see the power of that in my experience.

Anneka Gupta (00:24:22):
It also makes people feel heard and especially when you have a lot of diverse voices in the room that may not agree on all things but have valid viewpoints, it helps bring people together and ultimately the diverse perspectives are going to yield better insights and better decisions for the organizations. You want that, but some people shy away from that because it's scary because you have to deal with a lot of conflict and it's a way to kind of move beyond the conflict and get to the heart of an issue, which in my mind, that's what the PM job is all about is getting to the very, very heart of a problem.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:56):
If someone wants to work on this skill of summarizing as kind of a tactic, can you give just an example of how you would do that? Is there like a phrase to use? Is there words or an example you could give of just like here's how it would look in a meeting?

Anneka Gupta (00:25:10):
Yeah. So, often if there's a lot of discussion going on, sometimes it can be a little hard to insert yourself. I still may insert myself and say, "Hey, let me pause here for a second and try to capture what has been said." This is what I've heard. I've heard that our customers are having these kinds of challenges. We feel like this is the way that we want to solve these challenges. We have a right to win in this way and therefore we're going to take this action.

(00:25:36):
Is everyone in agreement with that or is there some dissent about whether that's an accurate portrayal of where we've landed with this conversation? That's the way I'll frame it up and again, ending it on a question so that you're not coming in and just being like, "Hey, this is where we're at." But then inviting people to discuss and say "Yes," or "No, I agree with 90% of that or 10% off." And that helps move the conversation forward because sometimes you'll get stuck in these circular discussions that aren't moving forward and you need to figure out a way to move it forward.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:11):
And then you experience is just doing that makes you look more strategic and gives people the impression you're thinking strategically?

Anneka Gupta (00:26:18):
Yes. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:19):
Awesome.

Anneka Gupta (00:26:19):
The other way you can do it is if you're in a room with someone and you have a whiteboard is actually summarize on the whiteboard while people are talking and then show your summarized framework or whatever on that. So that's kind of a good way to do it too. If you're having a hard time interrupting the flow of discussion or you don't feel as comfortable thinking on your feet and interrupting and then framing your point of view, you can do that. In Zoom you can also use a chat. I've done that very effectively and said, "I'm not going to interrupt the flow conversation. I'm just going to summarize in Zoom chat this is what I've heard, and this is what I think we're saying in this conversation." And then sometimes that'll get invited back into the broader conversation that's happening live on the Zoom itself.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:05):
That's a much lower stakes way of doing it, and I'm picturing all the PMs listening to this, they're going to start doing this and there's going to be all these summaries now in Zoom chats and everyone will be like, "Oh my God, why is everyone sharing?"

Anneka Gupta (00:27:14):
And then Zoom AI will start just doing it all for you. Then we'll have to think again.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:19):
And then PMs are over and AI replaced us all.

Anneka Gupta (00:27:19):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:22):
Okay, so then just to close the loop on becoming more strategic, your advice is when someone's like, "Hey, you're not strategic enough. You need to be more strategic." Your insights is the two things to work on is one, be clear on the whys behind the ideas that you're working on and be very crystal clear. People may not be understanding why you're working on the things you want to work on, the things you're pitching. And then two is actually be the person that makes these things happen, not just put a doc out there. If you're not actually achieving them, people are going to think you're not strategic.

Anneka Gupta (00:27:53):
Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:53):
Awesome. Okay. I want to talk about decision-making. You have a really interesting perspective on how to become a better decision-maker in relation to being kind of a historian, which I love this concept. Talk about that insight.

Anneka Gupta (00:28:07):
Yeah, so I was at my previous company for 11 years, so I kind of ended up becoming the historian. And when I joined Rubrik about three years ago, I came into an organization that had a lot of history that I just didn't know about. So one of the things that I decided to do when I joined the company was to really understand what happened in the past. What were the products that we launched that weren't successful? Why weren't they successful? What was the perspective on the history of how we've decided to develop the things that we did and why? What was the perception of different people in the organization? I tried to construct this past knowledge of what had happened and what were the decisions that were made and why were those decisions made, whether they were good or bad it didn't matter, so that I could better understand how to make decisions going forward and to learn from the mistakes that I didn't personally live through.

(00:29:07):
I think that's the part that's really important about being a historian. You can always be a historian. It doesn't have to be just when you join a company, but even today I'll hear about projects from many years ago that people will bring up and I'll be like, "Tell me about this project. What happened with it? How did we decide to do this?" And just really learn and be curious about it because that gives me more context into, well, what is it that we did poorly and how can we do that better? And also, what is the baggage that people have around trying to do something similar again? Because people always come with their baggage of, oh, this hasn't worked before, so why is it going to work now? And as a product leader, you're obviously putting in place a lot of thoughts and ideas around this is what I want to go achieve and these are the initiatives. And some people are going to come and say, "Well, we've tried that before." Especially you've been at an organization that's been around for a while.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:56):
I've been that guy. We've done this so many times. It didn't work. Why are we thinking about this again? Okay, so the advice is if you're new to a company especially, just study the past decisions that were made and share them out as a part of that and then as a side effect, it'll help you make better decisions because you'll have this history about what the company has done. I love that. Along the same lines of decision-making, I asked your former colleague Rachel Wolan what to ask you, and she said that your parting advice when she left to join a different company was it's not about making the right decision, it's about making the decision. That's like the things she remembered about you most, that parting advice. Talk about why that is so important and your insight there.

Anneka Gupta (00:30:42):
Very easy to get into analysis paralysis before making a decision and say, "Well, if I just had this one more data point, if I just knew this, then I could make a decision." But the reality is that you were always operating off of imprecise information as a product leader. What I've found is that once you commit to a decision, you actually learn more post committing to that decision about what's going to work and not going to work, and you move out of the hypothetical. And as long as your decision is like 70% right, you can iterate on that 20, 30% in either direction, but if you don't commit, then you don't actually get any new information that is high fidelity and high quality. So, I'm a big believer in making decisions...

(00:31:28):
I know you've had a few guests talk about speed is super important in organizations. Well, I think making decisions quickly and then being able to iterate on them is a form of that. Just make a decision. Don't make it uninformed, but have a strong hypothesis and then just keep testing whether that hypothesis is accurate or not and you'll shift here and there. You might build something that you have to throw away 20% of the work on, but that's okay. It's better than making no decision at all because you won't get any new information if you don't make any decision at all.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:56):
As a PM that might be listening to this, feeling like, "Okay, yeah, that sounds great." But then I make a bad decision and then Anneka is going to be like, "You messed up here. You've shipped the wrong thing here. It didn't work." How do you create a culture where people don't feel that and aren't as afraid of making bad decisions and making decisions with 70% of the information?

Anneka Gupta (00:32:19):
I think part of it comes down to making sure there's a strong hypothesis that everyone understands when you're making the decision. Or it might not just be one hypothesis, it might be a series of hypotheses and assumptions that we're making that are informing the decision. So it might be a hypothesis that this segment of customers is going to be willing to pay for this product because it's solving an urgent and important enough need for them that they're going to go do it and this is the evidence we have to find it, but this is also the stuff we don't know.

(00:32:52):
Then along the way, we learn whether that hypothesis is true or not. And so at the end of the day, if something didn't work out, we can go back to the original hypothesis and say, "Well, this is what we learned in this process that our hypothesis was actually not true, and we learned all of this after the fact." I think the way to make a culture of risk taking and people willing to make these bets and go out on a limb is to reward the learning versus the outcome. That's what I try to focus on is if we're constantly learning, it is okay if we make bad decisions, but we learn from them and we get better for next time. Even in making this bad decision, we learn something about our customers or our business that we otherwise wouldn't have learned that we can use in another context.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:40):
First of all, I love that this comes back to your strategic lesson of just if you have a strong why behind something, that's incredibly powerful and people will be confident that you're thinking strategically. Two, I was just at a talk with Zuck. He's being interviewed at the Chase Center, the Acquired Podcast at this whole event, and his main thing that he talked about that he values most in the culture of Facebook is learning faster than anyone else. Shipping stuff that isn't perfect, but just so that you can get one more turn and learn something faster than someone else. So, that super resonates that's Facebook's culture. Is there an example of something you worked on where you did that, where you kind of ship something that you weren't fully confident in and you learn faster?

Anneka Gupta (00:34:26):
Yeah, I mean, I think there's a lot because anytime you're shipping products, there's so many different things that could go right and wrong. There's a situation where we created a really amazing high value product and we decided not to monetize it, and then we realized after the fact, "Wait, we should have monetized it. So, we're trying to figure out how to package some new capabilities to monetize this thing that we know has a lot of value without taking away what we've already given to existing customers." So that was something we learned along the way that we originally didn't think, oh, we should monetize this, but then we realized that there's actually an avenue to do that after the fact. There's been other things where we've developed a set of capabilities thinking that it will solve for this new persona's problems, but then we misunderstood how easy it was going to be to go sell to that new persona within our own organization. I've made that mistake many times actually.

(00:35:26):
And so now I think now what I've taken from that is really know how you're going to sell something and who's going to do the selling before you actually go build out the product. Because if you don't have that right focus, you may build out the best product and yet it's going to get zero adoption because no one in your organization is ready to sell it. So there's tons of stuff like that where it's like been okay, yeah, we've learned something from this, and it's not all throwaway, it just means that we've got to do something differently for this product and we need to do something differently for our organization going forward.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:01):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next-generation A/B testing and feature management platform built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams. Companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth and for understanding the performance of new features. And Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does.

(00:36:31):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most was our experimentation platform where I could set up experiments, easily, troubleshoot issues, and analyze performance all on my own. Eppo does all that and more with advanced statistical methods that can help you shave weeks off experiment time and accessible UI for diving deeper into performance and out-of-the-box reporting that helps you avoid annoying prolonged analytic cycles. Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insights with your team, sparking new ideas for the A/B testing flywheel. Eppo powers experimentation across every use case, including product, growth, machine learning, monetization, and email marketing. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com/Lenny and 10X your experiment velocity. That's geteppo.com/Lenny.

(00:37:20):
I want to come back to something Rachel also shared with me when asked her what questions to ask you. By the way, first of all, she spent a lot of time raving about how amazing you are first. That was the first set of conversations, and then she came up with a bunch of questions to ask you. And so her other question was about how good you are at navigating very difficult personalities. She showed this quote that she constantly saw you interact with and bring together several leaders who had much higher egos and very disparate points of view who are not informed or thoughtful or as gracious as you were, and she also said you have very low ego. She wanted me just to ask you for what you've learned about how to navigate very difficult personalities and help people align when it's not neatly what they want to do.

Anneka Gupta (00:38:06):
I try to embody the mindset of feeling like and believing that I can work with anyone. I think what I do when I hit a difficult personality and difficult personalities come in all shapes and sizes and forms is I really try to understand what drives that person. What is it that they really care about? Hopefully they care about something deeply about the company and making the company successful. Sometimes they care about their own personal career, how they're showing up, what people view of them. That's fine. I just need to understand what it is that they really care about, and then if I need something from them, what is it that I can do to motivate them to find what I need from them important? And trying to make that match of they have this desire kind of like building a product, they have this desire and how am I going to get them to care about the thing that I want to care about?

(00:39:08):
The other thing I do is instead of feeling like anger or frustration with the person and instead trying to shift that to a mindset of feeling gratitude and a positive emotion about them is I look at them and I ask myself what can I learn? Maybe I don't want to adopt their personality or operate the way that they are operating, but everyone has something that they can teach you, whether it's their communication style or the way they're able to marshal people together, the way they come up with visionary ideas, whatever it may be, trying to study that person and be curious about them, learn from them and then thank them for that and feel the generosity genuinely about what I got from this situation. It's easier to do sometimes than others, but I think it comes back to that abundant mindset. If you can approach it with an abundant mindset, then you can really consciously do this and when you actually learn something, you will feel the gratitude when you recognize that you are able to get something from that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:13):
I love that this connects with your other original piece of advice of just turning something into this is going to be fun. Let's make this fun. And in this case it's like make it great. What can I learn from this person even though they're really annoying me and it's frustrating and don't want anything done? Then your other point of understanding what they want and kind of using that as a way to pull them in your direction, how do you figure out what they want? Do you have any tricks for just like, "Here's how I learn what this person's motivations are and goals are"?

Anneka Gupta (00:40:42):
Talk to other people that have worked with them before and have done so successfully. So that might be people that work for them because if you work for a person like that, you have to figure out and or you're successful working for that person, you probably understand what makes them tick. So that's one, or talk to people that are peers, anything like that to try to understand and build this view of this person that helps me empathize with them and also helps me understand what they may be wanting to get out of a situation and why.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:16):
I love that. Yeah, they don't have to be involved in that. You just ask other people, "What is this person's motivations?" And then the idea is connect what they want with the thing you're trying to achieve. Beautiful. I really love this idea of when you're frustrated by someone just reframing it to like, "I'm grateful I'm going to learn something from this person in our interaction, even though they're making life hard for me." I really love that. Another skill I hear you're really strong at, and this comes from another one of your colleagues, Hema Mohan shared that you're world-class at giving feedback, giving hard feedback, and receiving hard feedback. And so I want to just ask you, what have you learned about how to do this? It's very hard to give hard feedback. That's why it's called hard feedback. So from either direction, what have you learned about receiving hard feedback or giving hard feedback where someone actually hears Zoom doesn't get defensive?

Anneka Gupta (00:42:07):
The answer is so much, I've learned so much from it. So maybe I'll start with receiving feedback. So, on the receiving feedback side, I think it's very natural to feel upset, defensive, all the negative emotions when you first see a piece of negative feedback, whether it's you're reading it in a employee survey or you're receiving it in a one-on-one from a direct report or from a manager or from a peer. And I try to let myself just feel the things that I'm going to feel. Sometimes that's an emotional feeling, sometimes that means I want to step out of the room or it depends on who I'm talking to, but let myself feel the things that I'm going to feel. Then once that's passed, whether that's a few hours or a few days, don't react. Don't try to say, "Oh, I don't believe this." Listen. And then ask myself, okay, well where is this feedback coming from? Why am I getting this feedback?

(00:43:07):
And try to be super curious about it. And that might be going back to the person that gave me the feedback and maybe asking someone that's a peer somewhere in the organization that might have more context and flavor to what the feedback really is, just trying to learn. Then I can decide, do I think this is valid or not? Is this something I should do something about or not? Actually, all feedback I think is valid. People's feelings are valid, but it doesn't mean that you need to do something about all of those things. Going through that process and letting myself ride the emotional wave and not judging myself for that, but then not reacting and letting myself then figure out and come back curious. I think when you come back curious, people then want to give you more feedback because they know that you're listening and that you're hearing what they say.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:55):
So the advice is feel it, don't block it off and be like, "No, no, no, no, no, this isn't real." So fully let your body go through the roller coaster of feeling the negative feedback. Sometimes the feedback is just like, "No, this isn't actually a thing." Do you have any just heuristic of like I should actually pay attention to this deeply or just like let me wait for more data points?

Anneka Gupta (00:44:15):
Yeah, I think in product you receive feedback all the time for your organization or for yourself, and you can't make everyone happy. Everyone wants a different thing from product. So I think this comes up quite often where there's a lot of feedback for the organization or for you as a leader and you have to decide what to focus on and what not to focus on. I always try to anchor on, "Well, what is best for the company and what does the company need for me and for my team at this point in time?" There's stuff that is a must-have on that list, and there's stuff that's nice to have. Sometimes there's just too many must-haves to go deal with the nice-to-haves and you have to just be like, well, I know this is a problem, or I know we could be 10% better in this, but it actually doesn't matter as much as fixing these things that are really, really important and are really what's going to help my organization deliver what it needs to for the company and for the business overall.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:13):
In terms of receiving hard feedback, so you shared one example or I shared an example where someone said you weren't strategic enough. Is there another example of receiving hard feedback that you got that you're like, "Ugh, that sucks"? Either earlier in your career or more recently, anything else come to mind?

Anneka Gupta (00:45:26):
I mean all the time. So there's always hard stuff. Well, people will give feedback of, "Oh, I feel like we're not moving fast enough on our roadmap and priorities. We need to be doing more. Why aren't we moving fast?" Or-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:47):
Never heard that one before.

Anneka Gupta (00:45:48):
Never heard that one before, right? Or disparaging the direction that we're taking a certain product because they don't agree with it because a competitor is doing something else, but we've decided for our reasons that we're not going to go follow that path. There's always something that people have negative feedback about and sometimes I'm like, "Okay, this is an eye roll." I understand where they're coming from. I understand why they're giving me this feedback, but I also don't agree that we should change directions because of it. I don't know, some of the things cut deeper than others, but I think people are making personal statements about my team or they're feeling like, "Hey, the product team isn't listening to feedback, or the product team has a bad culture. Anneka isn't listening." Things like that cut deep and are a lot more... I know like physiologically they make me kind of seize up a little bit, but again, then I try to feel the things I'm going to feel and try to understand why are they saying that. Why do they really feel that and what does that mean behaviorally that I have to do differently or my team has to do differently or maybe just two people on my team need to do differently and someone is extrapolating this out to be a much bigger problem than actually is?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:59):
Awesome. Okay, and then we were going to shift to what you've learned about giving hard feedback so that someone actually listens and doesn't just put up a shield and like, "It's not real."

Anneka Gupta (00:47:10):
So I think in giving feedback, you can never fully control how someone else is going to respond to that feedback. All you can control is what you do, your body language and what you say. What I have found is that if I can convey, and I will say this very directly to people, I care so much about you and I'm giving you this feedback because I want you to be successful and I want you to be able to reach the pinnacle of what I know you can accomplish. And you do all of that setup and you don't just hope that they understand that, you actually explicitly say that and you show that in your body language, then it makes the other person much more receptive to hearing whatever you have to say. Then I think the other piece is that you've got to be direct.

(00:47:57):
The worst feedback is the kind of passive-aggressive feedback versus saying directly this is what you are doing or this is how you are being perceived in the organization, and here are the three things that you can do to change the way you're being perceived or to change the outcomes of what you're driving or become more strategic or whatever it is that I'm trying to give feedback on. I do a lot of prep before I give someone a lot of feedback. I really think about how can I frame this in a way that's going to resonate with them that doesn't come across as attacking them, but helps them understand why what they're doing isn't working or is being perceived poorly? And try to give them examples and even examples that I've personally had to go through myself of how I've approached those situations. And let them ask questions and brainstorm with them, be part of the solution versus saying like, "Here's all this feedback, now you go figure out what to do with it."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:56):
This reminds me of Radical Candor. Basically make people feel like you care deeply about them, but be very direct about what they can be doing better. Are there phrases or ways that you set up the conversation? You mentioned a few of just like, "I want to help you become the best version of who you could be and what you're capable of." Is there any phrases you find helpful that you come back to often of just a way to start the conversation?

Anneka Gupta (00:49:21):
Yeah, I think what I started with is like, "I care a lot about you. You have a lot of potential. I can see you doing these kinds of things. I can see you getting to where you want to go in your career." Sometimes I even start the conversation by asking them, "What do you want to do? Where do you want to go in your career?" And that will help me frame up which of these things are important. Because honestly, if someone wants to be eventually like a CPO, the feedback I'm going to give to them is very different than if they're like, "Hey, I don't really want to manage people ever. I just want to be the best I see I can ever be." I'm not going to give them the same feedback. And so having that conversation up front also allows them even before I jump into the feedback to give them their perspective of what they want and then I can tailor the conversation more to what they're looking for.

(00:50:04):
I think that has really helped as well make sure that I focus on the things that are going to really matter. During the feedback conversations, I also try to frame things as this is how you're being perceived than you are doing X. Because I think even though it's hard to hear, "Oh, hey, this person doesn't perceive you in the way that you may think," then we can talk about, "Well, what are ways that we can change the perception?" I also think it's important because sometimes people are like if you say, "Hey, I don't think you're X," and then they're like, "Well, yes I am." And if you're saying, "Hey, well this is how other people perceive you including me, but maybe this is not what you are intending," and you actually say that, you're giving them the benefit of the doubt of actually how they're trying to show up is different than how people are perceiving them. You can have a better conversation then around, "Well, what can you do to change that perception?"

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:01):
You mentioned I see product managers, and this is a good segue too. You're a big deal, fancy chief product officer person. A lot of people listening to this podcast are early career PMs or trying to get into product. I want to ask a couple of questions along these lines. One is about getting into products. So, interestingly, you got into product the same way I got into product, which is you used to be an engineer and then you moved into product within a company, which is maybe one of the simplest ways to get into product potentially. For people that are trying to break into product management, what advice do you often give them of how they could go about doing it? I know there's never the silver bullet, but what's your advice?

Anneka Gupta (00:51:41):
I definitely think doing it within the same company is a lot easier than trying to switch companies and switch jobs at the same time because when you're within a company, you've already built credibility, hopefully. And if you haven't, then go crush it at your job so you build the credibility. Then you can start to raise your hand, interact with the product team, take on projects and do things that allow you to get some experience and build a relationship with a leader on the product team who then may be willing to take a chance on you to put you into a product role even if you don't have the experience. Especially when you're within the same company, you bring other things to the table. Let's say you're working in customer support, well, you have a huge amount of knowledge about what are the big problems that people are calling up the support team or opening tickets on the support team for, and that is valuable knowledge for being a product manager.

(00:52:33):
You're coming from the sales side, you're coming with a knowledge of how to sell the product, what really resonates, how do you do the objection handling, and that can be a valuable perspective. If you come from the engineering side, but you understand how the product is built and you understand that technical nuances of that well, that can also be a valuable way to enter into the product team. That way, even though you don't have the direct product experience, you're still bringing something to the table where you are going to have to get trained on core product management, but you're not going to have to be totally trained on the business or the technology.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:06):
So is the advice basically get a job in any function, not necessarily any function, but join a company however you can essentially and then push to try to get into the product team in some form?

Anneka Gupta (00:53:19):
Yeah, I think join a product adjacent function, which honestly pretty much every function is product adjacent, because what function does product not engage with, but as closely product adjacent as possible, and then yeah, find your way into the product world from there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:34):
Ideally there's something within the company, there's some program I imagine that does this sort of thing. Some companies have something structured, some are just kind of ad hoc. Is there anything there you're just like should you talk about this in your interview just like, "Hey, I would really love to become product manager someday." Do you have anything along those lines that would help me get into that or not? Or should you not talk?

Anneka Gupta (00:53:52):
Well, I think it depends. For instance, when I joined LiveRamp, which was my previous company as a software engineer, I actually did say in the interview process I want to become a product manager I think. At that point I was still early in my career, I didn't know for sure, but I said that. Now that was a 20-person startup, so it was worth saying it because they didn't really have a product team and I wanted to put it out there that that was something I was interested in growing into.

(00:54:17):
If you're joining a 5000-person company, you're hiring manager is probably not going to receive it well if you're like, "Hey, I'm interviewing for product marketing, but really what I want to do is go into product." So, it just kind of depends on the company and the stage. You have to play that wisely. But I think once you're in a company, then finding a way to make a relationship with the product leader, or if you're in a startup that is really small and they don't have product management, well then you have the opportunity to take on projects for sure that are product management related because no one is doing that work. Really taking initiative to do that so that you can find an inroad into product management.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:57):
Kind of along these lines, you have a really unique perspective on new PMs because you teach product management at Stanford. You've been doing that for a while. I just want to ask you work with a lot of people that are new to product, thinking about getting into product, then get into product. What do you find are the things that new PMs or people getting into product most misunderstand about the role of PM or are most surprised by when they become product managers?

Anneka Gupta (00:55:23):
When we interviewed students as we were designing the class about what they wanted to learn, what was most surprising to me was that students would say, "Well, can you teach me how to use Figma? Can you teach me the tools that product managers are going to have to use?" What was surprising me about that was I don't think it's the tools that you need to learn to be successful. I think what you need to learn to be successful is how to take very ambiguous situations and consistently drive more and more clarity over time. So, it was interesting to see this mismatch between what people said they wanted to learn and what I felt they actually needed to learn.

(00:56:03):
Now, having taught this class for a few years now, I think talking to students who have then left and become product managers, they've seen a lot of this in practice now and I think they understand that, but there is this mismatch of people who haven't been in product management saying they want to go and thinking that they need to learn some tools or process versus the mindset and the skills required to clarify ambiguity.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:29):
Along those lines, I actually saw you somewhere in a talk or maybe something you wrote talk about how creating this class and creating the curriculum helped you crystallize your own thinking on product and helped you crystallize the mental models of becoming a product manager. Is there anything that you recall from that time of like here's something that's really helped me understand about this function and the skill as you were putting together the class?

Anneka Gupta (00:56:51):
Yeah, I know anytime you're teaching something, you have to figure out a way to synthesize it for another audience, and so many of us have learned product management just figuring it out on the job. I don't know if there's a particular framework that I would say came out of that, but what I found very interesting was seeing the questions that people asked in the class and then feeling like, "Oh, I understand how to answer this question. I can provide an example for it." That was super interesting to me because I didn't expect that coming out of the conversation. Yes, there's frameworks we developed to talk about ideation and product discovery and all of that, but I think those are fairly flexible frameworks.

(00:57:33):
What was most enlightening was being able to crystallize the answers to some of these questions, whether it was about how do you interact as a PM effectively with engineering or what happens if the data shows you that it doesn't matter which direction you pick, like there's merits to both ways. How do you actually go about making those decisions? It was very interesting being able to then have those conversations with students and bring in the real life examples. And I found in some situations that actually go back to my own team and share the same answer that I came up with in class, I was like, "Oh, this is actually a valuable thing to share with my team back at my company."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:15):
Reminds me of the recent chat I had with this guy Alex Komoroske, where he talked about how oftentimes talking with people helps them uncover new insights that he had in his head and then he writes them down as soon as he says something that's really clever in any way. He's like, "Okay, I'm going to remember that now." Coming back to how to become a PM, so you see all these people getting and taking this class want to become product managers. I know they're like Stanford students and people more likely hire Stanford people. But I guess in terms of how they end up becoming PMs, if you were to look at the pie chart of the people that end up getting a PM job, what's the biggest chunk? Is it they join at some other function and then move into product? Do they just join as a junior PM somewhere? How are people actually getting into the PM role in that class?

Anneka Gupta (00:59:00):
Yeah, I think very few are directly going to an established company and becoming a PM directly, so I would say a big chunk of them. Some of them are, but many of those then had PM experience to begin with or had engineering experience and then went to a technical company into a PM role. The vast majority of them are joining product adjacent roles or they're going to small startups where they might be doing product management, might be the first product manager, or they might be doing product management plus plus, chief of staff, something like that where they get to put their hands in product management, but it's a super small company. So I think those have been the two most successful paths to get into product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:40):
Awesome. That's a really interesting lens into how people actually get into this role. Potentially final question, but we'll see where it goes. I have this recurring segment on this podcast called AI Corner where I try to get a sense of just how people are finding AI tools useful in their work, in their life. So, let me just ask you, is there anything you've found useful in some AI tool in how you work? Like something you found that helps you work more productively, more efficiently, either you or people on your team?

Anneka Gupta (01:00:08):
One way that we're using AI today is summarizing our user research calls. So, that has been really valuable because we're doing all these calls all the time, we're getting a ton of rich insights. Some of those rich insights are related to the specific project that we were doing this call for and some of them aren't. And now we have that summarized and tagged in a way where you can look up any sort of thing that you want around the calls that we've done and it'll find you the call, it'll find you the context, it'll find you the transcript and summarize exactly what we've learned from that call. So we're starting to use that more and more. It's very powerful capability. I definitely think that that kind of summarization of information for PMs is a big unlock for organizations and I think we're still in the very, very early days of AI making a meaningful difference to the way that PMs do their work.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:01):
Is there a specific tool that you love to help you with that that you may want to give a shout-out to or is it something you guys built?

Anneka Gupta (01:01:07):
Yeah, we use Dovetail and it's been fantastic. Connects into all of the Zoom calls and everything, it does a great job with summarization, with search, everything.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:18):
Awesome. I love it when someone recommends a very awesome sponsor of the podcast. Dovetail is ongoing and excellent sponsor, so I'm really happy to hear that. Amazing. Anneka, is there anything else that you thought you wanted to share or that you want to leave listeners with that you think might be helpful before we get to a very exciting lightning round?

Anneka Gupta (01:01:38):
The mindset that you bring to your work is actually the most important thing over anything else that you can do. And if you are approaching every situation as much as possible with the positive mindset, you can do more than you could ever possibly hope to achieve.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:56):
I'm going to pull on this thread because this is such a powerful point and I think it's easy to just hear that. It's hard to learn to do it. Do you have any advice on just how to build that mindset? Like it connects to many of the things you said: how can this be fun? How can I be grateful to this person that's annoying me and the things that they might teach me? Is there just anything you've done that has helped you build this mindset?

Anneka Gupta (01:02:20):
Journaling is very powerful. So actually growing up I journaled every single day of my life from when I was 13 to when I was 23. And while I cringe to go back to read any of those, I think what it helped me do and build a practice around that I still do today is when I have a lot of thoughts going through my head, especially negative thoughts, just putting them all down on a piece of paper, writing them on my phone and trying to explore why am I feeling this way? Why am I getting triggered? What is it about the situation that's making me feel so strongly?

(01:02:56):
And when I put it down on paper, then it takes this thing that's abstract and things that I'm ruminating on and actually makes it possible for me to break it down and understand, "Well, okay, this is something I may feel, but the why behind it is a little irrational, so let me let this go." I realize that this isn't rational way to think about this. Whereas other things I start to uncover, well, what is it about the situation and what is it that I need to do differently? What's within my control and what is it maybe that I need to go talk to someone about and say, "Hey, I need you to do this differently to be able to make myself feel better and make the situation better."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:34):
It's interesting this is another thread that's been coming up a bunch on the podcast recently that when something is bothering you or something is hard, the more you actually listen to that part of yourself and dive into it and explore it and give it a space to share and talk, the less power it gets and the more space is created for the stuff you actually want to take space. It's not what you would expect because usually it's like, "No, shut up, everything's fine." But the more you actually hear that out, the easier things get. So, I love that you share that.

Anneka Gupta (01:04:09):
It's like doing cognitive behavioral therapy on yourself. That's how I think of it. I've never actually done cognitive behavioral therapy, but I've read a lot about it and sometimes when I go through this, I'm asking myself the same questions that I think are asked in those settings.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:26):
Love that. All right, Anneka, is there anything else that you wanted to share or leave listeners with?

Anneka Gupta (01:04:29):
I think that's all I can think of.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:31):
Well, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Anneka Gupta (01:04:35):
I'm ready.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:36):
All right. First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Anneka Gupta (01:04:41):
The Hard Thing About Hard Things by Ben Horowitz, such a great book, great again about mindset of how to approach hard things. Second is I'm a huge fantasy sci-fi fan, so I love Brandon Sanderson's books. I highly recommend those to people as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:57):
All I know about him is I saw videos of him after COVID where he just said, "I wrote five new books during COVIID." I was like, "what is going on?"

Anneka Gupta (01:05:03):
He is someone that is at the top of his craft and I admire people so much that are truly the elite in what they do, and he's truly the elite in what he does. He writes a lot about writing, he podcasts a lot about writing. It's pretty impressive.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:17):
And he writes fantasy books, is that right?

Anneka Gupta (01:05:18):
He writes fantasy, yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:20):
Okay, cool. It feels like a lot of books to read though. I'm just like, "Oh, my God, so many books." Okay, great. Next question, do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Anneka Gupta (01:05:31):
Again, on the fantasy sci-fi track, I really like Fallout, which is a dystopian show based on a post-apocalyptic, post-nuclear war world. It's very entertaining.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:42):
Yeah, it's just very quirky and fun.

Anneka Gupta (01:05:45):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:46):
And unexpected. Awesome. Do you have a favorite product that you've recently discovered that you really love?

Anneka Gupta (01:05:53):
My eight-foot iPhone charger. So I have a cord that's very long that allows me to move around the house and do stuff while my phone is charging because my phone is always running out of batteries. So, highly recommend getting a super long charging cord.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:10):
I've got one of those and I know exactly what you mean. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to find useful and work during life?

Anneka Gupta (01:06:18):
I think it comes back to dealing with lots of different types of people. I really try to remind myself that everyone has something to teach and everyone has something to learn. I think that helps not only think about how you interact with other people, but also combat imposter syndrome because you have something to bring to the table and teach as well as anyone else, no matter what your age is, no matter what your background, and leaning into that and realizing that people can learn from you and you can learn from others in every single situation.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:51):
Final question. I heard that you're a big fan of Isaac Asimov. Do you have a favorite Asimov book, one that you'd think if someone were to explore his canon, they might want to start with?

Anneka Gupta (01:07:01):
I really like the Foundation series, so starting with that is really good. It's a very different style of writing. You kind of have to stick with it, but it's good, I promise.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:11):
And I'll build on that and say, "Don't watch the show because the show is so different from the book series." I don't know if you've seen it and-

Anneka Gupta (01:07:16):
Yes, I have.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:17):
... not nearly as good.

Anneka Gupta (01:07:17):
Okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:18):
I was just like, what is going on? This is not the story.

Anneka Gupta (01:07:20):
Yeah, very different.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:21):
What are they doing? Amazing. Anneka, this has been amazing. We covered so much ground. I feel like this is going to help a lot of people. Two final questions, where can folks find you online if they want to follow up on things, maybe ask you questions or just check out the stuff you're up to and how can listeners be useful to you?

Anneka Gupta (01:07:38):
You can find me on LinkedIn, follow me, DM me. I would love to connect. The way you can help me is we're actually redesigning our Stanford class right now for PMs, and I would love to hear from you if you don't have any PM experience, what is it that you wish a class could teach you? And that would be super helpful for me as we're redesigning this class. Thanks.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:59):
Amazing. And the way they could share that is DM you on LinkedIn or Twitter?

Anneka Gupta (01:08:03):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:06):
Easy. Amazing. Anneka, thank you so much for being here.

Anneka Gupta (01:08:07):
Thanks for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:09):
Absolutely. My pleasure. Bye everyone.

(01:08:13):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00):
He said that we're just starting to scratch the surface of what an agentic society actually looks like.

Asha Sharma (00:04):
We're approaching this world in which the marginal cost of the good output is approaching zero. We're going to see exponential demand for productivity and outputs. The way that you scale to that is with agents. When all of that happens, the org chart starts to become the work chart. You just don't need as many layers.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23):
We were chatting about this concept you have that we're moving from product as artifact to product as organism.

Asha Sharma (00:29):
Because these models are so effective at this point, you want to start to tune them to certain types of outcomes. All of a sudden, these are these living organisms that just get better with the more interactions that happen. I think this is the new IP of every single company products that think and live and learn.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45):
Planning right now is just crazy. How does anyone plan a roadmap when there's just like, "Okay, GPT-5 is out."

Asha Sharma (00:50):
We think about it as what season are we in? Season one might've been prototyping of AI and then it was all around models and reasoning models, and now it's the advent of agents.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03):
Today, my guest is Asha Sharma. Asha is Chief Vice President of Product for Microsoft's AI platform where she oversees their AI infrastructure, foundation models and agent tool chains, while also leading applied engineering, responsible AI and growth for the core AI division. She was previously COO at Instacart and VPR product at Meta where she ran Messenger, Instagram Direct, Messenger Kids and Remote Presence. She also sits on the boards of the Home Depot and Coupang, and she's a second degree black belt in Taekwondo.

(01:32):
Asha has a really unique and rare role that allows her to see more than most anyone else in the world, where things are heading with AI and what works and doesn't work for companies that are building large-scale AI products. In our conversation, Asha shares a bunch of trends and predictions that she's seeing that I haven't heard anyone else talk about, why we're moving from a product as artifact to product as organism world, why GUIs are being replaced by code native interfaces, why post-training is the new pre-training, the coming age agentic society, what it takes to be a successful builder today and going forward, and also her single biggest leadership lesson that she learned from Satya who she works closely with.

(02:09):
If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. Also, if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of 15 incredible products including Lovable, Replit, Bolt, n8n, Linear, Superhuman, Descript, Wispr Flow, Gamma, Perplexity, Warp, Granola, Magic Patterns, Raycast, ChatPRD and Mobbin. Check it out at lennysnewsletter.com and click product pass. With that, I bring you Asha Sharma.

(02:35):
This episode is brought to you by Enterpret. Enterpret is a customer intelligence platform used by a leading CXN product orgs like Canva, Notion, Perplexity, Strava, Hinge and Linear. To leverage the voice of the customer and build best-in-class products, Enterpret unifies all customer conversations in real time, from Gong recordings to Zendesk tickets to Twitter threads, and makes it available for your team for analysis and for action.

(03:01):
What makes Enterpret unique is its ability to build and update a customer-specific knowledge graph that provides the most granular and accurate categorization of all customer feedback and connects that customer feedback to critical metrics like revenue and CSAT. If modernizing your voice-of-customer program to a generational upgrade is a 2025 priority, like customer-centric industry leaders like Canva, Notion, Perplexity and Linear, reach out to the team at enterpret.com/Lenny. That's E-N-T-E-R-P-R-E-T.com/lenny.

(03:35):
Today's episode is brought to you by DX, the developer intelligence platform designed by leading researchers. To thrive in the AI era, organizations need to adapt quickly, but many organization leaders struggle to answer pressing questions like which tools are working, how are they being used? What's actually driving value? DX provides the data and insights that leaders need to navigate this shift.

(03:58):
With DX, companies like Dropbox, Booking.com, Adyen, and Intercom get a deep understanding of how AI is providing value to their developers and what impact AI is having on engineering productivity. To learn more, visit DX's website at getdx.com/lenny, that's getdx.com/lenny. Asha, thank you so much for being here, and welcome to the podcast.

Asha Sharma (04:25):
Thanks for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (04:26):
I want to start with something that we were chatting about before this that I've never heard about as a concept that I think is going to be really helpful for people to think about, which is this concept you have that we're moving from product as artifact to product as organism. Talk about what that means and what people need to understand here.

Asha Sharma (04:45):
It's been a pretty interesting shift, especially over the last year or so because when I got to Microsoft, it was right after OpenAI and the large foundation models happened, and then immediately after there was this explosion of models, proprietary open frontier models that were pushing the frontier curve and so they were both more efficient and then we're starting to see domain level expertise in a bunch of them and then even more recently, models now can tool call and they can function call and they can take action, and I think that's just giving way to a new type of products that are starting to see some success.

(05:26):
And so all of a sudden products aren't just like these static artifacts that we start to ship that's not just like, "Hey, come up with an idea or an insight. Go solve a problem, ship it into the world, maybe make it a little bit better and then have a dashboard." All of a sudden, the whole KPI is what is the metabolism of a product team to be able to ingest data and then digest the rewards model and then create some sort of outcome? Because these models are so effective at this point, you want to start tune them to certain types of outcomes, whether it's price or performance or quality. And so it's pretty exciting because all of a sudden these are these living organisms that just get better with the more interactions that happen and in many ways I think this is the new IP of every single company and it's a completely different way to build product and to even think about products that think and live and learn, which is kind of exciting.

Lenny Rachitsky (06:21):
So when I hear this, what I'm thinking about is when I had Michael Truell in the podcast, the Cursor CEO, he talked a lot about how their big moat is the data that they capture from people using Cursor, accepting certain suggestions, not accepting other suggestions. Is that what you're talking about here? Just the proprietary data that companies gather from people using their product or is there something beyond that even?

Asha Sharma (06:40):
I think why we're seeing the rise of post-training happen is just that the models themselves are so powerful. As of this year, Nathan Lambert did this study that I thought was pretty interesting of all the top leader boards and it showed that once a model hits 30 billion parameters, the CapEx to actually train a model and put billions of tokens into a pre-run doesn't economically make sense and you can start to optimize on the loop. And so yeah, in many ways, I think using your own data is the best way to do that, but you can synthetically generate data.

(07:16):
You have to come up with the rewards design, you have to actually roll it out, you have to A/B test it rigorously. You have to find the job to be done or the use case that it makes the most sense for. And then yes, that generates data that you can learn from. I haven't ever seen it be one loop for any product. I think it's multiple tracks running in parallel that are like assembly lines, if you will, and producing that.

Lenny Rachitsky (07:43):
And so is this thesis that we're moving towards product as organism, is this basically for model companies or is this also true for, I don't know, SaaS businesses and tools and user tools?

Asha Sharma (07:54):
Look, I think that software as a primitive is changing and the artifact inside of it is a model alongside the software components itself. And so in many ways I think that software products will all be model forward products, if you will.

Lenny Rachitsky (08:12):
This reminds me what I just had Nick Turley on the podcast who we were talking about before we started recording head of ChatGPT and I was asking just like how much does ChatGPT change with GPT-5 coming out, and he's just like, "It's the same thing, they're the same product. It's just the model tells us what to do in the product of ChatGPT."

(08:32):
And it makes me think about something else of just you would think why can't just GPT-5 build its own user interface just like as you use it, it just evolve. It's sort of what it's doing with Canvas and all these things, but that's another way I think about when you talk about this idea of product as organism is the product, the UX can shift based on how you're using it and evolve automatically without having product teams have to do anything.

Asha Sharma (08:53):
I 100% believe that's where the world is going, and then my experience should look and feel different than yours. That's been I've been in personalization, but now you can do it on the fly in the future. So I think that'll be a pretty fun world. I also think it will look different for agents and it will look different for power users and new users and all of those things too.

Lenny Rachitsky (09:12):
Let me zoom out a little bit and ask you this question. You work with a bunch of companies that are building AI products on your platform, other platforms. I imagine some just do an awesome job and are killing it, some are struggling. What do you find are common patterns across the companies that do really well and have a lot of success building really successful AI products and ones that don't?

Asha Sharma (09:35):
Yeah, so I think there's things that are more broadly applying to the organization themselves and then there's things that are applying to the people who are building the AI products too. So more broadly, I think there's a pattern that's starting to emerge for successful companies. One is they are embracing AI and everybody becomes AI fluent.

(09:58):
So I think everybody is using some sort of co-pilot or sort of AI in their day-to-day workflows like job one, so everyone's not afraid of it, understands how we can raise the ceiling and lower the floor for all sorts of skills and tasks. Number two, from there, they start to say, "Okay, how can I take a process that already exists and apply AI to making it better?" That might be something like customer support or taking fraud down from 15 days to cure to 10 days.

(10:26):
In going through that entire loop of mapping out the process, applying AI to it, seeing some sort of impact, and then feeling the P&L or the intrinsic benefits that looks like. The third thing then is like, "Okay, great. Now that you've seen impact, everybody is using it, how do you actually use it to inflect growth?" And that can be something like improving the customer experience, so your LTV or retention improves. It could be co-creating a new set of concepts or categories.

(10:56):
It could be going from agents that are embedded to agents that are embodied and then being able to take on exponential number of tasks. I think that where companies fail is that they're doing AI for AI's sake. They have a ton of projects that they're kicking off at the same time without a blueprint to understand how it actually worked and what their Stack looks like and they aren't treating it like a real investment, and so they don't have the measurement and the observability and the evals all set up.

(11:24):
It's going to do that end to end. I think the tricky thing is for enterprises is the technology is changing. There's something like 70,000 enterprise tools in the AI space launched last year. It's really hard to know which one you should use for what outcome. And so you really need to bet on a platform or some app server type layer that allows you to swap things in and out and not really be beholden to anything, any one technology or any one tool because the reality is the whole thing is going to change.

(11:54):
I feel like you have to actually build for the slope instead of the snapshot of where you are. So that's kind of what I see at the enterprise level. I think the builders themselves are actually changing pretty fundamentally too. Every single advent change a technology has invented a changing set of roles like mainframes to PCs like the whole garage engineers, and then when we went from server to cloud and mobile, there was like SEO specialists and CDNs and growth VMs and UXR and front end, back end, and yada yada.

(12:30):
And now I think we're seeing this advent of the polymath and where I think that full stack builders are kind of having their renaissance where if you take an average organization, it takes probably 10 steps to launch a product. It could be security review, it could be spec, it could be user research, and there's what? Five plus functions, maybe six or seven. I'm being generous for a normal organization, and then you have six or seven layers. So all of a sudden, you have 500 different touch points that have to happen to get a product out and when there are 500 models available a week or 500 new technologies, that is insufficient.

(13:15):
And so I really believe in the concept of the full stack builder. You're seeing it with a bunch of the AI native companies that are coming up. I'm even seeing it in enterprises that have been around for 50 years starting to operate in that way. And I think that gives you velocity and throughput and then gives you the whole loop to start to actually metabolize and go through that much faster.

Lenny Rachitsky (13:35):
That's definitely a recurring theme in these conversations is just the Venn diagrams of PM engineering design or starting to converge and more and more of other disciplines within your role. So PM needs to level up on design or engineering.

Asha Sharma (13:50):
Yeah, I completely agree. I think it's all about the loop, not the lane here. And so I think that whatever function you are, you have to be obsessed with trying to understand the efficiency or the cost of the product, the actual rewards or system design that you're going after, the actual UI, UX, how that actually manifests for agents or people. You have to start to get really good at that really quickly.

Lenny Rachitsky (14:21):
I like this phrase that you just use, the loop and not the lane. Can you say more about that?

Asha Sharma (14:21):
Oh, it's just going back to our previous discussion on the signals loop and products evolving and becoming these living organisms and not these artifacts. And if you think about getting really good at that loop, I think that is the product, that is the IP, that is the future of every organization and I think feedback becomes continuous and observability becomes the culture, and I think that functions start to blur in future workforces.

Lenny Rachitsky (14:49):
To make this even more real, is there an example of a product or a company that is a really good example of doing this well, living this kind of loop life?

Asha Sharma (14:57):
I think most companies that we're seeing in the space from an AI perspective are doing this. I can tell you about a couple that we are working on. Obviously in the coding space, you mentioned Cursor. GitHub has very similar features that we're using as an ensemble of models that have been fine-tuned across 30 different countries. All of the languages to actually then go iterate in a loop for next set of suggestions or code completions and things like that.

(15:25):
We've got in AI product called Dragon that's for physicians and we saw a massive difference from when we used synthetic fine-tuning to when we annotated 600,000 patient-physician interactions by experts and actually fed that into the model and continuously optimized it to then produce. I think we were sitting between 30 and 60 character acceptance rate depending on the run to something like 83%. And so that required a small group of individuals, not a large organization that were able to actually iterate in this loop across functions and all of those lines dissolving.

Lenny Rachitsky (16:07):
That's super interesting. So what I'm hearing here is if you can gather data on how things are going and then spend a lot of time creating high-quality labeling to feed back into it, to fine-tune it is basically the big advantage is how you win in a lot of this stuff. Okay. Along these lines, something else that you told me that you've been noticing that I want to hear more about is the shift from GUIs and you reference this from GUIs to code-native interfaces. Talk about what that means, what that looks like and what this means for folks building product.

Asha Sharma (16:38):
I think it goes back to what does it mean to be a product maker in the future. I think that everybody's instinct is a GUI, but if you think back in history, databases went from the desktop down into SQL, I think cloud was all about consoles and now it's about Terraform. And so I think we're literally just seeing the same pattern that's played out in history, start to play out in AI and everything else in AI, it's like Moore's law and it's getting faster. And so I think that's just accelerating and if you think about a stream of text just connects better with LLMs.

(17:14):
And so I think that there's a bunch of trends that are working in the favor for the future of products being about composability and not the canvas. And I think that product makers really need to rewire their mindset around this because I think we spend an inordinate amount of time thinking about the UI of something rather than how something composes, how an agent's going to be able to read something. How do you actually get infinite scale? How does that collaboration start to work? And so I think it's just a new way of thinking even though it's long been a trend that's happened in these changes.

Lenny Rachitsky (17:49):
So is the prediction here that it's terminals like Claude code sort of experiences or is it that it's agents that are taking or is it both? Is that what you're just sharing?

Asha Sharma (18:02):
Yeah, look, if any of us knew, that would be amazing. I just think that the reason why terminals are great and it feels really great when you code is because of the way it can interact with an LLM with the text stream. And I think that both can be true that humans will continue to commit code and will find new ways to actually do that, whether it's in the IDE, whether it's in GitHub, Copilot, whether it's in some new development environment, and I think that we'll do that with agents and agents will do that with each other and we'll continue to evolve from there.

Lenny Rachitsky (18:36):
We had Bret Taylor in the podcast, founder of Sierra, and he had a similar prediction that all software companies are going to become agent companies and it's essentially what you're saying here is that your software will just be this thing that's running in the background and there's much less of a GUI. Do you think it still becomes this chat interface the way we're getting used to? Is that the primary interface with agents or is anything something else happening there?

Asha Sharma (18:58):
I think the conversation is a really powerful interface. I worked on messaging. I think it's great for lots of forms of communication, but it's not the only form of communication. We use email today to collaborate with each other. We use docs. Everybody uses Word and PowerPoint. There's a billion people living in places of artifacts that I think can become really important composable pieces of the picture and I think they should be. So I'm excited about that. I think that chat will be important, but certainly not sufficient.

Lenny Rachitsky (19:35):
What's interesting is ChatGPT, the number one fastest growing product of all time, maybe the most important consequential product of all time is chat.

Asha Sharma (19:44):
Yeah, it's great.

Lenny Rachitsky (19:45):
It works.

Asha Sharma (19:46):
I think the question we have to ask ourselves is will it only always be chat?

Lenny Rachitsky (19:49):
Yeah, yeah. The way Nick described it is we're in the MS-DOS era of ChatGPT, which is interesting. It's like the reverse of what you're saying, so it's like maybe if you start as that and then you have to move to GUI and then maybe it'll go back, but he said there's going to be a Windows version where it's much easier to understand what the hell is going on.

Asha Sharma (20:07):
Yeah. Look, I think that it's smart. Every company should be bringing AI to where their users are and ChatGPT has all of their users using chat and it's a phenomenal product and we've got lots of people around the world that do work in many different ways and we should be thinking about how we use AI to enable that.

Lenny Rachitsky (20:28):
So let's talk about agents. You spent a lot of time working with agents, building agents, helping companies build agents. Yeah. There's a really great quote that I love. You said that we're just starting to scratch the surface of what an agentic society actually looks like. I just love this idea of an agentic society. What does that actually look like in the future?

Asha Sharma (20:47):
Oh gosh. It's funny you were telling me about your two-year-old and I have my son Ron just turned one and I can't even imagine life at two. I'm just like that is so far away and what will have been developed. Look, I think that in the future, work will look really different. I think that we're approaching this world in which the marginal cost of a good output is approaching zero. And I think when that happens, we're going to see exponential demand for productivity and outputs.

(21:20):
And I think that the way that you scale to that is with agents and it's agents that are embedded and their tools and their pieces of software. And I think there's going to be a ton of those far more than the software that we use today. And then I think there could be a set of embodied agents that are developed and we start to see that now, right? You can assign a pull request to Copilot. You can create a software development rep that's agentic that can do some of the lead generation and mining for you.

(21:50):
And so I think that when all of that happens, the work chart starts to become the work chart. I think that tasks and throughput become more important than they have been before. I also think that you just don't need as many layers. I think the whole organizational construct might start to look different in a few years, and so I'm pretty excited about it. I think meetings will still be meetings and there'll be weird, but I think that will be a bit better and I think there'll be lots of changes.

(22:24):
I think that for the average employee, my hope and my optimistic view is that they will be able to expand their skill set because now they have their own agents stack that they can bring with them to work just like you can bring your own device and you can start to have access to a set of skills that you never had before. And so if you think about the 20 million people that maybe sit in that space across America and they get 20% more skilled, it's pretty exponential for GDP, and so it's pretty fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (22:59):
This comment you made about the work chart becomes the org chart is such a profound concept because I don't know if this is what you meant, but what I'm imagining is you build these teams and here's your mission and goal and KPIs and it's humans and like, "Oh cool, go do this first." And what I'm recognizing as you're talking is like, "Okay, but if you have agents doing that, that is their prompt, go drive conversion." And then you have all these agents and that's the org. This is the conversion onboarding team and that's like a bunch of agents off doing their work. Is that what you mean?

Asha Sharma (23:33):
Yeah, I think today we think in terms of, "Hey, who reports to who in the org chart and who's responsible for these areas?" And I think at the end of the day, when you have a set of capable agents and people are capable of more things, you're not going to start to think in hierarchy and communicating up or during start to figure out outward task base type of opportunities. I think that humans will always decide in organizations how AI is used and what we want to apply it to.

(23:58):
But yeah, it's exciting when a new issue comes up or new tasks comes up, how do you actually automatically decide where to route it? Who's working on that task? How do you actually go work on it? How do you observe if they, it's doing the right thing, how do you fine-tune it if they're not, all of those things. So I think that I'm just speculating that there's a world in which that could be pretty exciting and I think that's great because we can just accomplish more.

Lenny Rachitsky (24:25):
You touch on this point that reviewing the work is going to be increasingly important. If you have a thousand agents off doing work, it's just like holy moly, that's a lot to look at and make sure they're doing the right thing. How do you think that evolves? Just being able to scale your ability to review the work that's being done?

Asha Sharma (24:40):
Yeah, I think that the same kind of loop that we talked about becomes increasingly important, like fine-tuning and self-healing observability, really good evals, all of that. The good news is that there are systems that manage this for billions of people today that already exists, and so I think that we don't have to reinvent the wheel. There's certainly going to be a bunch of new things to learn if that world ever plays out, but I think managing devices and policies and group access, all those things are solved problems, which is good.

Lenny Rachitsky (25:17):
This episode is brought to you by Fin, the number one AI agent for customer service. If your customer support tickets are piling up, then you need Fin. Fin is the highest performing AI agent on the market with a 59% average resolution rate. Fin resolves even the most complex customer queries. No other AI agent performs better. In head head bake offs with competitors, Fin wins every time.

(25:39):
Yes, switching to a new tool can be scary, but Fin works on any help desk with no migration needed, which means you don't have to overhaul your current system or deal with delays in service for your customers. And Fin is trusted by over 5,000 customer service leaders and top AI companies like Anthropic and Synthesia. And because Fin is powered by the Fin AI engine, which is a continuously improving system that allows you to analyze, train, test, and deploy with ease, Fin can continuously improve your results too.

(26:07):
So if you're ready to transform your customer service and scale your support, give Fin a try for only 99 cents per resolution. Plus, Fin comes with a 90-day money back guarantee. Find out how Fin can work for your team at fin.ai/lenny, that's fin.ai/lenny. So a lot of this, it feels like it's in the future. I know a lot of this already happening, people are using agents in all these different ways. Is there any way you and your team have found a value in working with agents of some kind other than coding I imagine is a big part of it, but just anything there that's like, "Wow, that's a big deal."

Asha Sharma (26:40):
At this point, we have AI and agents and many of our workflows, one of my favorite ones, so right now are my engineering partners out. So I jump on the live site bridges when something goes down and as something as simple as you can automatically get a summary of everything that just happened because usually, there's 15 people talking, you don't actually know where the incident started, where it's going to end and everything and then all of a sudden I have that and I can figure out and ask questions and get updates. Awesome. I think that the entire DevOps areas is changing.

(27:17):
We use use Spark to create prototypes so everybody on the team is expected to code, but sometimes just chatting in and talking in real words actually gets you to a prototype that's more interesting and more expressive and reflective of your creativity. So we use that. I think everybody's using AI to write. Everybody is using AI to find ways to have efficiencies and coming up with documentation and things like that, and so I think it's everywhere, which is cool. I think that we're just scratching the surface though for what's possible in terms of working with agents.

Lenny Rachitsky (27:58):
That's how I always feel when people ask me how I use AI. It's just like everywhere. It's just in every little sprinkled in everything I do now. I don't even know how to describe it.

Asha Sharma (28:06):
Yeah, it's hard to remember a world where it didn't really exist.

Lenny Rachitsky (28:09):
Yeah, there's a product manager that I collab with, Peter Yang who talks about how he just, "I don't even know how to do a strategy doc anymore without AI. How did people do this without having someone-"

Asha Sharma (28:20):
Do you think there will be strategy docs in the future? That's going to be interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (28:25):
I wrote this post once of which skills of a PM job will be most replaced by AI, and strategy is the one that people are the most have the biggest debate on. You could argue, I don't know, let's get into it briefly. You would think if some AI had all of the information you had about where the market is going, your metrics, your product today, it would be so good at developing a strategy for you. Many people think that's the one thing AI will be really not good at for a long time because that's where we need all this human judgment stuff. I don't know, do you have any thoughts?

Asha Sharma (28:59):
I think that some of the most consequential products in the world required a bunch of deterministic, logical sets of inputs and sparks of creativity and imagination and judgment and vision that could not be achieved without humans. Microsoft is the vision of a software factory and creating what Microsoft did wasn't inevitable. Instacart, there was web bands and web bands didn't work, but Instacart did work because of a different way of thinking about it.

(29:40):
That came through and iteration and a bunch of things that you couldn't have learned unless you actually went through the process, the iPod, you go forward. So I think it's there. I think docs themselves for every idea, for every need will just start to fade into applications and different artifacts in the productivity suite, which is just a different way of working.

Lenny Rachitsky (30:06):
Yeah. Your original question, which I didn't quite answer, but I think is important. You're asking do we even need strategy docs? And I guess it's just somehow everyone needs to be aligned on the strategy, maybe it's not a doc.

Asha Sharma (30:17):
Correct.

Lenny Rachitsky (30:17):
Yeah, it could be some other artifact.

Asha Sharma (30:20):
If you architect an organization the right way to keep up with AI, you need a different alignment mechanisms than traditional ways of actually work.

Lenny Rachitsky (30:34):
So let me ask you actually about that. So planning right now is just crazy. How does anyone plan a roadmap when there's just like, "Okay, GPT-5 is out." Okay, great. What works for you for setting actual a roadmap and a strategy for your team? How far out do you plan? How often do you have to rethink everything?

Asha Sharma (30:49):
I'll caveat this by saying everyone's just figuring it out and it's a lot harder to figure it out when you're a larger organization than when you're much smaller and you get to run something yourself and there's pros and cons to both. So here's what we do. The company historically, at least in our product teams had semesters that they planned against.

(31:10):
So think of that as every six months there's a strategy to look back, look forward, all of those things. I think that's very valuable. I think the idea of six months though and really understanding what's changing out in front is truly challenging to have a overbaked situation. And so we think about it as what season are we in? And so a season which is very uncomfortable can be denoted by a set of secular changes that are happening in the industry or that are happening from customers.

(31:40):
And so you can think about season one might've been the prototyping of AI and the early GPT work and then it was all around models and reasoning models and now it's the advent of agents and so that can last a year, that can last six months, that can last three months. But grounding everybody on the ethos of what are the secular changes? What are the customer problems we need to solve? What does winning look like?

(32:06):
So everybody has that shared sense. What is the north star metric is something that we do. The second thing that we do is that we have kind of loose quarterly OKR. So like, "Okay, if we believe that, what do we need to do next quarter to actually put ourselves on a path to that?" And then from there, teams are operating in squads and they're kind of setting out four to six week goals that they're trying to go after for problem areas to go ladder up to that and especially as the platform for the company and the platform for our Azure customers with AI, I'll say we go through lots of changes to that all the time and I think we have to just have an openness that that is the business that we're in.

(32:47):
I think the other thing is just we try to leave Slack in the system, not just for the unplanned, but for the slope. I think that we have to continuously be thinking about how we're going to disrupt the platform in our thinking and what we need to be investing in to make that possible. And so we try to do a little bit of both.

Lenny Rachitsky (33:06):
This is awesome. So what I'm hearing here is there's this concept of seasons and everyone's aligned, "Okay, this is time for agents, this is what's happening right now. We're going to center around our strategy around agents." And then there's these loose quarterly OKRs. You plan for three months roughly and then you leave some Slack in the system for things to change.

Asha Sharma (33:24):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (33:24):
Is the current season agents, how would you describe what season we're in right now?

Asha Sharma (33:27):
Yeah, it's agents. The rise of agents.

Lenny Rachitsky (33:31):
The rise of agents. It sounds like a Terminator movie. Do you have a sense of what the next season might be? Is there any like, "Oh, this might be coming next."

Asha Sharma (33:39):
Gosh, I don't, but I think that, look, we have more than 15,000 agents that are deployed on our service today, at least at the Azure service. There's a bunch of other platforms in the company and I would just say that I think that we should really focus on making sure that we have all of the alignment, accountability, observability, evals to making those agents great.

(34:11):
I think that Manus breakthrough in the space was that they could do these tool calling loops and have agents do longer running tasks that really no other platform was able to do. I think stuff like that is critical. Memory is critical. There's still a bunch of building blocks that I think are leaving agents incomplete in the wild that I think we have to really sweat the details on before we move on.

Lenny Rachitsky (34:37):
So it's just like agents until the end of time until super intelligence and then we're just on beaches chilling.

Asha Sharma (34:44):
Yes, agents until dank memes look. Yeah, I think the cool thing is something new could come in three months. Something new could come in 13 months. I think we have this conviction on a set of building blocks that we want to provide to enable these agents to endure and have high endurance and so that's what we're focused on.

Lenny Rachitsky (35:07):
When you said there's 15,000 agents, what does that mean? Is that 15,000 types of agents you can use or is it like that's how many processes are?

Asha Sharma (35:13):
No, that's customers. 15,000 I think I should re-reference the numbers. 15,000 customers who have produced agents. I think the number of agents is actually millions.

Lenny Rachitsky (35:24):
15,000 customers that are building a specific kind of agent on your platform and they're running and the number of agents is in the millions just running in the cloud.

Asha Sharma (35:32):
Yes. Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (35:33):
Okay. It's wild. Some crazy numbers here. Okay, so let me just go in a slightly different direction. You're in the center of the storm of a lot of AI, just seeing everything else going on. Is there something you wish you'd known before stepping into this role that you're just like, "Okay, I see. I didn't expect this."

Asha Sharma (35:52):
When I first took the role, it was described as the belly of the beast and I had spent most of my career building products at the center of machine learning and applications or businesses and I think that to my surprise, a lot of the learnings have translated in terms of what makes a great platform is what makes a great product. And the thing for me is it's often in the invisible work or not the pixels that actually drives that.

(36:26):
So for example, one of the first companies that I worked at was a company called Porch Group. I was employee seven and we knew we wanted to help people take care of their home and I think we invented so many features like the home report or a way to manage your home or house style inspiration where you could see all of the houses and it's map every single room. And the single most important thing that we could have done and did during my time there was create a matching platform that matched the 6 million professionals with the 1,300 service types with the 37,000 zip codes and all of the homeowners in North America to actually take care of their home, and that was just the game of inches and optimizing that engine in order to create higher quality leads essentially.

(37:15):
That's what got us to the first $500 million valuation. That's eventually what we built on to actually have other vertical services and software platforms that IP of the company. Same with messaging. The number one learning that I had was look like WhatsApp didn't win because it had stickers or stories or dark mode. In fact, I don't even think it had all of those things when it won. It won on a few premises because one was the phone book, you knew that when you use WhatsApp, you could reach every single person because you had their phone number and those are the people that you care about when you're using messaging.

(37:54):
It was the reliability and how fast it was. I could text my grandmother in India and know that she would get my text message all the time, and then it was the privacy. When you are sending 200 messages a day to the four people you care about most, you want to make sure no one else can read the messages and so the end-to-end encryption really mattered. And so it wasn't the hundreds of features, it was all in the infrastructure and the platform.

(38:21):
Same Instacart, there are so many loved features of Instacart, but at the end of the day, it's a billion items that updates 3,000 times every single minute to get homeowners their groceries from the store that they love. And so I think I wish I had known that because I think it would've curtailed my learning curve to say that it's not all the features for the platform that matters, it's the data residency.

(38:46):
So the hospital in Germany that's fine-tuning the model can do so in confidence and the data isn't going to leave the region, it's the availability, it's the reliability. It's making sure you have the right selection of the tools that enterprises need and the right way to retrieve the knowledge and that's the platform that we've built but just didn't fully have that picture that those learnings would translate.

Lenny Rachitsky (39:07):
Mm-hmm. That's really interesting. So what I'm hearing is people undervalue who just the simple bottom of the Maslow hierarchy of things that help you win in platforms, especially in messaging platforms including so it's like reliability, privacy, I don't know, availability.

Asha Sharma (39:26):
Yeah, performance, reliability, privacy, safety, all of those things.

Lenny Rachitsky (39:31):
Mm-hmm. Let me ask you a totally different question. When we were going to record this previously and you're like, "Oh, I have a big meeting with Satya I got to do instead." And so we moved at a different time. Very few people get to work with Satya, he's quite a successful leader. What's something you've learned from him about? I don't know, leadership or product building?

Asha Sharma (39:52):
I've learned that optimism is a renewable resource. This company for 50 years has had every reason not to succeed and it has even as it's had early success in the AI era and challenges and other successes and the space is developing so quickly, I think that his ability to generate energy and to use his optimism to renew everybody's dedication to the mission is unbelievable and I think it's such an important part of the culture. Everybody talks about the growth mindset, that's real, huge part of the culture, but I think the ability to generate energy and clarity on what we need to go do and use optimism to renew the commitment every single day for every single person in an entirely competitive talent space is pretty amazing.

Lenny Rachitsky (40:54):
Is that something you think that is just innate to him or it's something that he's worked on to just generate this optimism on behalf of everyone?

Asha Sharma (40:59):
I have no idea. We should ask him, but I'm deeply impressed by it.

Lenny Rachitsky (41:04):
It's interesting that a lot of this comes down to just vibes. There's just this vibe of imagine it's not him just the words he uses, it's just this energy that he exudes optimism and energy.

Asha Sharma (41:16):
Think about it. We all choose to someone who just said this to me and I thought it was great, "We all choose to close the door on our kids every single day to go work on something." And so you have to work on something that is deeply moving to you and you have a deep belief that is going to make the world a better place and I think that's why it's vibes. I think you have to follow and have a sense of duty towards a mission that is bigger than yourself.

Lenny Rachitsky (41:45):
It makes me think of a line that I've referenced a couple of times on this podcast that hits people really hard that the only people that'll remember you working late are your kids.

Asha Sharma (41:54):
Okay. I don't know where we're going with that, but that was like, now you're like, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (42:02):
It's too much. We've gone too far. Oh man. Okay. Well let ask you this. What's driving you?

Asha Sharma (42:04):
We could have said our customers, we could have gone a different route on that one.

Lenny Rachitsky (42:09):
This is the real stuff. What's driving you? What's driving you? What's keeping you excited about the work that you're doing?

Asha Sharma (42:17):
What AI will help us do from a workforce perspective, what it will help us do from a healthcare perspective. My mom has cancer and I think a lot about how we might find a way to solve the form of cancer she has in my lifetime and I never thought that was possible three years ago. All of that's deeply profound and the thing that I personally think a lot about now that we know that we're living in this time working with such powerful technology is the effects of it and how I can best build a platform where people can make use of it.

(42:52):
So the reason why I work at Microsoft is because the whole ethos of the company is how do I help people and businesses achieve more and more for me in the thing I think about at night outside of GPUs is I think about will my son have classmates in the future? And that's not because agents are going to replace them, it's because the fertility rates are declining. The average birth rate in the '90s when we were growing up was like three and now it's 2.3 and in 2050, it's estimated to be below replacement and I think that AI can have such a big effect on it and already is.

(43:42):
It was just reading about a hospital in London that's able to improve pregnancy rates by using AI to match eggs and sperms and their cutting costs at the same time. You saw with the ChatGPT-5 launch yesterday. Such an amazing story about how ChatGPT is helping in healthcare. Stanford is one of our big customers with the platform that I build and they're working on using AI for tumor reviews and it's just like, it is these sets of things that will move humanity forward and expand our lifetime and give us the privilege to solve 100-year problems. And so that's why I'm excited and that's why I do what I do.

Lenny Rachitsky (44:22):
Yeah, especially in your role where you're building the platform that enables all of this, I could see how impactful that could be. Asha, is there anything else that you wanted to touch on or share or double down on of anything we've talked about before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Asha Sharma (44:39):
We touched on it a little bit, but I think that with the advent of agents and products that think and can act and reason, there's going to be this new wave around RL and I have a deep belief that that will become one of the most important product techniques of the next season or at least the next few seasons.

Lenny Rachitsky (45:00):
And RL is reinforcement learning?

Asha Sharma (45:02):
Yes. Yes, exactly. I believe we will see just as much money spent on post-training as we will on pre-training and in the future, more on post-training. We talked a little bit about Nathan Lambert's study where his review was that when a model hits 30 billion parameters, it makes more sense to fine-tune and optimize that 50% of developers according to surveys are now fine-tuning and we know fine-tuning is good, but if you actually go through the full loop, you can get better results.

(45:30):
So I think there's a bunch there and I think there's a whole new set of infrastructure and platforms and companies that will be created that are all around this part of the stack. And so I think it's an exciting time to be in the platform space, but it's also an exciting time to be starting companies and be thinking about those problems.

Lenny Rachitsky (45:48):
I want to make sure people truly understand what you're saying here because not everyone truly understands post-training, pre-training. What's the simplest way to understand the difference there and just why it's such a big deal that investment is moving to post-training?

Asha Sharma (46:02):
The way that I think about it is to create a foundation model, it requires a tremendous amount of compute, a tremendous amount of science. Expertise as we're seeing which the cost for scientists or the average value is raising dramatically and I think an expertise that we've seen isn't everywhere in the world right now. And so it's just a big CapEx investment to do that.

(46:33):
With this explosion of models that we talked about in the beginning, there's a lot of good models to choose from for different domains. And so I think that you just get more leverage economically, you get more leverage from a taste perspective of how you actually want to steer a model if you're actually doing reinforcement learning or some sort of fine-tuning to actually start to optimize what's off the shelf for some outcome like price, performance, quality.

(46:58):
If you think about that, that's not crazy, right? Ranking is an age-old optimization problem where you don't want to just take what's off the shelf because there's amazing frameworks and UI and components that the world is react components that are out there. You still want to tailor the experience to a set of use cases or a set of people. I think it's just the same industrial logic.

Lenny Rachitsky (47:22):
So in practice, what this means is there's a GPT-5 model. You're saying there's a lot of opportunity and a much more efficient way to spend money, which is take something like that and then train that on additional custom data that you have, whether it's data or just reinforcement learning, maybe even with humans to align it with what you wanted to achieve?

Asha Sharma (47:41):
Yep, and it could be your own data, it could be data that you buy, it could be synthetic data, it could be something else, but I think that we're going to start to see more and more companies and organizations start to think about how do I adapt a model rather than how do I take something off the shelf as is or invest a bunch of money and building my own models.

Lenny Rachitsky (48:06):
Yeah, I forget. I know Cursor, when he was on the podcast, he shared that they have a bunch of models that support your experience with Cursor and over time, they're just going to have their own thing. I forget who it was, Windsor for one of those guys just uses their own model now, they don't just plug into Claude.

Asha Sharma (48:22):
I'm much more in the model system camp. I believe in model diversity. I think that in experience like Claude, like Sonnet 4 is awesome for a set of use cases versus GPT-5 is different for different use cases. I think that there's some tasks where you care about the latency of the model. You're cool with the thinking time or you want a quick retrieval and things like that. I think the beauty is there's a lot of models that can help you achieve that, and so I'm much more in the model system rather than one model to rule them all.

Lenny Rachitsky (48:58):
Is that the right term? I've also heard ensemble model, ensemble of models.

Asha Sharma (49:01):
I think about an ensemble of models as a set of multiple models that then you can fine-tune and deploy independently, but at this point, we're all making up different terminology to define things that we have deep beliefs on that have limited sets of data points because everything is moving so fast.

Lenny Rachitsky (49:18):
Yeah. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round.

Asha Sharma (49:23):
I'm very excited for our lightning round and I'm turning down the lights

Lenny Rachitsky (49:27):
And then it'll come back on I imagine in one second. Okay. First question, what are two or three books you find yourself recommending most to other people?

Asha Sharma (49:34):
At work? It's probably Thinking Machines, so it's all about treating the cause, not the symptoms. The prototypical example is if you want to solve traffic, you don't actually put up speed bumps or speed limits, you actually have to solve walkability and mobility and why people actually use cars. Outside of that, personally, the CMO of Instacart recommended to me Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow and I read it last month and last year and the year before because I love it so much. It's like this beautiful story over 10 years.

Lenny Rachitsky (50:12):
Mm-hmm. What are some favorite recent movie or TV shows you really enjoyed?

Asha Sharma (50:18):
Formula One, saw it twice for all mankind. For all Mankind, I like season four. I don't know, I like playing alternative theories to how the space race might have looked.

Lenny Rachitsky (50:32):
Do you have a favorite product? That you recently discovered that you really love? Could be tech, could be gadgets, could be clothing.

Asha Sharma (50:36):
So I just joined the board of the Home Depot and we're doing a little renovation project and so there's this new, well, new to me DEWALT power pack and they use pouch cells and so it's like 50% lighter, but with all the power and it's awesome for drills and things that I need to lift up with one hand that feel heavy. So I love that.

(50:59):
We also are testing out this new brilliant, smart home kind of system. So it's four inches of high-res middleware that allows you to connect to everything and I've reached peak dissat with the explosion of all the technology required to actually use your home. So it just might be the middleware that sticks, but we'll see.

Lenny Rachitsky (51:22):
Did you say dissat? Is that short for dissatisfaction?

Asha Sharma (51:26):
Yes. Sorry. I'm speaking in acronyms.

Lenny Rachitsky (51:28):
Whoa, I've never heard that dissat. I love that. By the way, I love that you're on the board of the Home Depot. What a different part of the spectrum of work.

Asha Sharma (51:40):
Yeah, it's been awesome. The very first board meeting, the head of philanthropy has been at the company for decades and she said, "Welcome to the greatest company on the planet." It's pretty special.

Lenny Rachitsky (51:52):
They're like, "Microsoft." Is there something you've learned from working with them that you've brought to Microsoft?

Asha Sharma (52:00):
Look, it's new, it's this year, but I've long worked on products that had that impact. So when I was at Porch, it was pros. At Instacart, we had 600,000 shoppers and obviously, the Home Depot has associates. One of my favorite things about the company culturally is they have this inverted pyramid where instead of having executives at the top, the associates are at the top and the stores themselves are headquarters and then the traditional HQ is support.

(52:35):
And so it's so customer-centric and when I think about amazing execution and creating these durable long-term institutions and how culture and ideology and leadership is formed, I think about that and I think about at the end of the day, AI is going to have an impact on every single person and every single job. And it's amazing to just spend time with people outside of our bubble and really try and learn what their real pain and problems and how they think about AI and how they think about technology and what we need to do.

Lenny Rachitsky (53:09):
Okay, two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you find yourself coming back to? Sharing with friends or family?

Asha Sharma (53:18):
I used to use the minimize regret framework and it's great, and I've used that for a long time. I think that probably once I got into my adult years and started to have a family and things like that, my just worldview changed a little bit and it was all about maximizing option value and it just gave the things that I naturally cared about like family and health and trust and relationships.

(53:51):
It was just a new level of value associated with those because all of a sudden, learning rest on the weekend can compound in the future or having good health can compound in the future. You don't have to trade that off of working extra hours or the importance of family and all of those things. And so I think that my worldview is when I'm 70, it's not about what do I look back on in my life and count the number of regrets, it's really about looking forward in the number of adventures I will still have because I have accumulated this wealth of skills and trust and people and family and impact and things like that.

Lenny Rachitsky (54:31):
Speaking of skills, the internet tells me that you're a second degree black belt in Taekwondo. Why? Oh gosh. Is this true? And then I have a question about it.

Asha Sharma (54:44):
This is true.

Lenny Rachitsky (54:45):
Okay. That's incredible. Why is this embarrassing? That's an incredible thing.

Asha Sharma (54:52):
I am generally embarrassed anytime anything is discussed about me.

Lenny Rachitsky (54:56):
Okay, great. No problem. What's something that you learned from Taekwondo that has helped you with life or work?

Asha Sharma (55:03):
Taekwondo is more mental than it is physical. And so I think that's the same with all of our jobs and making product. I think it's like mental clarity, it's courage. It's the ambition to see things through and be unwavering. And so I think that's literally what it taught me outside of meditating, which probably took me the entire time to actually learn to meditate and clear my head. But yeah, I think it's awesome. I think everybody imagines flying psychics or running up a wall and you can do those things too, but the real value is the mental pursuit of it all.

Lenny Rachitsky (55:47):
And you can do those things too. Wow. Okay. I'm good. I got to get into this. Asha, this was awesome. Is there, oh, actually two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to maybe follow up on anything, if you want people to reach out and how can listeners be useful to you?

Asha Sharma (56:02):
You can hit me up on LinkedIn or email or text. I think all of those are traceable. Look, how can you be helpful to me? I think we're all early in this journey and great platforms that are built on great use cases and built on great customers, and so if you have feedback, you have ideas, you have things want AI to be able to do to help you achieve more, I'd love to hear it. I think the thing about all of these changes is that all of these new products and use cases will be developed everywhere, and so I'm always just thinking about how can we be the platform to support that.

Lenny Rachitsky (56:40):
Amazing. Asha, thank you so much for being here.

Asha Sharma (56:42):
Thanks for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (56:44):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Ben Horowitz (00:00:00):
The worst thing that you do as a leader is you hesitate on the next decision. The thing that causes you to hesitate is both decisions are horrible. Probably one of my bigger ones on that was we went public with $2 million in trailing 12 months revenue at 18 months old. That's obviously a bad idea. But the truth of it was the alternative was going bankrupt, and that's a worse idea.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:23):
It's a very difficult and painful to be a CEO, to be a founder. In spite of that. So many people want to start companies.

Ben Horowitz (00:00:29):
The psychological muscle you have to build to be a great leader is to be able to click in the abyss and go, "Okay, that way's slightly better. We're going to go that way. If everybody agrees with the decision, then you didn't add any value because they would've done that without you." So the only value you ever add is when you make a decision that most people don't like.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:47):
You are famous for writing one of the most popular pieces of literature for product managers.

Ben Horowitz (00:00:52):
What I was trying to get out in Good Product Manager, Bad Product Manager, was the job is fundamentally a leadership job. And it's a tricky leadership job because nobody is actually reporting to you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:06):
There's always this kind of sense that the PM is not the mini CEO. How dare you call yourself that? I actually think that's exactly what the PM is.

Ben Horowitz (00:01:12):
It doesn't matter if you write a good, spec or you have a good interview or you do this or do that. What matters is that the product works.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:21):
Today my guest is Ben Horowitz. Ben is the Z in A16Z, the world's largest venture capital firm with over 46 billion in committed capital. They're investors in OpenAI, Cursor, Andrel, Databricks, Figma, basically every generational tech company. He's also the author of two New York Times bestselling books, the Hard Thing About Hard Things and What You Do is Who you are.

(00:01:43):
Ben is endlessly fascinating. He started a rap group when he was younger. He started his career as a product manager and wrote the now famous Good Product Manager, Bad Product Manager piece. In our wide-ranging conversation, we cover a ton of ground and Ben shares stories and insights that he's never shared anywhere else. A huge thank you to Shaka Senghor, Ali Goetze, and Adam Newman for suggesting topics for this conversation. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It helps tremendously. And if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of 15 incredible products, including a year free of Lovable, Replit, Bolt, n8n, Linear, Superhuman, DScript, WhisperFlow, Gamma, Perplexity, Warp, Granola, Magic Patterns, RateCast, ChatPRD, and Mabin. Check it out at lennysnewsletter.com and click Product Pass. With that, I bring you Ben Horowitz.

(00:02:38):
Today's episode is brought to you by DX, the developer intelligence platform designed by leading researchers. To thrive in the AI era, organizations meet to adapt quickly. But many organization leaders struggle to answer pressing questions like which tools are working? How are they being used? What's actually driving value? DX provides the data and insights leaders need to navigate this shift. With DX. Companies like Dropbox, Booking.com, Adyen, and Intercom get a deep understanding of how AI is providing value to their developers and what impact AI is having on engineering productivity.

(00:03:13):
To learn more, visit DX's website at getdx.com/Lenny. That's getdx.com/Lenny.

(00:03:22):
This episode is brought to you by Basecamp. Basecamp is the famously straightforward project management system from 37 Signals. Most project management systems are either inadequate or frustratingly complex, but Basecamp is refreshingly clear. It's simple to get started, easy to organize, and Basecamp's visual tools help you see exactly what everyone is working on and how all work is progressing. Keep all your files and conversations about projects directly connected to the projects themselves, so that you always know where stuff is and you're not constantly switching contexts.

(00:03:55):
Running a business is hard. Managing your project should be easy. I've been a long-time fan of what 37 Signals has been up to, and I'm really excited to be sharing this with you. Sign up for a free account at basecamp.com/lenny. Get somewhere with Basecamp.

(00:04:13):
Ben, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Ben Horowitz (00:04:17):
All right, thank you Lenny. Excited to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:19):
I'm even more excited to have you here.

(00:04:21):
I want to start with a question that a close friend of yours suggested I ask you, Shaka Senghor. So Shaka, he's, we could do an hour just on how interesting this guy and the things he's done.

Ben Horowitz (00:04:32):
Three hours on Joe Rogan that day. He is very-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:35):
So we're not going to do that. Just to give a glimpse, he was in prison for 19 years. He was in solitary for seven years. He led a huge prison gang. You wrote about him in your book as a great exemplar of great culture in the prison gang that he ran. So interesting. But something that he learned from you that he told me I need to ask you about is about success and how to be successful and how it's not what people think. And he said that you learned this lesson from a pilot. What is that story? What is that lesson?

Ben Horowitz (00:05:08):
I mean, I would say it's a long life lesson. But the pilot story is I actually, I ask people silly questions sometimes when they meet them. And so I met this gentleman who was a pilot and it was right around the time JFK Jr. crashed his airplane and ultimately died. And I asked him, I was like, "What happened?" Because there's always the story in the press, and I know this from them writing about me or anything, is it's always what's the best narrative not what's true. So you can never actually find out what happened, you just find the best story version of what happened.

(00:05:53):
And the story in the press was all about, "Oh, he wasn't trained on instrumentation was flying at night." And I wanted to know is that right? And the pilot said, "Well," he said, "really, it's like all plane crashes are a series of bad decisions. And none of the decisions by themselves is that bad, but when you add them up, it's bad."

(00:06:14):
So the first decision was he needed to get wherever he was going and that was the priority. And in flying, that can't ever be the priority because there are conditions, there are things that happen. And then the second one was, "Well, his timing of when the sun would go down was wrong." So he thought he'd be flying in sunlight and he wasn't. And then once he got up there, it was when the plane was going down making it go up was a bad decision because he was upside down. And so it was like, I can't remember all the things, but this guy had 17 bad decisions in a row. And the big thing for me that I felt was really true is it's one decision leads to another. And so if you can break psychologically, you can take the sunk cost, then that gets you out of a lot of bad paths. And then a little good decision may be difficult, but you have to believe it's going to lead to the next one. And a lot of success is about that. It's a small thing, a small thing that's hard to do that doesn't seem to have a high impact, but it leads to the next small hard to do thing and then eventually you get an outcome, so that was kind of the concept.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:46):
So the lesson there is just success is just a bunch of little things. It's not this, "Cool, I got here in a big thing."

Ben Horowitz (00:07:52):
If somebody were to write a story about me, they would be like, "Then Ben this really smart thing and blah, blah, blah, happy ending." But it really wasn't like that and I don't think it's like that for you or anybody. And I spent a lot of time with Shaka on how, because it's always your own psychology that gets you. And one of the most insightful things he said to me is, because most people who are in solitary for seven years, that's it. You're insane. You're never coming back from that. It's just an impossible thing. But if you study his story, he actually really was massively self-improved coming out of solitary, and he wouldn't recommend that for anybody, just to be clear. It wasn't solitary. But what it was was he changed, in solitary he was able to change a big set of beliefs that he had about himself that got him out of that.

(00:08:50):
And the thing that his conclusion from it, which I thought was really interesting, he's like, "Look, was in prison for 19 years. I was in solitary for seven. I come out, I can't rent an apartment, I can't vote, I can't get a gun, I can't do, no rights. None of that was anything compared to what I did to myself."

(00:09:08):
And I think that's very true for CEOs in general and people in general is all the things that you perceive that are happening to you that are bad, be it the systems against you or somebody undercuts you or racism or sexism or this or that or the other is very small compared to ... It means a lot if you believe it. If you believe what people say about you, if you believe what they did to you, then that destroys you. But if you go, "That's not me," you can overcome almost anything. And he's got a new book out on that anyway that I think is very good because that's the, I'd say more than anything, that's the key to success.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:52):
If you look at all the writing you've done, it's essentially about the struggle and pain and suffering of being a CEO, your first [inaudible 00:09:59] to Hard Thing About Hard Things. There's a lot of talk these days about just how important struggle is and how valuable it is to go through struggle. Jensen's big on this. He talks a lot about just you have to go through pain and suffering to be a great leader.

Ben Horowitz (00:10:12):
You don't really have a choice. That's true.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:15):
There's something that I saw you share that I love, which is running towards fear versus running away from fear. Something that you tell all your leaders to work on. Easy to hear, hard to do. We don't like doing things that are scary, running towards things that are scary. Why is this so important? Why is this something people need to learn to do?

Ben Horowitz (00:10:33):
Well, so the biggest mistake that you make, the worst thing that you do as a leader, there's things in your control and there's things out of your control and hesitation, that's generally the most destructive. And I go through all the ways that it's destructive, but it's extremely bad. And the thing that causes you to hesitate is both decisions are horrible. It's that business school where you're going through a case study, "And if you had done that, then the company would have gone this way. But if you had done that, it's a great success." That's not actually what happens to you as CEO.

(00:11:16):
What happens to as CEO, it's like, "Okay, if we rearchitect, this product, the architecture is not actually get us to where we need to go. I kind of know that. But if we rearchitect it, we're going to probably miss all the features, miss the quarter, have trouble raising money, shudder, et cetera. So that's really bad. And then not rearchitecting is really bad, and so I'm just going to try to and avoid this subject because I don't even want to deal with either of those." And that's the worst thing, because if action is the better choice and that's good. And then if you don't make an explicit decision, then the whole company's going to get nervous because they know that the architecture is whack and you got to fix it.

(00:12:07):
And probably one of my bigger ones on that was we went public with $2 million in trailing 12 months revenue at 18 months old. That's obviously a bad idea. I mean, there's no question that wasn't a bad idea. But the truth of it was the alternative because of where the private markets were was going bankrupt. And that's a worse idea.

(00:12:34):
And if you look at that time, March of 2001 when we went public, you just look at the number of CEOs that hesitated on that and didn't do it and went bankrupt. It's a lot. And so that getting good at making a decision that everybody's going to go, "Wow, that was insane, Ben." The Wall Street Journal wrote a whole long story about how stupid I was. And then Businessweek wrote a story called the IPO From Hell. That was the name of our idea, the IPO from hell, which was accurate in a sense.

(00:13:13):
So that's really bad, but it wasn't as bad, and this is why it's so scary you make that decision that's going to happen. I knew those stories would get written, there was no question. And yeah, that's the kind of muscle. So if you think about the psychological muscle you have to build to be a great leader is to be able to look in the abyss and go, "Okay, that way slightly better. We're going to go that way. And it's very hard to do." I would say it's a thing people struggle with. And it began something, should I fire the head of sales? So I don't want to have that conversation. And then I'll have to replace them. And then there's going to be a bad PR story. And you can kind of quickly calculate all the bad stuff that's going to happen if you do it. But if you don't do it, that's probably going to be much worse and that's why you have to run towards the pain in darkness.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:13):
What is the advice you share with founders? Because as you said, it's very hard to do this, just what helps them actually get better at this? Is it just Ben being by their side telling them this is how it is? Is there anything else you can share?

Ben Horowitz (00:14:23):
No, no. I would say this is one where I can't really coach you to be good at this. I can point it out so that you recognize that you were slow or whatever. But it's kind of like I always liken when I talk to them, it's like football. You can have a really fast great athlete, but if they don't trust their eyes, if they don't run to the ball when they see it, if they think, "Oh, maybe that was a fake," then they're that step slower and then they'll never be as good. And CEOs are like that. If you don't trust what you see and you don't run at it, then you're just not going to be good. And it's hard to get CEOs not to hesitate. But look, the thing that does help is they look at it and I look at it and I confirm, "No, that is as it appears."

(00:15:23):
And sometimes they're afraid of the conversation. So that one I can help with. So A CEO might be afraid, like they want to do something but they don't know how to say it. They don't know how to have the conversation with the employee so I can walk them through that. I had an instance where the CEO said, "Hey, I need your help, Ben. My CTO, he's an asshole." And I was like, "Okay, great." I said, "But you're not going to fire him because I know he's a good CTO, or are you asking me should you fire him?" He said, "No, no, I don't want to fire him." And I was like, "So you're asking me what to do? You don't know how have that conversation with him about being an without him quitting. That's what you're saying?" And he goes, "Yeah, that's the problem."

(00:16:09):
And so I go, "Well, why is he an asshole?" And he says, "Well, he's an asshole because the other day he made a very junior young woman in our finance organization cry." And I was like, "Yeah, I got you." I said, "Look, this is what I would say to him. I'd say I just sit them down and I would say, 'Look, you're a really good director of engineering because you do a great job at managing the team, get the products out, all that. But you're not really a CTO because to be a CTO, you have to be effective with other parts of the organization. You can't just be effective only with engineering. And making somebody cry, she's never going to do anything you want. You lost all effectiveness with all of finance by doing that. And so if you want to get good at that, I'll help you. I'll work with you on it, but if you don't, I'm going to have to hire a CTO at some point because obviously I need that.'" And then he was like, "Oh, okay, I can have that conversation. I can't have the conversation that, 'Hey, you're an asshole,' because I don't want them to quit, but I can have the conversation that's more specific." And a lot of getting people not to hesitate is just getting them over that.

(00:17:20):
And so often, and I would say early in a CEO's career, a lot of it is just not knowing how to have the conversation.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:29):
There's also I imagine an element of I just want to be liked. I don't want people to hate me. You have this great line that you want to be liked and respected in the long run, not the short run.

Ben Horowitz (00:17:37):
Yeah, that's tricky. By the way, I have to deal with this in the firm too, and people want to be entrepreneur friendly. I'm like, "No, it's not friendly. Respectful. But you've got to be able to tell them the truth in a way that you probably don't tell most of your friends the truth." Because your friend, look anthropologically, we want people to like us. It's just so they don't throw us to the lion or whatever. That's just kind of a thing. So you say tell people what they want to hear, but in dealing at a company level in a context of you're on the board of somebody's company, you've got to be able to tell them what they don't want to hear. That's the most important thing you're going to say.

(00:18:22):
And yes, they're not going to like it when you say it, there's no question. But over time it could save the company. And all the most important things I've said are things that I've said to CEOs that they did not want to hear. And that's what the leadership is about. If everybody agrees with the decision, then you didn't add any value because they would've done that without you. So the only value you ever add is when you make a decision that most people don't like and that's where leadership comes in because you know that's where it's got to get to. And that's the thing that takes practice.

(00:19:05):
I think when Jensen talks about luck, you've got to get to near death to get yourself to do that. That's true. It's hard to build that if everything's going great. And I would say the CEOs who had an easy run of it for their, let's say, they just launched a product that's an instant hit, it's very hard for them to develop that muscle compared to the ones that built a company like Jensen where he gutted it out for multiple decades before they had big success.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:36):
Clearly, it's very difficult and painful to be a CEO, to be a founder. In spite of that so many people want to start companies. So many people dream of having their own company. Who is not right to start a company? What advice do you share with folks that are thinking about starting a company that may not understand just what they're about to get into?

Ben Horowitz (00:19:57):
Yeah, so it's funny. So there's a couple of things. John Reed, who was the CEO of Citigroup when I started as CEO, said to me something I never forget. He said, "Ben, the only reason to start a company is because you have an irrational desire to do so, because it's not worth the money." And I was like, "Wow, he doesn't even quantify how much money and this guy's running Citigroup." So he is a very numbers, banking guy and he didn't quantify it. And I remember when we sold LoudCloud for $1.6 billion, I remember thinking, "Wow, that wasn't worth the money whatsoever."

(00:20:37):
So I think if you're doing it for the money, that's a very bad reason and it will be extremely difficult to get you an outcome. You really have to have an irrational desire to do something larger than yourself to improve the world in some way that somehow that is your purpose. And if you don't feel that, then you'll never get through it. It's just too many bad things happen along the way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:08):
So then how do you think of founders that are looking around for ideas that brainstorm, that look for market opportunities versus come from, "I have this a mission, I've got to do this thing in the world."

Ben Horowitz (00:21:19):
My business partner Mark always talks about that. So if you have a product that forces you to build a company, that is a great case of it, right? Okay, you built something and the world wants it and you need a company to deliver it, you know, already have the right product. And so that's very helpful.

(00:21:37):
I think there are cases of people, I think Hewlett-Packard was built that way, that they're like, "Okay, we've got to build technology," it was that abstract, "We've got built in technology for the world." And then they started with, "Well, what do you need?" They called it the next bench thing. What does the engineer sitting next to me need? The next engineer on the bench? So how they define the first set of products.

(00:22:03):
So it can work the other way, but I think the thing that is in common is it's just a very abstract idea that you have to build something that's going to be important that people are going to like working there, people are going to benefit from the products. You have to have some weird concept other than, "Oh, this is going to be successful and I'm going to make a lot of money." I think way better off taking Zuck's offer at Meta and just doing that. That's a way better deal.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:37):
Along these lines, something else Shaka suggested I ask you about, apparently there's a story where the CEO of Databricks asked you for $200,000 in the early days and you said no. And it's not because you didn't want to invest and it was more about helping them think bigger. What happened there?

Ben Horowitz (00:22:55):
So there were six of them, they were six HD student, well, and Jan Stoicka (phonetic) who was their professor. And Jan was this super genius, but when I met with them, they were like, "We need to raise $200,000." And I knew at the time that what they had was this thing called Spark and the competitor was something called Hadoop. And Hadoop had very well-funded companies already running towards it and Spark was open source, so the clock was ticking.

(00:23:39):
And I think they didn't quite know what they had. And then there's also a thing always, although I wouldn't say Jan has this mentality, but professors in general it's a pretty big win if you start a company and you make $50 million. You're a hero on campus. That's a pretty cool thing to have done. And so I'm always a little nervous about a company that comes out of academia thinking too small anyway.

(00:24:09):
And so I said, "Look, I'm not going to write you a check for $200,000. I'll write you a check for $10 million because this company, you need to build a company. You need to really go for it if you're going to do this, otherwise you guys should stay in school." And they were all graduating right then, so that was kind of that. And Ali actually was VP of engineering at the time, and it was a while before I made him CEO and that was very good luck on my part because I had no idea that they had a guide that good inside the company who could become CEO when I invested. That was just, God smiled on me and gave me that one.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:54):
So speaking of Ali, I actually asked him what to ask you about, and he immediately shared this story. I don't know if you remember this. In your first one-on-one with him, after you-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:00):
I don't know if you remember this. In your first one-on-one with him, after you made him CEO, he was struggling with a bunch of low performers because he was coming in to lead the company and he was trying to turn things around, trying to coach them, trying to level them up. And your advice to him was quote, "You don't make people great. You find people that make you great, that make the company great, that you learned from, not the other way around." And there's something that he called managerial leverage. What is that all about? What's the lesson there?

Ben Horowitz (00:25:27):
Oh yeah, yeah. So understand, he had just become CEO. So I was teaching him, he had been VP of Engineering and CEO is different. And I'll get into why and what I mean by leverage.

(00:25:40):
So I actually wrote a post about this with a little Wang quote where I think the quote was, "The truth is hard to swallow and hard to say too but I graduated from that bullshit, now I hate school." And that was always my feeling about this particular idea was, look, if you're VP of engineering, you can develop people. You can teach them to be better engineers. You can teach them, be better engineering managers. That's very doable.

(00:26:08):
But if you're a CEO, what do you know about being CFO? Like what do you know about being VP, HR? What do you know about any of these jobs except maybe VP of engineering?

(00:26:22):
And so the idea that you're going to take somebody who isn't world-class at marketing and make and you them world class and you don't know anything about marketing, is a dumb idea. It just doesn't work.

(00:26:34):
And then the company can't afford for you to be spending time on that because they need you to make very high quality, fast decisions. They need you to set the direction for the company and they need you to have a world-class team. And so it's a very hard lesson if you've been VP of engineering because if you're a good VP of engineering, you do develop your people.

(00:26:55):
But as a CEO, it's not like you don't do any of it, but it is very, very small compared to it. So I like to make things just very stark. So you get what I'm saying? I don't like to hedge it.

(00:27:08):
And then managerial leverage means it is very simple. It's okay. If I have the ideas about what your department should do next. If I am kind of pushing you to kind of move your organization forward, then that's no leverage. What's leverage is if you're telling me what you should do and how you can push the company forward, that's leverage, then I'm getting more than I'd have if you weren't there otherwise I could just manage a team.

(00:27:39):
And that's the point when you feel like you're not getting leverage. When you got to go say, "Hey, why aren't we doing this? Why aren't we doing that?" That's when you got to make a change. And by the way, he's unbelievable at that, as good as anybody I've seen as a guy who's not callous as a CEO. He really cares about the people who work for him. He really wants him to have great careers and all that, but he does not hesitate. If he's losing leverage, he'll make a move.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:06):
Kind of going back to the origin story of A-Sixteen-Z something you guys were really big on was helping founders stay COs become great COs, not replace them with professional COs.

(00:28:16):
I want to flip this question on you. When does it actually make sense to replace CO? When are people not going to make great COs?

Ben Horowitz (00:28:26):
There's a very consistent thing that happens, which is when somebody doesn't make it and it kind of starts with confidence is the way I would put it.

(00:28:35):
So if you invent a product, you kind of recruit a team so forth, all of a sudden you're CEO, but you don't run a big organization, you don't know how to do that. Most founders are like that. And so, if you don't know what you're doing, you're going to make mistakes and they all make a lot of mistakes. And then when you make those mistakes, they're very expensive. They could cost you to do a down round or they could cost you to lose a company or they could cost you a customer or you scrub the product. They're very high impact and not just on you, but everybody who you talked into joining you. And so that kind of motion can really cause you to lose confidence.

(00:29:20):
And then if you lose confidence, what happens is you hesitate on the next decision. And as we talked about, hesitation is very dangerous because one, it locks up the company, but even worse what happens is if you have senior people working for you, they get very nervous and they feel like they need to jump into that void and make the decision for you. And that's when it gets political, very political, because people are vying for power inside your little screwed up company.

(00:29:57):
And so now you've got a political dysfunctional organization and that's generally where, okay, the founder probably can't run this thing anymore. That's how it happens.

(00:30:11):
So most of what we do as a firm is to try to help people with that confidence problem and there's a whole series of ideas that we have around that, but you kind of have to somehow climb the confidence and the competency curve together. It's very hard to do and particularly if you're an engineer and you're used to getting things right or if you've been a straight A student or something like that, it's very disconcerting. Sometimes it's better to have CEOs who are like C minus students.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:45):
Why is that?

Ben Horowitz (00:30:45):
Yeah, a little facetious. Well, it's just good to be used to failing. So I think I wrote this, but the median on the CEO kind of test is like 18. It's not like 90. And so you got to be comfortable getting a lot of D minuses because the D minus is fine, as long as you don't get the F, as long as you don't run out of cash, as long as you don't lose all thing. Okay, you got through it, keep going. And match, that's a lot of the thing that we try to do CEOs.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:20):
Yeah, it comes back to your core, I don't know, message through your first book is just how much you'll fail and how much you'll struggle and how much paid you'll go through as CO.

Ben Horowitz (00:31:29):
Yeah, yeah, and I mean a lot of why I wrote that book was just to nanalyze it. I think what happens is, particularly when I wrote it, and I think it's come back and been true now, is the way the narrative gets written on all these successes is like, "Ph, they came up with a genius idea and then they built this company and they hired all these smart people and it was all great." But that's not at all how it happens and I've spent enough time with everybody from Mark Zuckerberg to Sam Altman and so forth, that they all go through that same thing that who has your struggling company go through? You screw a lot of things up and they have massive consequences, but you have to maintain your confidence.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:19):
Actually, I was at a storytelling event last night and I was chatting with someone that I ran into there and told her I was chatting with you today, and she said how meaningful your first book was to her as a founder. Exactly as you said, normalizing that it's very hard and painful and this is just the way it is.

Ben Horowitz (00:32:36):
And the feeling, look, if you think about organizational design or goals and objectives or OKRs or whatever management technique, you need a basic eighth grade education to do any of that stuff. It is not that complicated. The difficult part is the feeling that you have when you have to do it is very, the hard thing of matter a reorg is you're redistributing power, so you're going to have people really fricking mad at you because somebody's losing power if you do it correctly. And that person may be a really good employee. Dealing with that is the hard thing. Knowing how the organization should work to make communication better, it's not that complex.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:18):
Yeah, I think about I was at Airbnb for a long time and just thinking of Brian, who I don't know even know if he had a job before Airbnb now.

Ben Horowitz (00:33:25):
Oh yeah. I spent a lot of time with Brian and after COVID, it all kind of clicked for him and then he did that he and that good talk on founder mode and so forth. But the reason that was so articulate is he had screwed every one of those things up and he hired LT and all this stuff, and these are very senior people and he wanted to defer to them, but you can't defer as the CEO because you know what Airbnb should be doing. He may know what finance should do, but you know what Airbnb should do and this kind of thing. And then it gets really wild when you can't defer decisions as the CEO. You got to understand what people are saying and go, "Now we're going to do this."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:13):
And this again comes back to the point of you have to go through the struggle and pain and failure to learn those lessons.

Ben Horowitz (00:34:18):
Yeah, no. They're really hard to learn without doing and often without paying the consequence. Even I, like I make mistakes. I was having conversation with Ali the other day and I was like, he's like, "How's it going Ben?" And I was like, "Well, I'm finally dealing with something that I had put off for a very long time." And he said, "Why'd you put it off?" I said, "Because things were going too good. I didn't have to deal with it. "And he was like, "Yeah." He said, "I know that." I'd say Ali is one of the, if not the kind of best private company CEO out there, and he's making a mistake and I'm making a mistakes. So, it is just tough.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:01):
You said that one of maybe the main reason founders fail the CEOs is they lose confidence, and you had some ideas that you guys have to help founders work through that. Are there a couple you can share how you help?

Ben Horowitz (00:35:12):
Yeah. So we do a lot of things on that. So the kind of design of the firm is about confidence. So the first thing is, well, what would give you? Well if you can get stuff done. So what if I could give you a network that's as good as Bob Iger's network, day one, the day you stepped into the job.

(00:35:31):
And so we have 600 people at the firm and why is that? Well, most of them are building that network for you, so you can call any CEO or anybody in Washington or any executive or that kind of thing and get them on the phone and they'll talk to you and you can kind of deal with that thing. And then that just makes you feel like a CEO.

(00:35:55):
And then we have a lot of people in the firm like myself, who you can talk to on a CEO to CEO basis, as opposed to an investor to CEO, and just kind of feel that. Early in the firm days, we used to do this thing. I think I'm going to bring back in some form this thing called the CEO barbecue. And it was like a lot of people have these events where they bring in speakers and this and that and the other. And I always felt like those were one, they were too many days. And then sometimes what they said wasn't really applicable and that kind of thing.

(00:36:32):
So I said, "Why don't we just have a barbecue?" I would barbecue. We get everybody in my backyard because was 500 people at the peak, which is why at the stuff I couldn't cook that much, that kind of stuff. And then we'd have Larry Page and Mark Zuckerberg and Kanye West, and so you're a CEO in there with portfolio. You're like, "Wow, I must be important. I'm here with all these guys" and we're just hanging out having a drink, eating barbecue.

(00:37:04):
And so then when I go back to my company, I feel like I am somebody. And okay, I might not be perfect at all this, but I am really a CEO. I was at the CEO barbecue, for crying out loud and that kind of thing. But the whole idea was always like, "Okay, do you feel like you can do it?" Because that's half the battle?

(00:37:29):
And look, having been in and every CEO has been in a position where they feel like, "Well, maybe I shouldn't be the one running this thing. Maybe it's just too big for me." And that's a bad, you don't want to go there. And because as we've said, founders can get to the next product and that's something that almost no professional CEO is able to do. There've been rare cases, but very rare.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:57):
So clearly you've worked with a lot of companies, a lot of founders. Let me kind of zoom out a little bit and ask you this question.

(00:38:03):
What's the most counterintuitive lesson you've learned about building companies that goes against common startup wisdom?

Ben Horowitz (00:38:09):
Well, the common startup wisdom keeps changing. One of the early ones that was wrong, and Brian articulated it, and then now I think a little bit of what people have gone to is also wrong.

(00:38:25):
So the first idea that was wrong was like, okay, build a team of senior executives as soon as you get product market fit as fast as possible and they can scale the thing. And I think that you got to build that team slowly and deliberately, kind of pace to your ability to integrate and then manage them. Because if you bring in a bunch of senior people and you don't know really how they match to your company or how that function works or so forth, then you're going to start deferring. And once you start deferring, it's going to get out of control very fast because they're going to build empires, they're going to get political, they're going to do all that kind of thing.

(00:39:08):
So that was bad advice. You kind of have to do it in a measured way. I think that founder mode, I think a lot of people have taken to never hire anybody with experience. And that's also bad advice in that, look, somebody who knows how to do something can really accelerate your thing. So very early on, one of the founders, great founder Arsalan at Databricks was running sales. And I'm like, "Oli, you're going to have to hire somebody who knows sales because Arsalan's, PhD in computer science. I like that, but that's probably not where you're going to have to start if you're going to catch these guys before they take Spark and use it against you."

(00:39:53):
And I sat down with Arsalan and I explained why. I said, "Look, a lot of what sales, there's a lot of knowledge in how to build a worldwide sales organization; maybe knowledge of customers, territories, territory splitting, rep profiles. There's just a litany of stuff that you really can only learn by doing trial and error and you don't know anything. And so you're phenomenal. Let's get you. And still, he's a very senior executive in the company now, but we need somebody who knows that. And the idea that there are companies that go, " Okay, we're just not going to hire that in founder mode." That's also a mistake. So there's a lot of, it's more subtle than you think, and it's more complex than you think. And so you kind of have to get all the way to the truth. And these little snippets of advice that he sees good, because they watch some fucking podcasts, are all fucking stupid.

(00:40:51):
There's a lot of depth to these things. You have to know the answer to the next question, the next question and the next question, and it does drive me crazy. One of the funnier things that happened along these lines, just to show you how little. You know as an investor, about what it means to be CEO.

(00:41:11):
We were at a board dinner. One of the CEOs says to me, he goes, or one of our CEO says, "Hey Ben, that thing you told me a while ago about don't be CEO at home." He said, "I was doing that and I stopped and it really helped me."

(00:41:28):
And then the other kind of VC said, " Yeah. You got to unplug some time." And I said, I was like, "What the fuck are you talking about? He's CEO. He's not unplugging. He's getting shit all the fucking time. He's got to deal with that. That was not what I meant. I was like, you can't go home and boss your family around. That's what I meant."

(00:41:48):
You hear something from somebody who, but if you haven't done it, you don't even know what that means. And so then you then trying to transfer the advice to the next guy, that's not going to work. So anyway, but he was very innocent. I just don't want to kind of speak bad of him, but that's how it sounds, right? But that's not what it is.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:09):
That's an amazing story. So the advice partly here, is just don't believe everything you see on Twitter and little sound bites of advice.

Ben Horowitz (00:42:18):
I think actual CEOs know it. And that's kind of how people in my profession going to get a bad wrap. Because giving advice, that's not something that you know but something that you heard, is very dangerous, I think.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:31):
So speaking of advice that you've shared that might be out of date now, you are famous for writing one of the most popular pieces of literature for product managers. There's a lot of PMs that listen to this podcast called Good Product Manager, Bad Product Manager. And if you actually go to that post today at the top you say, "This document was written 15 years ago and it's probably not relevant today for PMs. I present this nearly as an example of a useful training document."

(00:42:56):
Still people link to it. I actually just link to it as just like this is something every PM needs to read. What is it that you think people should maybe not take away from it, and what do you think people still should take away from that piece?

Ben Horowitz (00:43:07):
Yeah, so the reason I wrote it when I wrote it was that I had a lot of product managers. And one thing about product management is it's a job that's completely different at every company and there is no training for it. So everybody kind of figures it out as they go. And depending on what's being emphasized, they'll get wrapped around the axle on if it's an enterprise company, well pitching to customers or I need to be really good with the press, or I need to be really good at writing the product requirements document or that kind of thing.

(00:43:49):
And those are all these tasks, but none of those were the job and what I was trying to get out in Good Product Manager, Bad Product Manager was, the job is fundamentally a leadership job and it's a tricky leadership job because nobody is actually reporting to you.

(00:44:14):
So it's like this influence, how do I get people to do what I want even though I'm not paying them. I can't fire them. I can't promote them, and so forth, which is kind of the essence of real leadership because if you start to rely on promotion and firing and so forth for authority, then you're never going to be good at being CEO or anything.

(00:44:38):
So I wanted them to get into the mindset of, "Okay, your actual job is to get a product into market that customers love that's better than anything that anybody else in the world puts in market. That's your job." And so to accomplish that job, you need engineering to understand you with clarity. You need to understand engineering with clarity. You need to have a really good view of the market and the competitors and the technology and so forth and you need to put that all together and deliver the thing.

(00:45:17):
And all the other things are tasks that you may or may not need to do. I don't know if you need to do them, but the thing is, you have to be the leader. You've got to get the thing done. And so what I think it's still good on is that the mindset, be the leader, I think the details of any kind of thing that was kind of task specific was really for my group a Netscape in 1996, whenever the hell I wrote it.

(00:45:56):
So as a kind of document I wrote out of frustration. But I am glad that the people still like it, and I think leadership in general is undervalued, underestimated. It's the most powerful thing. And most of the great companies, Jensen is a great example. What a phenomenal leader he is not just of Nvidia, but of the whole industry. And he doesn't have authority over the industry, but he drives it forth and that's why the Good Product Manager, Bad Product Manager is so important because that thing, if you learn how to do it, that's the thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:39):
I didn't realize you wrote that initially as just an internal document and then you made a-

Ben Horowitz (00:46:44):
It was kind of before blogging took off, so it is just an internal thing and I published it later. I was just getting so mad. And by the way, my product management team at the time was very good, very talented people. They just were not getting that concept. So like David Wyden said, Coastal Ventures, Raghu Raghuram, who wanted on to be CEO of VMware, the team was like that team, but they were driving me crazy. And so I was like, "I can't yell at people anymore. I have to explain to myself." And so it's a good thing if you find yourself yelling at people, you probably haven't explained what you want, was the other big takeaway from that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:30):
Did you ever think that piece would be so long-lasting? And so, I don't know, popular?

Ben Horowitz (00:47:34):
I didn't even know. I thought it was kind of like aggressive when I wrote it. You could tell I was mad. I called a Good Product Manager, Bad Product Manager. It's like bad dog, bad, bad, bad product manager. That was kind of the emotion I had. So, it is kind shocking some of the things that you write.

(00:47:54):
I would say that that's and kind of creative, and you probably know this. The idea is that you have the things that you write in five minutes end up being much better than things you write in five weeks. And I find in talking to musicians or writers or everybody has that same experience. The thing that you've already synthesized so much that you just have to write it out, that's the best stuff.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:21):
There's something that you mentioned there in your answer about the PM being the leader. There's always this kind of sense that the PM is not the mini CEO. How dare you call yourself that. I actually think that's exactly what the PM is. They're basically the closest to the CO. Their kind job is to think like the CEO within the team.

Ben Horowitz (00:48:39):
People get mad because everybody, this is the whole challenge of management in general. People get jealous over stewardship. But from the perspective of the PM, it doesn't matter if you write a good spec or you have a good interview or you do this or do that. What matters is that the product wrench. And you have to get all the way to there and work backwards from that and you can't do that without leadership because it is about, okay, we want to build that. And you're not necessarily the person who comes up with every idea or this or that, or that. You're just the keeper of the vision.

(00:49:22):
And that's true for CEOs too. You don't want every idea in a company coming from the CEO. I think it's a misunderstanding of what a CEO is, is why people don't like that. They don't know what a CEO is. But a CEO isn't the one who has every idea it gives, every order does every. That's not the way it works.

(00:49:40):
The way it works is there's somebody who's got to consolidate, get all the good ideas, prioritize them, decide which good ideas we're going to do, and then get everybody on the same page, so that they have very high fidelity understanding of what that is. And so that it is a CEO, kind of function. Now, it doesn't mean I'm better than you, it just means that...

Ben Horowitz (00:50:00):
... kind of function. Now, it doesn't mean like I'm better than you. It just means that that's what I'm doing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:05):
This episode is brought to you by Miro. Every day, new headlines are scaring us about all the ways that AI is coming for our jobs, creating a lot of anxiety and fear. But a recent survey for Miro tells a different story. 76% of people believe that AI can benefit their role, but over 50% of people struggle to know when to use it. Enter Miro's Innovation Workspace, an intelligent platform that brings people and AI together in a shared space to get great work done. Miro has been empowering teams to transform bold ideas into the next big thing for over a decade. Today, they're at the forefront of bringing products to market even faster by unleashing the combined power of AI and human potential.

(00:50:44):
Guests of this podcast often share Miro templates. I use it all the time to brainstorm ideas with my team. Teams especially can work with Miro AI to turn to unstructured data, like sticky notes or screenshots into usable diagrams, product briefs, data tables, and prototypes in minutes. You don't have to be an AI master or to toggle yet another tool. The work you're already doing in Miro's Canvas is the prompt. Help your teams get great work done with Miro. Check it out at miro.com/lenny. That's M-I-R-O.com/lenny.

(00:51:16):
Let's talk about AI. I'm very proud of us. It's been almost an hour. We haven't even mentioned AI. I think that's a record. Okay, so I asked Adam Neumann, WeWork founder, now Flow founder, someone you work closely with now what to ask you about. And he said he has some really interesting insights about how AI is impacting hiring.

Ben Horowitz (00:51:35):
Adam is probably the single most controversial investment that we ever made. We got called everything from stupid to sexist to racist to this and that for literally just funding that. And I think it's going to end up being one of the best investments we ever made. He's doing a phenomenal job there. There's an important principle in that which we do as a firm, which I think is not widely done, but I would love it if people copied it, which is, and it's something I learned somewhat from Shaka, which is you don't judge a person by the worst thing that ever happened to them. We've all had bad things happen to us. We've all made bad decisions. Most of them, they don't make a miniseries about.

(00:52:35):
And so to judge them on that, you want to judge people on what they do well, not what they screwed up, because that's where you see the talent. If you look at what Adam did well, it's truly spectacular. Everybody knows WeWork. Name a more important commercial real estate brand than WeWork. You can't. And so what an accomplishment. And there were so many things that went into that and so many things he did right.

(00:53:10):
And then if you kind of look at really unravel the things that went wrong, most of it was like a combination of inexperience and nobody around him that would tell him the truth. And, yeah, maybe he wasn't good at listening to the truth either at the time, but to throw away a guy on that, which is by the way, the world was so mad at us for not throwing him away, for believing in him, is just that it's a big mistake. And I credit Mark because Mark is the one who called him up originally, and just said, "Hey, Adam, what are you doing?" Because we watched what you did at WeWork and we thought it was pretty impressive.

(00:53:54):
And so I think that that's probably the biggest secret there. Judge Al Davis once said, "Coach players on what they can do." And I think that's very true. Judge people on what they can do, coach people on what they can do, help them take their strengths and use them as opposed to over focus on their weaknesses and just hand wringing about the one fucking thing they don't know how to do. Because look, everybody's uneven.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:31):
What you're describing, essentially, this is the job of an investor, is to find an underappreciated asset and invest or before something people don't see.

Ben Horowitz (00:54:42):
Venture capital is really about investing in people. You have ideas as an investor, but what you really are ultimately betting on is the entrepreneur and the entrepreneur's idea because the initial idea isn't where they end up usually. It changes a lot with everybody we invest in. So you kind of have to make the judgment on the person. And how you do that is really, really important. And one of the things we emphasize inside the firm is, look, we're investing in strength, not lack of weakness. I want to know how good, are they world-class? Do they have a world-class strength? And can that beat anybody? And look, everybody's flawed. And so let's help them deal with the flaws and surround them with people who can handle that and put the right person on the board who can talk to them.

(00:55:43):
You know Mark's on the board, I go to all his board meetings because I'm the one who's good at killing a guy who's that confident when he's like, "Okay, that's not your best idea." That's good role for me. But that's how you deal with that. You don't throw them away and go, "Oh, okay, we don't want to be called names. So we're not going to invest in Adam Neumann after we built WeWork. That's crazy.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:08):
That's also why you guys invested in Cluely, I imagine similar.

Ben Horowitz (00:56:10):
Yeah, yeah, no, that's right. I mean, look, if you look at what those guys did, that was some high level marketing genius too, and that's really something. Plus the product is awesome.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:23):
I'm going to bring us back to AI. Something that a lot of people are talking about right now while we're recording this is this potential huge bubble we're in with AI. Sam Altman said, "We're in a big bubble," which is, that's saying a lot. I'm curious just how you that it-

Ben Horowitz (00:56:36):
What is it saying? First of all, I should qualify this by saying I am an investor and Sam's a CEO. So CEOs have to have much more purpose when they talk. Investors just have to be entertained. So you got to give Sam credit for what is it in his interest to say it? Well, if it's a bubble, then the one thing you should invest in is him and not all these guys chasing after him.

(00:57:09):
I would say that's very smart. And then the other thing that's smart about it is there's nothing that you can say to the press that will make them love you more than saying, "All investors and entrepreneurs chasing this are idiots." They love them. The press are generally haters, and so it's just red meat for the haters, which was also super clever. So I think whether even he believes that or not, that was a super smart thing to say. So I'll just put it there. Whereas what I'm going to say won't be as smart, but it will...

(00:57:45):
I don't really have an ax to grind here. I mean, I could have an ax to grind and say, "Okay, let's get all the other investors out." I'll say, "It's a massive bubble." But what I would say about that is, so the first thing, the one thing about bubbles is anytime everybody thinks it's a bubble, it's not a bubble because in order for it to bubble, you need capitulation. In that you need everybody to believe it's not a bubble, because then the prices really go out of control. But as long as there's people who think it's a bubble, then it's hard for that to happen. And it's funny, I had this debate in The Economist, I think with Steve Blank in like 2011 or '12 when everybody thought it was a tech bubble, if you can imagine that, which it absolutely was not. But because there were 1,400 articles saying that we were in a tech bubble, and I mean where prices were then compared to where they are now.

(00:58:52):
But I knew because everybody was saying it was a bubble, it wasn't a bubble. I knew that. The prices were higher, but the reason the prices were higher was we're getting to a global market. AI prices are higher than prior prices, but if you look at the revenue growth and numbers, we had not seen anything like it. Sam's product worked so amazingly, we'd never seen that before. Not even Google, not anybody. And so that's real.

(00:59:23):
And we have companies that went from zero to 800 million in a year and that kind of thing. I would say there's a basis for the prices going up, first of all. I think the thing that's right about what Sam is saying is the landscape is early, really early. The technology is very immature. As amazingly as it works, there's a long way to go to improve it. So it's very possible when you have that much technological change, that the positions that these companies have achieved with their high revenue isn't sustainable, and that there'll be a competitive change that either lowers prices or a new number one emerges or that kind of thing.

(01:00:18):
Yeah, that's possible. But I wouldn't characterize that as being a financial bubble in that if you go back to the great dot-com bubble that everybody is always waiting for it to happen again, which I was CEO during. The thing that happened there was very different, which is it was the internet and every smart investor knew that the internet was a big deal. How could you not fucking know that the internet was, of course it's a big deal. But if you go back to 1996, at Netscape, we had 90% browser share and we had 50 million users. So there were 55 million people on the internet in total, and half of those were on dial-up.

(01:01:03):
And then to build a product like Evite, the greeting card company, had 300 engineers. That's how hard it was to build this stuff. And so the math didn't work, and the math didn't work on any of those ideas, but the investors kept pouring money in. And then eventually everybody went bankrupt because there was no revenue coming in. And when they figured that out, then nobody would invest in anything. And of course then everybody realized, well, the internet was actually real and Paul Krugman didn't know what he's talking about, and like it was going to be a big thing. And then Facebook and Google and all these things emerged.

(01:01:44):
But the thing that made it a bubble was the unit economics didn't work, the businesses didn't work. These businesses are all working, and they're being priced appropriately for how they're growing. So that's not in effect. The thing that you could say is, "They're not going to keep growing like that," and so forth. And I'm not sure about that. The products, like I said, are working so much better than any technology product that we've ever built has worked. It's just mind-blowing how good this stuff is. And so, I don't know, if I had to bet, I would bet not a bubble. I think there'll be some dislocation. I think always in venture capital, if you've got a run like this, then the great company and the crap company both get funded. But that's just venture capital. That's not a bubble.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:44):
Four founders starting companies these days. When you look into the future of the AI industry, say in five, 10 years, how do you think things will play out slash where do you think the biggest opportunities remain? Where are you guys looking to invest most?

Ben Horowitz (01:02:57):
In infrastructure. I think that there is obviously a real estate power cooling play. I think that's a little outside of hardcore technology investing that we do. But there's another layer which is take a given open source model, who can run it the cheapest with the lowest latency? And that's going to be extremely valuable, whoever has that. And Google has been historically very good at that and so forth, and Sam is really trying to build that now with Stargate. And so I think that's going to be a very important layer of value. I think that on the foundation model side, you have to be very selective as an investor. So in order to compete in foundational model world, our basic rule of thumb is you have to be able to, without much product progress, raise at least $ 2 billion because that's basically what it's going to cost you to train something that gets you competitive enough to make money.

(01:04:08):
And there are just very few founders like that. So Ilya is one of those. Mary's one of those, Fei-Fei is one of those, but that's the kind of class of person you need. And there's whatever. There's certainly less than 10 of those in the world. And so that's kind of an important area, but a small area. And then I think the application layer is going to be very, very interesting. And I think that if you look at Sam, he's making most of his money off ChatGPT, almost all his money off ChatGPT now. And Chat GPT, like it or not, it's got a real moat. It's very hard to knock it off. It's perched.

(01:04:57):
Everybody's taking a shot at it, people, great distribution like Google and Elon and Zuckerberg and everybody. And that thing just keeps going like it is. So I think the applications are both more complex and kind of stickier than people thought they were originally. The thing that people got very wrong is this whole thin wrapper around GPT, that's really wrong. In fact, here's how wrong it is. Back in the '80s, that same phrase was used, but it was thin wrapper around an RDBMS-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:38):
Database.

Ben Horowitz (01:05:39):
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So it meant companies like Salesforce were basically just a thin wrapper. And I think that that's kind of the mistake people made. So we're at this company Cursor, and if you look under the covers in Cursor, they've built 14 different models to really understand how a developer works, a high-end, a real developer. Those models have tons and tons of interactions with how people talk to their friend Cursor about how they should design their programming so forth. And that's real, that's not just a thin layer on a foundation model. And I think there are many, many applications like that. And so I think there's going to be a lot of opportunity at the application layer. There's going to be some opportunity at the foundation model, and of course you can invest in Sam, you can invest in Anthropic and so forth as well.

(01:06:43):
But there will probably be a very small number of companies at that set, and then a almost unlimited number of companies at the application layer. And then as the technology advances, we'll of course see more things we can body to AI. I mean already autonomous cars are working really well now after a long, long, long, long time. Since I think Sebastian won the challenge in 2006 when he drove the self-driving car across the country. And here we are 20 years later and now they're deployed. So that was a long time. Robots I think is a harder problem than self-driving cars. So we'll see how that goes. But, yeah, there's certainly a lot in that world as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:34):
Wow, okay. There's a lot to this answer. No, that was exactly what I was looking for. The Cursor example, it's something that comes up a lot on this podcast, in the application layer specifically. The thought that the way to win in this space and to build a moat is, as you said, "Build your own model slash have proprietary data that you build through people using your product." Thoughts on that?

Ben Horowitz (01:07:58):
Yeah, I mean, I think that ends up just being what's required. So it turns out that the universe is long-tailed, is fat-tailed, and humans are very fat-tailed in terms of human behavior, human conversation and so forth. So to get to the real meaning of it and to get to the kind of essence of the problem, in any domain turns out to be, I think, more complex than we thought. And so the early things and people were running around saying, "Okay, there's going to be one big brain to rule them all on these kinds of things." That's kind of not played out yet.

(01:08:41):
And in fact, if you look underneath the covers, you have LLMs, which have generalized pretty in fascinating ways, but they've kind of also asymptoted in that we have run out of data for the most part. And so if you look at the GPT-5 LLM compared to the GPT-4.1 and how much more it costs to train and so forth, it's definitely not going linear anymore.

(01:09:12):
On the other hand, the reinforcement learning side has been linear, but it doesn't generalize. So if you build a great programming model, it may be an idiot at math. And so that I think is just very different than what people would've said three years ago. And I think that there's not something that's both scaling and generalizing yet, and maybe we'll get there, but that certainly opens the door to something that's more user-friendly, that's more effective in any number of domains than just the basic foundation model infrastructure. Now those models are incredibly important, and I think OpenAI is probably 80% of the revenue in AI are something like that now. It's massive, and so that foundation model is really, really important. And then the basic consumer app is really, really important.

(01:10:12):
That just answers whatever the hell you want to know. Those things are very, very real. But I do think particularly, and then if you get into enterprise stuff and then it's no longer internet data, it's their data that becomes very different. Databricks is having a lot of success there because, okay, well, once you're inside a company, guess what? You care about access control. That's hard with an AI world. It gets trained on some stuff. How does it know who has access to that information and who doesn't, and so forth. You have semantic issues. So if you look at an enterprise, find 10 enterprises, they all have a different definition of what a customer means. You would think customer is a basic thing. Well, is it a department at AT&T? Is it AT&T? Is it a person at AT&T? What the hell is the customer? And it turns out to be very, very meaningful, particularly if you're trying to figure out important things like churn and this and that and third.

(01:11:19):
So that kind of stuff matters. So I would just say the problem space is a lot bigger than you can just attack with a basic foundation model currently. Maybe that will change, and if that changes, then certain prices will have, in retrospect, look way inflated and others will look too low. But that is TBD.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:48):
So a big takeaway from this is that there's still tons of opportunity for founders to start companies building AI products.

Ben Horowitz (01:11:55):
I think so. Everything that we couldn't solve with software we can solve now, almost. So it's a really big world. And it's funny because we're investors in Waymo, and one of the things when you get into what took so long to make Waymo so safe like they are now, it wasn't the things that everybody reported on the podcast. There wasn't sleet and heavy rain, it was people. It was like the human who was driving 75 in the 25 zone. It was very hard for the AI to anticipate because it was rare but important. And the number of rare, important crazy shit that humans do is very high. And I think that that goes for all of AI. So to make things work really well, you have to understand this very kind of fat tail of human behavior.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:52):
Along this AI thread, something that is really important to you, clearly something you talk a lot about is the US being successful in AI, in leading the world in AI. Why is this so important? Why is something you spend a lot of time on?

Ben Horowitz (01:13:06):
It starts with, I think, my view of the US and its role in the world. My personal view is it's very, very, very important. Not for society to be completely fair because it's not going to be completely fair or completely equal because we've never had one that's been completely equal. But it's important that everybody have a chance at life, and particularly both culturally, but also just you can't advance the world if you can't tap into all of your resources. And so if you kind of take away motivation and these kinds of things, you get into trouble. And if you look at the kind of every country today, and this is by the way, so you want the right amount of decentralized power. You don't want it to be completely concentrated, concentrated power makes it very, very difficult for everybody to have a chance. This is the big lesson of communism over the last hundred years is it turned out right. And we still have politicians selling it this way today, it's like, "Oh, it's power to the people."

(01:14:23):
No, no, no. It's power to you because you're removing all power from the private sector and installing it into the government, and then you're putting yourself in charge of the government. And so I become extremely powerful. And this is why it didn't matter if it was Mao or Pol Pot or Ceausescu or Stalin, everybody died because when you give anybody that much power, nobody has a chance. There is no incentive, there's no carrot, there's only stick. And so you use that stick, and that's just the nature. It's a system's problem. It's not a person problem. It's not Stalin was evil, Ceausescu is evil. It was that system is evil. And-

Ben Horowitz (01:15:00):
It was evil. It was like that system is evil. And that's the saying with fascism. Be it Hitler or Mussolini, it doesn't matter. That level of power is evil.

(01:15:11):
And the US does the best job. Systematically, it's the best system. It's got all kinds of issues, it's got problems. People always try to defeat it. But one of the things that if you look at the Declaration of Independence or the Constitution, the language is very important. It's, "We hold these truths to be self-evident."

(01:15:39):
What does that mean? It means it's not my rule, it's not the president's rule, it's God's rule. And so those rules are above the President, and then you work in that context and that distributes the power, because you're under the law, not under the person. We see that now even with Europe, where the leaders are going, "Well, I have a rule. It's you can't say certain things or I'll throw you in jail." And the kind of shield they hide behind as well, we have to keep the kids safe. But if you say something that I don't agree with and the kids hear it, they're not safe. So the kind of transited property of bullshit is going to override.

(01:16:29):
And so it's really important that we have at least one society. And as flawed as we are, as flawed as the US is, it's still the best. And you can see it by the number of new company creations, the number of new ideas that come out of here and so forth. It's really, really important that the US stays important and powerful in the world.

(01:16:51):
We know from the last century, if you look at the last century, who were the countries that had economic power, military power, cultural power? They were the ones that industrialized, and the ones that industrialized first and best. And the ones that did became Communists, like Russia, China. They were slow on industrialization and they fell into this very fucking dangerous system.

(01:17:19):
Looking forward, that's going to happen again, but it's going to be AI. And so it is fundamentally important, not just to America, but to humanity, that America succeed at that. We don't have to be the one winner or this or that, but we do have to be in that tier.

(01:17:41):
And as I go around the world and travel, I can't tell you, everybody ... and then everybody was getting, by the way, very, very worried about us earlier. And they say, "Look, we need you to succeed. Don't destroy the dollar. Don't fall behind in AI. Don't over-regulate it too early. Don't do these things, please, because we need you to win, because we're all counting on that."

(01:18:08):
And I think it's the most important work that we do. It's why we're so involved in policy and so forth. I think this is also going to be very, very true with crypto, which ends up being an incredibly important networking technology that complements AI. That work is, I would say, beyond for the money. Although we will end up making a lot of money with the right policies, so I don't want to seem totally philanthropic on this, but it's more important than that. It's certainly more important than us succeeding or anything like that, that the country succeed.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:53):
Speaking of philanthropic and other passions of yours, something that I don't think most people know about you, and I think will give them another insight into how interesting you are, you run an organization called Paid in Full, which is incredibly cool. Talk about what that's about, why this is so important to you.

Ben Horowitz (01:19:14):
Our ethos as a firm is kind of what I'd say is something from nothing. This is the greatness of entrepreneurship. You start with nothing and then you make something really important. That is also how Hip-hop started, where you have a bunch of kids who didn't even have instruments, and they created something out of nothing. And the people in that world always talk about that.

(01:19:43):
And one of the really unfortunate things that happens is, the people who invent the art form, and certainly in the case of Hip-hop, don't get anywhere near the kind of proportional benefit of their invention. And a lot of the guys, people have forgotten about, or are struggling to make ends meet, and so forth.

(01:20:06):
So what we created was this thing called the Paid in Full Foundation, named after the Rakim, Eric B. song, which I did call Rakim and ask him for permission to use the name, so we didn't just take it. What we do is, we give essentially pensions to the old rappers, that enable them to kind of continue their work.

(01:20:28):
And then we have a big event go to paidinfullfoundation.org for tickets, which is amazing, where they get the award and they're celebrated by all their peers and so forth. And it's really phenomenal. Some of the awardees have been Rakim, Scarface from the Geto Boys, Roxanne Shante, Grandmaster Caz, Kool Moe Dee.

(01:20:56):
This year we're honoring George Clinton for being sampled, Kool G Rap and Grand Puba, and also Jalil from Whodini. I can't even describe how high impact it is on these guys. I think Rakim was touring close to 200 nights a year, and he got his award, and came out with his first album in 15 years and is doing amazingly well. All of a sudden everybody's going, "Oh yeah, that's the greatest rapper of all time." They're finally going back and remembering all the things he did. Roxanne Shante, nobody had mentioned her in years and years and years. I think six months after we gave her the award, the Grammys gave her a lifetime achievement award, which is amazing. It's super high impact. It's a great thing. As a Hip-hop fan, I say dream come true. It's my only guilt.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:51):
What's the origin story of you and Hip-hop? I imagine many people look at you and wouldn't imagine these records behind you, Nas gifted you. You are so deep into the community, just how did this all begin?

Ben Horowitz (01:22:03):
Well, I actually wrote a blog post on it called The Legend of the Blind MC, which I think would be, if you're really interested, it's worth reading. But it is kind of a story of me becoming a rapper, and how that occurred, and how it went, and so forth.

(01:22:23):
I always say the very short story is, I was in New York at the birth of Hip-hop and when it really became big, '84 through '88. It's just the most exciting thing to see a new art form pop out and the creativity and everything.

(01:22:43):
Once music becomes mainstream, I would say it's very shaped by business. And in the early days, everybody's just coming out with whatever idea they have and so forth. The early days of rock and roll were like that. The early days of jazz were like that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:02):
I see now even more why you guys brought on Erik Torenberg. Beyond his many talents, he's also really big into rap himself.

Ben Horowitz (01:23:10):
Yeah, that's a good reminder. I need to make sure he gets to Paid in Full.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:17):
Ben, this was incredible. Is there anything else that you want to leave listeners with or share before we get to our very exciting, quick lightning round?

Ben Horowitz (01:23:28):
Yeah, I would just say, if you're a CEO listening to this, then know that how you feel about yourself is going to end up meaning as much as anything, and take your time on that. Self-evaluation is ... one of my favorite quotes is that when my old manager saw me, as select players know, "From this day on, no credit will be given for predicting rain, only credit for building an ark."

(01:24:05):
And I think that's more true for CEOs than anybody. You have to build the ark. It doesn't matter if you predict you're going to fail, you've still failed. It gets you nothing. So what you have to do is figure your way out of it and spend all your time on that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:23):
Well, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got five questions for you. Are you ready?

Ben Horowitz (01:24:27):
Yes, sir.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:29):
First question, what are two or three books that you find yourself recommending most to other people, not including your own books?

Ben Horowitz (01:24:35):
So two that I learned a lot from, one is The Weirdest People in the World, which it's a kind of big history book, but through an anthropological kind of cultural lens. It's really fascinating. It explains an awful lot about how society works and how little changes in the rules completely change the culture.

(01:25:02):
One of the things that he basically endeavors to explain, why did the West get ahead on the rest of the world? It kind of comes down to a weird anomaly with the Catholic Church, where they enforced monogamous marriage. And it turns out that the natural state of humans is polygamy, but the problem with polygamy is, there's no cooperation among men, which is a problem. And as a result, and then everything is secret, so there's no sharing of knowledge, because it's all kept in the family, in what he calls kin-based culture.

(01:25:44):
It leads to something called kin-based culture. And even recipes won't be shared if you're in a kin-based culture, because it's a secret. So you can't build science, you can't build cities, you can't build big companies. So because the West kind of enforced broad monogamous marriage early, it was able to evolve into all these things.

(01:26:07):
And he kind of shows why and how. He does these psychological tests today with people from monogamous marriage culture, Western culture, and kin-based culture. And the psychology is completely different. He gives examples like if a person murders another person, is that still murder if that person who did the murder is your brother? And in Western society, yeah, that's a murder. In kin-based culture, it's not a murder. It's just not.

(01:26:39):
And so that's really different. And so morality is different, everything comes off of that. So it's just a fascinating, fascinating book. So that's one.

(01:26:55):
Another book that I recommend a lot is Shaka's book, his first book, Writing My Wrongs. He has a new book that I think is better, which is called How to Be Free. It's not quite out, or maybe it's releasing. It's releasing next month, so I recommend it.

(01:27:11):
What it does is, it goes through how did he work his way out of prison and solitary confinement to his current psychology, and what are the techniques he used? They're very powerful, very powerful ideas. CEOs always asks me, "How do you deal with it? How do you deal with it?" They'll ask in a work-life balance. It's like, "What are you talking about? No work-life balance for CEOs," or particularly entrepreneur CEOs, come on.

(01:27:43):
But what do you do? Do you meditate? Do you do this or that? But he kind of goes through the things that you really ought to do. That's what I would recommend, if somebody's wondering, how do you deal with all this pressure?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:57):
I love this. Just the whole idea of Shaka being this help for CEOs, someone that killed someone, went to prison, led a prison gang. I just love that, how valuable his lessons-

Ben Horowitz (01:28:08):
Prison gangs turn out to be really complicated things to manage. Sorry for getting into this, but the problem with running a prison gang is, you're just dealing with people who all come from broken culture.

(01:28:23):
So in any organization, like the fundamental thing is trust. And so you're bringing in a bunch of no trust people. And so again, it's kind of like a military organization. It's a gang. If you think about a military operation, if you don't have trust, people don't trust the order, then you're completely dysfunctional.

(01:28:46):
So how do you build trust from zero is a very interesting problem. And he's a genius at that, by the way. And I learned a lot from talking to him about it. So from a management standpoint, I would just say it's an important kind of boundary case of how you build culture. He is very, very smart at that. Like I said, you have to look at people about their greatness, not the worst thing they ever did.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:23):
I know it's the lightning round, but can you just share one example of something he did that was like, wow, that's a really good lesson, someone trying to create a good culture that worked for him?

Ben Horowitz (01:29:32):
Yeah. So one of the things that he did that I thought was really smart is ... Well, he did a couple of things. One is just a simple thing. He just made everybody eat lunch together in the gang, just to build rapport, relationship, trust, like it's all one thing. We're all together on that.

(01:29:56):
And I think particularly in the remote work world and so forth, people really underestimate how powerful just that idea can be. And then another thing he did is, he made morality ... he had very specific things about, you had to be good to your word internally and externally.

(01:30:26):
So normally a gang, like I said, it's kind of a kin-based culture thing. But it made it much more powerful when he said, "Look, you can't do devious shit outside the gang either." And he had a bunch of examples of that, that I went through in the book.

(01:30:50):
Like I said, because you're building it from zero, you really have to take a hard line on things that I think people in companies don't even take a hard line on. Is it okay to lie internally? Probably not. Is it okay to lie to a customer? Well, in some organizations it is, but in Shaka's organization, that's as big a penalty as lying internally. These things, I think, end up being really important.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:15):
We're going to link to this book. This is, What You Do is Who You Are. This is your second book that fewer people know about. And this is one of the stories you tell and just what the lessons are for building-

Ben Horowitz (01:31:23):
Yeah. It's kind of the more advanced book. You kind of have to survive to want to care about dealing with the cultural issues. And so the survival book has a bigger audience.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:36):
Amazing. We're going to keep going with Lightning Round. Is there a favorite recent movie or TV show you have really enjoyed?

Ben Horowitz (01:31:42):
Well on TV, I really like Slow Horses, which is the show about the MI6 cast-off guys. And then I haven't seen a lot of movies lately, but I watched Sinners. I went to theater for Sinners. Just the cinematography is unbelievable, and the story is really original, and the acting is incredible, and the costumes are amazing. It's just a great, comprehensive piece of work. The craftsmanship on that thing is just a lot beyond what most people making movies are doing these days, so I really enjoyed that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:24):
I hate scary movies, but I watched it and loved it.

Ben Horowitz (01:32:27):
It wasn't that scary.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:29):
It wasn't that scary, but still, it was zombies popping out of corners. That's not my jam usually.

(01:32:35):
Is there a product you recently discovered that you really love? It could be a gadget, it could be clothes, could be something else.

Ben Horowitz (01:32:40):
I bought a coffee machine called the Technivorm Moccamaster, which is freaking incredible. In fact, a friend of mine saw it and was like, "What is that?" And I just bought it for him too, because it's so awesome. This thing makes coffee that it's just perfect. There's no bitterness. It's completely clean. It's amazing. The only problem with it is, I can't drink coffee that it doesn't make anymore. I don't know if that's a good thing or bad thing, but ...

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:13):
That might come out someday in the AI future.

Ben Horowitz (01:33:16):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:17):
Two more questions. One, is there a life motto that you often come back to, find really useful in work or in life?

Ben Horowitz (01:33:24):
The thing that I would say has had the biggest effect on me is something my father said to me years ago, which is, "Life isn't fair." That seems really, really simple, but I think that the thing that defeats people more than any other thing that I've seen, just in life, is the expectation of some fairness. It's just not fair.

(01:33:54):
There are all kinds of stuff that are going to happen to you, and happen to everybody, that don't happen to other people, that are completely unfair. But it doesn't matter, because that's the way it is. As soon as you get that idea out of your mind, then you can just deal with it, like, oh yeah, of course it's not fair, but what should I do now, which is the real question, not how do I go back and get people to be fair? Nobody's going to be fair. It's not fair.

(01:34:25):
It's the nature of it. If you think about it for more than five seconds, you'll realize that. It's as an individual, if you want to make the world a better place, whatever, but as an individual, do not expect anything to be fair, it'll only defeat.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:43):
Final question. This comes from Shaka, actually. He gave me so many great suggestions. I hate to save this one for last. So the question is, if you had to build a business curriculum from two Hip-hop albums and one Funk album, what would they be and why?

Ben Horowitz (01:34:58):
I think probably Follow the Leader by Rakim. And the reason is what we had kind of gotten into earlier, which is leadership. When he came out with that song, which was maybe the greatest Hip-hop song ever written, he's telling people to follow him, follow the leader. And just to have the idea that he was the leader of the entire art form, not just his band, it is amazing idea. And then the way he expressed it was incredible. And then he's got other great concepts in there that would give you ... It's hard to listen to that record and not have confidence.

(01:36:02):
I think from a competitive, purely competitive standpoint, Stillmatic from Nas, that's the one with Get Ur Self a Gun, that's the one with You're da Man. It's like all of the idea of competition is encapsulated in that album, so that would be the other one.

(01:36:26):
And then Funk, One Nation Under a Groove, for sure. Because it's like, how do you initiate people into a concept or an idea, and how do you infuse them? One Nation Under a Groove is all about joining the nation, and it's so musically interesting and getting people to be part of that. [inaudible 01:36:58] If you asked me tomorrow, I'd probably have three other ones.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:03):
Incredible. I'm going to go listen to these. Ben, final question, how can listeners be useful to you?

Ben Horowitz (01:37:07):
If you get something that makes you better, please take it. If you need more advice on it, let me know. Look, my job is to help everybody build something great, so if you're an entrepreneur, thank you for that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:22):
Also, check out Paid in Full, paidinfullfoundation.org, if you want to learn more about that nonprofit.

Ben Horowitz (01:37:26):
Yes, definitely, we would love to have you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:29):
Amazing. Ben, thank you so much for being here.

Ben Horowitz (01:37:31):
All right, awesome. Thank you, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:33):
Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Bill Carr (00:00:00):
... Jeff would say, we took it as an article of faith. If we served customers well, if we prioritized customers and delivered for them, things like sales, things like revenue and active customers and things like the share price and free cash flow would follow. So therefore, when we're making a decision thinking about a problem, we're going to start with what's best for the customer and then come backward from there. That informs what's the work you have to do to then create this new solution for customers.

Lenny (00:00:33):
Today my guest is Bill Carr. Bill is the co-author of the book Working Backwards, which is a synthesis of the biggest lessons that Bill and his co-author learned from their many years at Amazon. Bill joined Amazon just five years after it was founded, stayed there for 15 years where he worked on the books business, and then as VP of Digital Media, launched and managed the company's global digital music and video businesses, including Amazon Music, Prime Video, and Amazon Studios. After Amazon, Bill was an executive in residence at Maveron, an early stage VC firm, then chief operating officer at OfferUp. And these days, Bill runs a consulting firm called Working Backwards, LLC, where he and his co-authored, Colin Breyer, help growth stage and public companies implement the many practices developed at Amazon.

(00:01:20):
In our conversation, we go many levels deep on how to actually implement a number of the practices and ways of working that helped Amazon become the success that it is today, including the process of how to actually work backwards, how to organize your team with a single-threaded leader, how to divide up your metrics into input and output metrics, how to practice disagreeing and committing, how to implement the Bar Raiser program in your hiring process and so much more.

(00:01:47):
Huge thank you to Ethan Evans for making this episode possible and introducing me to Bill. With that, I bring you Bill Carr, after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:01:58):
Today's episode is brought to you by Assembly AI. If you're looking to build AI powered features in your audio and video products, then you need to know about Assembly AI, which makes it easy to transcribe and understand speech at scale. What I love about assembly AI is you can use their simple API to access the latest AI breakthroughs from top tier research labs, product team to startups and enterprises are using Assembly AI to automatically transcribe and summarize phone calls and virtual meetings, detect topics in podcasts, pinpoint when sensitive content spoken and lots more. All of Assembly AI's models which are accessed through their API are production ready. So many PMs I know are considering or already building with AI, and Assembly AI is the fastest way to build with AI for audio use cases.

(00:02:44):
Now's the time to check out Assembly AI, which makes it easy to bring the highest accuracy transcription plus valuable insights to your customers, just like Spotify, CallRail and writer do for theirs. Visit assemblyai.com/lenny to try their API for free and start testing their models with their no-code playground. That's assemblyai.com/lenny.

(00:03:07):
This episode is brought to you by Coda. You've heard me talk about how Coda is the doc that brings it altogether and how it can help your team run smoother and be more efficient. I know this firsthand because Coda does that for me. I use Coda every day to wrangle my newsletter content calendar, my interview notes for podcasts, and to coordinate my sponsors. More recently, I actually wrote a whole post on how Coda's product team operates, and within that post, they shared a dozen templates that they use internally to run their product team, including managing the roadmap, their OKR process, getting internal feedback, and essentially their whole product development process is done within Coda.

(00:03:45):
If your team's work is spread out across different documents and spreadsheets and a stack of workflow tools, that's why you need Coda. Coda puts data in one centralized location regardless of format, eliminating roadblocks that can slow your team down. Coda allows your team to operate on the same information and collaborate in one place. Take advantage of this special limited time offer just for startups. Sign up today at coda.io/lenny and get a thousand dollars starter credit on your first statement. That's C-O-D-A.io/lenny to sign up, and get a startup credit of $1,000, coda.io/lenny.

(00:04:26):
Bill, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Bill Carr (00:04:30):
Thanks, Lenny. Thanks so much for having me. Pleasure to be here.

Lenny (00:04:32):
It's my pleasure. So, I was reading your book, and something that I recognized as I was going through this is just how many new ways of working Amazon contributed to the way tech and business runs. And I made this little list, and I'm curious if there's anything I'm forgetting that's obvious. So, obviously the idea of working backwards, the idea of one way and two way door decisions, the concept of disagreeing and committing input and output metrics using memos versus decks, just the idea of two pizza teams, and then I know that evolved into single-threaded leaders. Is there anything else that's just like an obvious core thing that's maybe almost too obvious that I don't even think about that Amazon contributed?

Bill Carr (00:05:10):
The one that's non-obvious and is really the way in which Amazon created a set of leadership principles that were very real, and the way in which Amazon created a set of processes to reinforce them. I think I certainly haven't encountered anything quite like that. It was very intentional. So, that is also a distinctive element of that we try to point out in our book.

Lenny (00:05:42):
Awesome. Okay. So, maybe we will come back to that, because that is also really powerful mechanism. So, the question I wanted to ask about this is there are companies that are bigger than Amazon, that are more successful than Amazon, that have been around longer than Amazon, but I don't think any other company has contributed so many unique, new ways of working and also been able to coin them into such shareable ways. What would you say it is about Amazon that enables this sort of way of working and also just making things so just proliferate through the culture?

Bill Carr (00:06:13):
That's actually one of the reasons why Colin and I set out to write our book because everyone knows about Amazon as a innovative product company, at least certainly during the time I was there, which was from 1999 through the end of 2014. The company rolled out all kinds of innovative products. The Kindle, AWS, Alexa, Echo, the Prime subscription itself is innovative and...

Lenny (00:06:41):
And it's all those things, by the way.

Bill Carr (00:06:43):
Yes, a lot of people around the world use all those things. And obviously, Jeff was a huge driver of those things. But what people don't realize is that Amazon was actually, to some degree, equally focused on process innovation. In many cases, by the way, we stood on other people's shoulders, we cannot take credit for having... For most of these, there were other inspirations or we built on work that others had done, which by the way, was what I think all great companies should do. And again, that's also why we wrote the book was because we would like to allow people to stand on Amazon's shoulders to learn what we learned, and then take all or part of these things and build from there.

(00:07:28):
But to more directly answer your question, how or why did this happen. So, this period of both product and process innovation actually occurred in this one narrow window of 2003 to 2007. During that window of time, all of the products I just mentioned and all of the processes except for one were all developed in this one four year period.

Lenny (00:07:53):
Wow.

Bill Carr (00:07:54):
And this is the period actually where we were going from hypergrowth stage, zero to one company, to what I would call one to whatever, a thousand, infinity. That next step that companies have to make where what happens is things become very complex. We're no longer just a bookstore, we sell a lot of things. We actually branched out beyond just a retail business, we had a third party marketplace business. We were experimenting in those days with providing running websites for third party retailers in those days too. We were developing new things. We were in many countries around the world. So, we'd become very complex. And what happens to that point is that then you reach this point where the CEO can no longer be in every important meeting, can no longer be involved with hiring every person. And you need a system, a method to run the company effectively. And Jeff Bezos is fundamentally, he's a very scientific and analytical thinker.

(00:09:07):
His undergraduate degree was in computer science, I'm pretty sure. Although I think he actually started off wanting to get a physics degree, he ended up moving over to computer science. He spent his early days at DE Shaw as a quant on Wall Street. Very quantitative mind. So, he applied this... When he thought about this problem, he said, "Well, I need to be scientific about this. There needs to be some system or some approach, some mechanism for me to be able to manage such a company. So, I'm going to experiment, like a scientist would, with different ideas, different hypotheses, implement them and see what works, and iteratively improve." So that was the mindset which we took... Which by the way, we applied both to process innovation, but also product innovation.

Lenny (00:09:55):
Awesome. I had Eric Reson, and he also happened... I thought about this at the same time, he contributed a lot of core concepts to the way tech worked, and he actually brought up a couple concepts that were on the cutting room floor, basically things that he thought would be things people adopt everywhere. And I'm curious, is there an example of that at Amazon where you built a process and had this clever term for it and just never spread or never actually worked at Amazon? Anything come to mind?

Bill Carr (00:10:20):
The dev team, the design team, the product team, they're all in one group, and they'll go operate autonomously, but not completely autonomously because we, the senior leadership team, Jeff and the S-Team want to know that they're on the right track. So, we're going to create something called a fitness function, which was let's figure out what are the four or five or six metrics that matter most for your particular area. Let's give a weighting to all of them and then let's create an index for those, and we'll measure that index up and down. And that's the fitness function.

Lenny (00:10:52):
That is a very nerdy way of organizing teams. I love it.

Bill Carr (00:10:55):
Yeah, super nerdy. But we realized after, I don't know how long, several months or a year of doing this, so the fitness function was not a good idea. This is what I would describe as a compound metric where you try to take several important metrics and munge them into one. The problem is it's actually becomes totally meaningless. When you're measuring things, you're trying to understand what actions or reactions are creating the good outputs that you want, revenue, customer growth. But by putting them all together, you basically obfuscate that. And what really we realized is we need to just break each one of these out individually and manage them each in its own way. So today, I discouraged teams and companies from creating any sort of compound metrics.

Lenny (00:11:44):
I've done that once, and it was a terrible idea as well, where we had six different metrics and every quarter, we were going to move a different metric that contributed to a higher metric. And what we realized is we just never learn how to get good at one thing, and then it turns out there's always one thing that actually impacts the bigger goal most. See, you just end up working on that thing anyway.

(00:12:03):
Let's actually go deeper into the single threaded leader piece since you mentioned it. It's actually come up a lot on this podcast of people working this way where they have a single threaded leader. And so clearly, it's worked. And I guess we'll just help people understand what does a single threaded leader actually mean, and then why is it such an effective way of working.

Bill Carr (00:12:23):
So, the concept of single-threaded leadership was first... When I was born from this time of complexity at Amazon, and where again, large... Once you get to a certain scale, you get to a point of where there are competing departments, competing interests, and they're competing for some centralized pool of resources. For all of you who are working for a tech company, this is this pool of engineering resources, or today, data science and AI resources. There may be other constrained resources often designed as a constrained resource. But the point is now all these teams want that pool of resources to go build stuff for them, but they're in competition with each other. So, most companies solve this by having an intense, centralized, highly collaborative process. We decided to go in the other direction for the reasons I mentioned, which were that we're just fine, that we're spending all our time in these meetings, planning, and a lot of the work we were doing, the artifacts we create, the documents, the projections, we're actually not very useful either, we're bureaucratic time wasters largely because a lot of the assumptions built into them were deeply flawed.

(00:13:35):
So, you're debating numbers in these documents that are based on flawed assumptions, which is a waste of time. So, what we realized instead was how do we get... The three things we really wanted were ownership, speed and agility. And so, we experimented with that and said, "Let's create teams that can stand alone, where there's a single leader and the cross- functional resources that they need are all either directly report to them or are dedicated to them." So they don't necessarily have to be a straight line direct report. In Amazon's case, for the most part it was. There were some dotted line, but it could be all straight line, it could be all dotted line, it could be a mix of the two. But fundamentally, we've moved from what we called a project orientation to a program orientation.

(00:14:24):
So, a project orientation means, oh, we are going to do this project to change our search result page and algorithm, and the project is defined in this way and it's going to take six months. The resources will come and swarm on that, and then they'll move off to some other thing in some other part of the company. The program based orientation says, let's stick with the search example. There's a team that works on search, and they always work on search. And instead of thinking about things on a project by project basis, they think holistically about what they need to do to improve search. They have a set of metrics by which they're looking to drive those metrics largely. Ones that they can control. Things like what percent of the time is a customer clicking on one of the top three results in my search page, or how many milliseconds does it take for the page load time in this browser type, on this device type, et cetera, et cetera.

(00:15:21):
And they then are running their own roadmap. They're deciding what are the most important things for us to go work on, and having a prioritized list of those things and be able to start at the top of the list and work their way down with the pool of resources that they have. Sometimes, and most times, they may want more resources to be able to tackle more, but they spend less time in resource contention, resource fighting, and instead, focus on building what they can build with the resources that they've got.

(00:15:54):
And so, the benefit of this is if there are success or failures, they're really dependent on themselves now. The only thing they could maybe argue about how they could do better is if they had more resources, which they can petition management for. But this way, it also solves a big management problem, which is instead of management, senior management refereeing every item on a roadmap, they're refereeing which teams have how many resources, which is more of like a once or twice or three times a year decision versus refereeing everything on the product roadmap. And then all the resource contention issues, that's a daily issue. And so, it frees teams up then to actually go and sprint ahead. There's a lot of work you have to do to get ready for this. For example, in a software environment, when we first started and we had a monolithic code base that was not pretty, we weren't ready to do this because you have all those interdependencies.

(00:16:56):
Once we moved to a service-based architecture, and then teams could own their code with defined endpoints, APIs that other teams could understand that are well-documented, then we could move in that direction. And the other thing is we had to create, what I would call, countermeasures because there's no free lunch in org structures, any org structure, you're trading off one thing for another thing. In this case, you're trading off potentially functional excellence. So, in other words, if you no longer have every single engineer or every single marketing person or every product person or every biz dev person reporting into a C-level leader of that particular function, and instead, they're spread out in small teams across the company reporting into some generalist who is probably not going to have functional expertise in several of the functions that they're leading, you risk the problem of then the people in those teams not gaining functional competency. That's the downside. And we can talk more about this, but we created a lot of countermeasures to still enable us to have functional excellence while creating these single-threaded teams.

Lenny (00:18:07):
To drill into this a little bit further, is the origin of this, this recognition at Amazon that the best stuff comes from one person's vision and just one person driving and one person's ask being on the line versus the often, the decision by committee approach?

Bill Carr (00:18:24):
It is less about that. I do want to be clear, it's one leader and their team who are accountable and responsible. So, with respect to what are we going to go build, how are we going to go measure success, all those things, this team and that leader are responsible for documenting that, writing their plan. Now, they don't just get to go off and do that. There was an intense review process at Amazon where either at some level, whether it be the vice president, senior vice president, or all the way up to the Jeff level and his direct reports called the S-Team, this plan would be reviewed and scrutinized deeply as well, and there'd be a discussion, an interchange, and basically getting alignment between the senior leadership team and each one of these single-threaded teams on that plan before the team could go off and run.

(00:19:17):
The beauty of that though is that once we'd had those discussions, those interchanges, then the teams were free to sprint hard after their plan. They didn't have to worry about whether was, "Am I aligned with my CEO? Am I aligned with my senior vice president?" They could know that they were. But yes, this creates then clear... If they're going to deliver it or not. It's up to that owner and that team. Whereas when you have this highly cross-functional approach and there's not one clear person who's responsible for this one project that's on this roadmap, I've seen many CEO pull their hair out saying, "I have no ownership and accountability here. How do I have that?" They're pushing on a string. Because they can't because their different people and leaders are part owning, half owning a long list of things instead of fully owning a short list of things.

Lenny (00:20:15):
I like that. I like metaphor of pushing on a string. Is this approach similar to just the GM model, or is there a big difference when someone's thinking about going GM model versus the single-threaded leader approach?

Bill Carr (00:20:27):
Yeah. Obviously, there are probably different definitions of what people consider the GM model, but I would consider that being this person is a P&L owner, and you can, of course, create mini P&Ls within a P&L. Like for example, in the book business, we could, and I don't know most of the time we didn't do this, but we could have created a P&L owner just for fiction books, or just for professional and technical books, which is a very large category with big differences between the others. And then you say, "Great." Then that team, they have their own dedicated team. They're fully responsible for the revenue numbers and other numbers. But you have to be thoughtful about how you do this because one of the three questions you have to ask when you establish one of these teams is, does the team have the resources within their control to effectively manage this part of this department, this product, this P&L?

(00:21:23):
And sometimes then if you narrow things down too much in some cases, then the answer is no. In other cases, the answer can be yes very easily. A great example, this was in Prime Video, one of the businesses that I managed, we could create a single-threaded team who just was working on applications for TV sets, like Samsung, Sony. We could create another team that's working on game consoles, and another team that's working on mobile phones and tablets. And then within each one of those, we could further break it down. We could have one team working on Xbox and another one on PlayStation, another one just on iOS. In those cases, then it's very clear how you can break the teams down and they can have very clear ownership.

Lenny (00:22:06):
Awesome. Let's go back to the countermeasures topic, and then even just a little more broadly. You talked about one thing that was important to put in place before you moved to the single threaded leader model, which is creating APIs, and basically breaking apart this monolith. What are some other things that you think you need to put in place to be successful in trying to shift to this model?

Bill Carr (00:22:26):
The other thing was these functional countermeasures. So, let's stick with the engineering, for an example. So, in 2004, 2005-ish, I started managing a single-threaded team. Actually managed two different ones, one for music and one for video, which are now Amazon Music and Prime Video. They weren't called that in those days. But I started managing a small team of software engineers at that point. Well, I have never... Well, I have written lines of code, but that would be back in high school, and we're talking about Basic and Pascal. I have a master's in business, a background in marketing. I'm a generalist, okay? So, I'm not equipped to coach. I couldn't possibly conduct a code review. I couldn't possibly conduct an architectural review. I couldn't possibly coach or mentor an engineer on how to improve their craft. But I was one of many of these examples.

(00:23:28):
And there could be reverse examples where instead of me being a business leader, I was purely an engineer, and now I'm managing a team that does marketing and business development. I wouldn't know anything about those things if that had been my background. So, what we did, and I'll stick with the engineering examples, we came up with various countermeasures. One example was that we still had a C-level leader of engineering in Rick Dalzell, and most of the core infrastructure and core services still reported into Rick. So-

Bill Carr (00:24:01):
Core services still reported in to Rick. So it was things like payments or infrastructure search, and Rick still could be a technical leader for the whole company and he and his team could create things like what are the standard ways that we're going to do code reviews? What are the standard ways across the company that we will interview and screen engineers? What does the promotion process look like? What are the defined steps getting from an SD1 to an SD2, SD3? How do we document and describe what are the requirements? There are many things like this. 

(00:24:41):
Effectively, what it also meant is that anyone who is an engineering vice president, or in many cases a director, they would often have something else beyond their day job of some sort of subject matter expertise area where they would also contribute to the company. A good example of this would be that they might sit on a panel for promotion from a certain level to another level in the engineering world, or they might be available to do code review outside of their organization for another organization. So people had other jobs in addition to their day job to build and maintain functional excellence. There are a lot of examples like this across the company.

Lenny (00:25:23):
Let's go in a different direction and talk about one of my favorite principles of Amazon, which is disagree and commit. I think in the way I even describe it I know is wrong. I think people hear this term and they often use this principle incorrectly. For example, it actually starts with have backbone and then disagree and commit. So I'd love to just hear how you've seen this actually implemented well and what people should do and think about when they're trying to implement something like this at their company.

Bill Carr (00:25:49):
So when I was at Amazon, there were 10 leadership principles and they've since expanded them. But of those 10, this was always the least well understood when I was at Amazon too, and partly because it is actually the most nuanced and difficult to actually use. So here's what it means. What it means is that have backbone and disagree, meaning when we are making any kind of a decision, important decision, if you are part of that team, part of that unit, it is your obligation to voice your point of view if you disagree with your approach that's been taken. The point of that disagreement, by the way, is to provide usually additional information or a new point of view that people have not considered.

(00:26:40):
So I like to geek out a bit on the process of decision-making and have read more and more about this. I think that Peter Drucker probably has the best writing on this topic. But as he would describe it, good decisions are made by first understanding all the different points of view and pros and cons to the potential issue at hand or the potential direction, and that great leaders, what they do is they solicit these different points of views. They have a team that they work with to debate and discuss things. So another way to think about this, a king and their court. In an ideal world, if you assume that there's no political motivations, the court is there to advise the king and help them think through different problems and provide different and opposing points of view to allow the king to arrive at the right decision.

(00:27:41):
This is sort of no different than that which is the disagree part is about bringing forth new information, new data, new point of view that would be contrary to the current direction. So that's the disagree part and you're obligated to do it as we would describe sort of all the way up the chain if necessary, if it's an important issue and people are not hearing or understanding your point of view. Now the important point is first of all about hearing and understanding your point of view.

(00:28:11):
What would often happen, I can tell you if someone in a leadership role, someone come to me with a disagreement and many times I'd appreciate it, by the, way because they'd bring some point of view that was useful, but sometimes they bring the disagreement and cite the reasoning behind it and I already knew that reasoning. We'd already thought of that reasoning, we already thought of that, in which case I would say, "I hear your disagreement. We have already considered that factor. But even though that factor is there, here are these other factors that outweigh that."

(00:28:42):
Now that is the point at which as long as the disagreer is hearing back from the leader that they understand their point of view, understand why they are pushing back and seem to fully understand it, and they've taken that into consideration, that is the point for them to commit. Because the point is you provided your information, they've processed that information and they've decided to go this way with the knowledge of that. Where people get confused about is they don't maybe understand when they're supposed to stop disagreeing is one thing, and so hopefully that explanation made people clear this is when you're supposed to stop, and then the commit part done well means that it's not just like I'm going to commit, I don't really agree with what we're going to do, but I'm going to get behind this.

(00:29:39):
Ideally it's, oh, now I've heard the argument, I've actually now thought about the argument and hopefully that person has now understood why we're taking that direction. So their commitment is based on that understanding because then they can reflect that understanding back to their organization too. Because the worst thing to do is to say, "Yeah, we're committed to this. I don't really agree and I still think it's wrong, but I'm committed to it." That's not actually commitment. This is really about decision-making and understanding the facts and information that people are going to use to make a decision and then be able reflect that back.

Lenny (00:30:22):
I imagine there are many times I've gone through this where I still don't agree. What's your advice to a manager or to a report of just like, okay, when you actually still don't agree, how do you behave? Do you just behave like, yes, I agree with this and don't really voice your concerns or something else?

Bill Carr (00:30:37):
I work with Jeff on all kinds of different new ideas. Jeff doesn't think a normal person. His level of sort of creativity and the way he thinks, the timescale of which he thinks, there's many ways about the way he thinks that there was no one else in Amazon that thought that way. So there'd be times when even after we've had that discussion, I would maybe still disagree, but then what I would do is I'd focus on, okay, well what is the kernel or the core of why Jeff thinks that we should do this and I would focus on that kernel. I got great advice actually from one of my managers at one point, Steve Kessel who said, "You have to look for what that is, and then your job is to then take that kernel and try to run with it and expand it and try to see how I can take that idea, that concept, and then make it into something viable."

(00:31:41):
It doesn't always work, but it's about then having that understanding of what it is, not just sort of going through the motion of stomp, stomp, stomp through it. That's not going to work. Also, I've seen people who try that and their career doesn't go very far. You have to have some degree of faith that there's something there and I'm going to try to do the best I can to make that part. How would I productize that idea? How would I make that viable from a business point of view or whatever the different constraints are.

Lenny (00:32:18):
Awesome. So the advice there is focus on the parts you agree with and think about how you can find out if it's actually right or not.

Bill Carr (00:32:25):
Agree with, or even just you may not even agree, but what is the core of what that person is thinking is the big benefit or good guy or thinking vector that they're on that's causing them to want to go in this direction.

Lenny (00:32:42):
Thinking vector, love that term. Along the same lines, another principle that I love is leaders are right a lot. I feel like this is a term that it almost goes unsaid. You almost can say this in a lot of companies. I'm curious just the origin of why that became an important principle and then how it's implemented at Amazon.

Bill Carr (00:33:03):
Yeah. So going back to this last discussion, so one fallacy we should all acknowledge is that when you're making these decisions, and you're trying to use data to make decisions, you can make the data kind of look however you want it to look to sort of try to meet your decision. If I'm looking at some issue and I've got some big dataset, I can come up with ways of looking at a dataset to support this idea and ways of looking at that dataset to not support it. So the data rarely makes the decision for you. What is happening is then a lot of judgment and interpretation of the data, weighing that, weighing various factors to then come to a decision. 

(00:33:49):
That is sort of the right a lot part. The right a lot part comes from having what we call sort of sound judgment, which generally come... Some people maybe are born with this, not a lot of them, mostly they get it through experience. A lot of experiences actually about being wrong, by the way, about making mistakes and by having looked at a lot of problems, made decisions or observed others making decisions, being a student of that, and then using that to understand then how to weight different information when making a decision.

(00:34:27):
So right a lot is that you're good at that and that then it proves, and that generally speaking, people want to follow someone who ends up by and large going in the right direction, right? You're the leader of a team. The team is petitioning you on multiple sides. If you keep kind of going off in some direction where most of the team is scratching their head saying, "I don't think that that was the right decision," they're not going to want to follow you very far and you're probably not going to go very far. So this is something that you develop through experience and I'd say from having the opportunities to observe and work for others that are good at this.

Lenny (00:35:12):
I love that it's a lot. I like that it's not just leaders are right. It's right a lot.

Bill Carr (00:35:18):
Yeah, yeah. No one is right every time. That is totally unrealistic. Yeah.

Lenny (00:35:26):
Let's talk about the titular concept of your book, and that's a word I've never used, but I think it's appropriate, which is working backwards. First of all, just what does it actually mean to work backwards versus working forwards?

Bill Carr (00:35:37):
The title of the book comes from two things. One is one of the leadership principles, which is that customer obsession, and the principle states something along the lines of that great leaders start with the customer's needs and work backwards from there to sort of meet those needs or solve them. Then also because we created a process in this window I was talking about earlier, the 2004 to 2007 window, we created this process for new product innovation called the Working Backwards PR/FAQ process. They both refer to the same idea, which is that as your guiding star or the point from which you're going to start is what are the customer's problems or what are the customer's needs, and then figure out, okay, well what would be the solution to that, what are potential solutions to that? 

(00:36:40):
To do those things, starting with without the constraints of my financial constraints, my resource constraints, my legal constraints, my engineering constraints, whatever all those constraints may be, because the problem is what most of us do is we start with those constraints and work forward from there, or we start with things like I got to increase revenue. How do I increase revenue? I need to increase active customers. How do I increase active customers? For customer oriented behavior, we tend to start with those things which may often lead you in the wrong direction.

(00:37:22):
Whereas we had, as Jeff would say, we took it as an article of faith. If we served customers well, if we prioritized customers and delivered for them, we took it as an article of faith that then things like sales, things like revenue and active customers and things like the share price and free cash flow would follow. So this is important because I still can't give you objective proof that that is true, I don't know who could, and so it was saying this is an article of faith that if we do that we think those other things will work out. 

(00:37:57):
So therefore, when we're making a decision thinking about a problem, we're going to start with what's best for the customer and then come backward from there. Then in that coming backward process, we're going to have to figure out, well, to do that, gee, I'm going to have to solve this engineering problem, or I'm going to have to figure out how to make this thing cost less or make this thing faster or solve one or more problems. That's the backwards, that informs what's the work you have to do to then create this new solution for customers.

Lenny (00:38:36):
Awesome. So just to summarize, you start with what are the customer's needs and problems, and I think a big part of Amazon's approach is what are the lasting problems they'll always have, which is I think it's lower prices, faster shipping and all those things, and then think with no constraints. When you work with companies to implement this idea of working backwards, is it always what is the customer problem and need versus revenue or growth or something like that? Or is there other examples of where you work backwards from at different sorts of companies?

Bill Carr (00:39:07):
Well, the working backwards part is strictly about the customer's needs. Yeah, we don't want to work backwards from revenue. I guess we didn't really use this term for sort of other things like cost structure. Cost structure was actually a part of working backwards from the customer that if we had a low cost structure, we could afford to give customers lower prices, therefore let's figure out how to have a low cost structure. Because in itself, driving down costs, doing things more efficiently doesn't inherently benefit customers because you could just choose to take more profit. It only does if you decide that in doing so I'm going to lower my prices to customers or provide some other benefit. So no, we used it in this method of I'm starting from the customer, and then very specifically, we used it in this method of new products and features that I'm going to go build on behalf of customers. 

Lenny (00:40:10):
Awesome. This episode is brought to you by Wix Studio. Your agency has just landed a dream client and you already have big ideas for the website, but do you have the tools to bring your ambitious vision to life? Let me tell you about Wix Studio, the new platform that lets agencies deliver exceptional client sites with maximum efficiency. How? First, let's talk about advanced design capabilities. With Wix Studio, you can build unique layouts with a revolutionary grid experience and watch as elements scale proportionally by default. No-code animations add sparks of delight while adding custom CSS gives total design control.

(00:40:46):
Bring ambitious client projects to life with any industry with a fully integrated suite of business solutions from eCommerce to events bookings and more, and extend the capabilities even further with hundreds of APIs and integrations. You know what else? The workflows just make sense. There's the built-in AI tools, the on canvass collaborating, a centralized workspace, the reuse of assets across sites, the seamless client handover, and that's not all. Find out more at wix.com/studio. Okay. So then when you go work with a company to implement this idea of working backwards, what are the very tactical things that you do to help them here? I know PR/FAQ is a part of that, so let's chat about how to actually implement that. What are the steps to shift to working backwards?

Bill Carr (00:41:31):
Yeah. So the first shift is to take this, so that's just a concept, right? Working backwards. Well, how do I turn that concept into a scalable, repeatable process? That's exactly where Jeff's mind went. Eventually, without getting into the origin story, we came up with this process called the PR/FAQ process. So what it means is that whenever we're devising a new product or feature, we're going to start by writing a press release describing the feature and describing it in a way that speaks to the customer and to some degree the external press and world where the idea is, in my description of this, it better jump off the page of something like, wow, as a customer I will really need this.

(00:42:17):
So what I work first is to say, okay, for your product development process, let's start by using this method as the method to decide what am I going to go build? And oh, by the way, to use it as a method to sort between a lot of different choices of what you might build. In summary, the way that process works is that PR, you're going to describe very carefully and clearly who's the customer, what's their problem, and what's the solution that you're planning to build. That sounds really simple and easy, but it's actually very hard to do that well. to crisply and clearly define those. The first two things are the things that are hardest to define, like who's the customer? Like anyone says, "All restaurants are my customer."

(00:43:08):
Okay, well, that's a mistake. Now, I mean, which kinds of restaurants are your customers? In what kinds of cities? In what kinds of formats, et cetera, et cetera? Then what is the specific problem you were solving? Ideally, you would some way have quantify that problem or there's some data or customer insights that have led you to understand that problem, to know that it is a meaningful and big problem. Ideally a problem that people would pay money if you could solve that problem for, because you can just look at the economics of that problem, and if instead they use your solution, this would be beneficial to them.

(00:43:50):
So I work to have them first implement this PR/FAQ process is the first step. Then the next step really is to go from there to say, "Okay, writing PR/FAQs is one thing. Well, how do I actually use them? How do we actually develop them?" Because there's this iterative nature to writing PR/FAQs where it's sort of a concentric circle review. You start off small with one author and with low fidelity writing these things, and then you start to share them with a small group and get feedback and improve it, a wider group, get feedback and improve it, and onward and onward until, depending on the size and scale of your company, you get up to the CEO as a way to strengthen, improve and really codify this idea and determine whether it's a great idea or not. So I help them understand how does that work? How do you do this iterative process? Then once you've done that, then what do I do with these PR/FAQs once I've got them? How do I then think about that with respect to my roadmap?

Lenny (00:44:55):
Awesome. Okay. That was an awesome overview. I'm going to fire off a couple of questions around the first part. Do you still suggest people do it as a press release? It feels like press releases aren't a thing anymore. Do you ever suggest people do it as a tweet or as TikTok video or a blog post?

Bill Carr (00:45:09):
Good question. So the first thing is it's not a real press release, okay? We could change the nature of it, and if instead we wanted to call it the customer problem solution statement, right? We could just change it to that because there really are three money paragraphs in this. First of all. Yeah, it's not meant to be a real press release, so don't use the language you would use if you were sending an actual press release. This is like an internal document. Okay. So that's the first thing.

(00:45:42):
The second thing is the heart of it really is that first paragraph, it's a short description, that second paragraph, that's the problem statement, and that third paragraph, that's solution statement. If you wanted to ditch the rest of it and the artifacts of the press release, you could. I think there are other benefits to it, like the headline, is this headline long and drawn out and I can't even tell what the heck this thing is from reading this headline? If you used a tweet that wouldn't work very well. 

(00:46:11):
The date is also a meaningful thing when you write the press release. The date is meant to be a hypothetical timing on which you're envisioning launching this thing which tells the reader something. Are you thinking that this is something that's so simple and easy, we're going to launch it next month or so complex that we're going to launch it in a year from now. So there are some other directional cues within it. Like I said, with everything, these are tools that people can use and I'm sure that companies will find other ways to improve upon these tools, but if you don't use those parts of them correctly, you're kind of missing out on what's the main benefit that your getting out of this.

Lenny (00:46:50):
Do you try to write it in a way that would be announced, like a press release feel? Or is it mostly just who is the customer? Do you try to pitch it as a part of this experience?

Bill Carr (00:47:01):
So you try to write it in that way, but the one thing is you don't want to use hyperbole. It would be very factual with numbers, data rich document too. So again, not like a real press release. A lot of internal confidential data would be in this press release.

Lenny (00:47:25):
Got it.

Bill Carr (00:47:25):
So it's a tool that has a very specific use to it.

Lenny (00:47:34):
Is there a template that we can point people to in the show notes to help them craft this? I think there's a version in your book maybe, but is there some online that we could point people to?

Bill Carr (00:47:43):
Yeah, so we have a website related to the book, which is www.workingbackwards.com, and there's a resources section within there and you'll find a template.

Lenny (00:47:53):
Amazing. Okay. Then the concentric circle piece. So the idea there is basically get feedback from an increasingly larger swath of the company and it sounds like a big part of that is also get buy-in as you go- 

Lenny (00:48:00):
... swath of the company. And it sounds like a big part of that is also get buy-in as you go along the way.

Bill Carr (00:48:05):
Yes and no. So first of all, there are some things where you may write it and you, the author, if we were in the old world, would take the piece of paper, crumple up and throw in the trash can, which is, in your own, you've realized, "Now that I put this down on paper and read it, this is not actually that good of an idea. I'm going to try something else." By the same token, you may then have written one you think is a pretty good idea, and you show up here or your manager and they give you feedback that makes you want to then ball it up and throw it into the trash can.

(00:48:38):
So part of this concentric circle thing is not just that everyone you write lives on and gets all the way to the CEO. There are no stats in this, but let's just say in some imaginary world where, yes, all these things... You're a product manager and you've got a director of product management you report to who reports to some senior vice president of division who reports to a CEO. Well, if you truly run this out and you write 100 PRFAQs in a year, maybe 20 of those make it their way to the CEO. The point is not every single one of them is destined to go that far. The numbers get narrower. And this leads me down to the concept of what you're really trying to create is a product funnel, not a product tunnel. And with a funnel, meaning lots of things at the top, fewer things at the bottom. The tunnel means that everything that comes in is also going to come out the other side.

(00:49:40):
And the problem with that method is that it means you're not actually having a method of consideration and comparing it against other things that you might build or how you deploy what are, frankly, most companies, your most precious resources, which is your engineering team, you should be looking at various choices. You should think of yourself honestly as a venture capitalist. They don't fund every company that they meet with. They actually fund a very, very low percentage of them. And at Amazon, we had lots and lots of PRFAQs that were a great idea, but we didn't ship them because we had other ones that were just a better idea, which had a bigger potential impact. So you want that. You want to create this corpus of ideas that are well-thought-out and select the best ones.

Lenny (00:50:27):
It feels like a lot of these processes are basically just ways to stop stupid shit from happening. I think the narrative is a good example where you have to expose your thinking deeply. This is a great example of that.

Bill Carr (00:50:39):
Yeah. And it's also, I would say, an example of where this is a process to prevent the other process, which is the product development process, from becoming the thing where you just get locked in on, "What are we doing in this sprint, what are we trying to get done," and focused on shipping stuff. What I recommend is you try to break that into two different processes. One is the process of deciding what you should go build, and that's what the PRFAQ is designed for. And then once you've decided that, then, yes, by all means, use all that good thinking, freight, "Now how can I ship it efficiently and effectively with few to no bugs?"

Lenny (00:51:19):
I was just reading this Harvard Business Review article, I think that's called the thinking to doing gap, where a lot of companies just spend a lot of time talking about ideas and solutions and not actually doing anything. And so I'm curious how you try to avoid that at Amazon considering there's this period of just like, "Let's explore, explore, explore, and we're fine."

Bill Carr (00:51:39):
There's a couple ways, and of course I'm somewhat having to imagine what are the problems in such companies where that's going on. So one such version of this problem is what I'd call the-big-idea-that's-not-fleshed-out problem. So I'm sure that every single person listening to this podcast has either themselves done this or have witnessed others in their company who come up with a concept of like, "Oh, I think if we built this, boy, that would really solve things or that would really work well or that would really grow things." And it may sound good to everyone, it may sound good to you, to everyone, and then maybe you start then working on building it. But the reality is that actually once you've spent some time looking at that idea more deeply, you then start to identify several roadblocks or maybe a fatal flaw with this idea. And in fact, no, you shouldn't waste any of your time going into building that thing because it has a fatal flaw.

(00:52:46):
So one problem is that companies get stuck, I think, where they never actually go do that documentation. And so it's a debate and discussion about concepts that aren't really well fleshed out. And so people's ability to actually evaluate them in any realistic way is they don't have a good way. And so in those situations, what gets done is probably more of a function of politics or will or a culture of completely top-down. I think the other way is where they're debating and discussing things that they just don't have good methods where then they can take things, and then go build them, meaning they probably don't have the right org structure or processes in place to then go take the good idea, assign it to someone who will own it, go look at it. And after they have owned it and gone and look at it, if it works, then they and their team can go actually build it.

(00:53:50):
What I always found as I became more senior in the company and my role became bigger and bigger is that when something came up, some idea that didn't neatly fit within my org structure, I couldn't necessarily delegate it to someone that this... There were only two things I could possibly do, which is just set it aside altogether because otherwise it'd just be a real distraction to people or I had to decide this was a compelling enough idea that we were going to take a resource, could be one person, could be a whole team, depending on the idea, and I'm going to have to assign that resource to actually go look at this and work at this. Otherwise, it will never happen.

Lenny (00:54:31):
I've been through those many times. Okay. So there's two more concepts I want to try to touch on before we wrap up. The next one is the idea of input and output metrics. This is something that at Airbnb, we super implemented, it became a very defective way of thinking. And actually there's a lot of Amazonians that ended up at Airbnb, a lot of leadership. So there's a lot of this stuff that we ended up doing like the memos. And so on the input and output metrics, could you just describe what that is and why that's so important, why people think about metrics in the wrong way often?

Bill Carr (00:55:03):
Yeah, so the origin of this one really was, again, in our early years at Amazon, '99, 2000, 2001, we were a public company then, we were growing. But then growth started to... It wasn't just all up into the right and like, "Woo-hoo." Every company's going to hit a wall eventually, and it's not going to be... If you're so lucky to even been at a company where it's just going up into the right with no gravity, good for you, because million people never experienced that.

(00:55:36):
What most people experience is the reality is that there's a lot of gravity pulling against your revenue numbers and you've put a plan out there and you wanted to grow 15% or 20% or 75% or whatever it was, and now you look like you're not going to hit that number this quarter. And so what ensues then is, "We're not going to hit our number. What should we do about that to hit our number?" And this often happens with, well, there's a month or a month and a half left in the quarter, and then we would run around like chickens with our heads cut off and come up with a bunch of ideas that tended to be promotional in nature and tended to be price reduction in nature, or we'll send this extra email or extra ad or whatever it might be-

Lenny (00:56:19):
Another Prime Day.

Bill Carr (00:56:19):
Right. And the reality is we did that, we went through that enough times, several quarters, and we started to realize, "Huh, these fire drills don't really work." We didn't really get meaningful progress against the number with these last-minute things we decided to go do. And oh, by the way, they were a big distraction. If they did work at all, they pulled revenue that might've just gotten in the next month or next quarter into this one. So it wasn't really a zero-sum game there. And we realized we're not really actually working on things that matter to customers that are going to move the needle over the long term.

(00:56:58):
And this is about the same time when Jeff and the S-Team were reading the book, Good to Great. And you have to ask Jeff what it is, but if you ask me, I think that this was the single most influential and effective management book for our company because what it caused Jeff to do, and I won't describe what... Most of you probably know what it is, if you don't know what it is, go read Good to Great. It is, in my opinion, the best, most important management book you'll ever read. Because what it did is to help us codify our growth flywheel, meaning what are the inputs that if we improve these things, which in our case, was how do we have broad selection? How do we have a great customer experience or great customers experiences in retail? Things like how easy was it to find what you wanted to buy, how easy was it to buy it, and how fast did it get to you. Were the prices low? Do we have lots of merchants on our platform? And by the way, could we drive out costs?

(00:58:06):
So we identified these things on our flywheel. And this identification of these things was such a critical moment for the company because then it realized, "Okay. Well, what we need to do is spend our time focusing on how do I measure each one of those things, and then how do I improve each one of those things?" So it shifted our focus away from this short-term thinking of pushing the revenue number up to this longer-term thinking that if we just improve these things, whether it's... There's no day that people will wake up 10 years, 20 years, 30 years from now and say, "All else equal, I'd rather shop at a store with fewer items than more items or a store with higher prices than low prices or a store where things get to me more slowly versus more quickly." So if we can just improve these things, this is our path to winning. So those were all inputs to the customer experience. And so we then figured out ways to measure them creating a set of input metrics.

(00:59:03):
And so then when we would develop our operating plans and review our business each week and set our goals, we were hyperfocused on those inputs and the input metrics. As a simple example, there was one tool that Jeff and the leadership team, the S-Team, used called S-Team goals, which are effectively a list of what they would harvest would be like, "Here are the most important goals for the company that I've harvested from all of our operating plans." And I can't remember exactly what year, something around 2007, 2008, they looked at that list, which is about 500 items long by the way, and they counted it up. And of that list, only 10 of them actually had a financial metric in it, like revenue or free cash flow or gross profit. These other things we're generally speaking, all... One of those inputs, like I mentioned to you about low prices, and selection, and speed of the customer experience.

(01:00:03):
So, yes, the point was, again, it's this other article... So we took it as an article of faith that if we can just improve these inputs, the outputs will take care of themselves. The inputs are the things that drive the outputs, which are revenue, customer activity, free cashflow. And so one of Amazon's... It's not really a secret, but one of Amazon's great strengths is [inaudible 01:00:28] focus on those things and make just continuous process, continuous improvement on each one of them and measure them rigorously.

Lenny (01:00:37):
The flywheel, you reminded me. It feels like that's another concept Amazon proliferated through all of companies is everyone's trying to create their own little flywheel, and I imagine everyone has that image of the Amazon flywheel in their head with a little orange circle in the center and the black arrows. On the topic of input metrics, just briefly, what is an example of a good input metric? Because I imagine people that are listening are like, "Oh, shit. I got to think about my metrics as input and output now." What's a sign that's a good input metric?

Bill Carr (01:01:02):
A sign that's a good input metric is, first of all, map your end-to-end customer experience. I never worked at Airbnb, but, okay, step one is that they clicked on some ad somewhere and showed up in the website or the app. Now you're in the app. Now you're looking at this first screen. Well, the first thing, what they're doing is they're browsing and/or they're searching. Okay. How are we measuring the speed, quality, and ease of that browsing and searching? Now they've got onto a detail page for an individual property. How are we measuring the speed, ease, and quality of the different actions they may take like reserve... Forgive me if I get any of my terminology wrong. I'm not an Airbnb-

Lenny (01:01:47):
You are, but it doesn't matter. It's close enough.

Bill Carr (01:01:51):
So then you've reserved. Now you have interactions with a property owner. How do I measure the quality of those? How many messages go back and forth? Is a lot of messages a good thing? Is that a bad thing? At first, you may not know the answer to that question. Same thing every step of the way. Then there's the actual rental experience. How do I instrument and measure every part of the customer experience? So you know it's an input metric if it is measuring something with respect to the customer experience. Which ones are the right metrics, which ones are the most causal to the outputs, I couldn't begin to tell you this is actually what you're getting paid for. You work at Airbnb to figure that out. And basically through an iterative process of measuring, observing, improving, and looking at what the effect is on your outputs.

(01:02:49):
So, again, we didn't really create this concept. This is a concept from Six Sigma, which is using DMAIC, which is I have a process, there's an output of this process, but the inputs are a black box to me. So how do I understand those inputs? Well, DMAIC stands for define... Oh, boy. Define, measure... The A is going to come back to me in a minute. Improve and control. And I'm going to have to... Oh, gosh. The A is lost. I've lost it for a second here. But-

Lenny (01:03:26):
Oh, here it is. I'm looking at... Define, measure, analyze, improve-

Bill Carr (01:03:30):
And analyze. Thank you. Yeah, duh, analyze. So we just use that process, which was... And by the way, the way we think about it first is like, "Well, you need to throw a lot of things at the wall. You don't really know which of these things are going to be the most causal." So you know you're doing input metrics. If it is, do you control it? Meaning can you apply resources to make this thing better or worse? Does it touch customers? It doesn't always have to touch customers, but if it is affecting the customer experience, it's almost certainly is an input. And then which ways you're going to measure that input? You need to try more than one way, because again, we tell a story in the book about one of our most important input metrics, which was how much selection do we have, and we were actually not measuring that right for several years. We had to refine that measurement.

Lenny (01:04:23):
So I don't know if you saw this, but I asked on Twitter what questions I should ask you and tell people you were coming on. And something that came up a bunch is with working backwards, obviously some products Amazon has launched have not worked out. Say the Fire Phone is a classic example. What have you learned from that process of just like, "Okay. [inaudible 01:04:42] won't work out"? Also knowing many things are not going to work out, there's no way to really [inaudible 01:04:46].

Bill Carr (01:04:47):
Yes. So the one important thing to share is that all these tools that are described in this book that Amazon is using, whether it's using documents and meetings or the PRFAQ process or input metrics, is that none of these things give you the answer. They are tools to help you make decisions. So sometimes you're going to make the wrong decision. Fire Phone is a great example that comes up often, people ask, "Well, if you've got this great PRFAQ process, how did you get Fire Phone?" So I was tangential to the Fire Phone team and I worked on it closely and different people have different opinions, so I'll just share my opinion, which is that if you think about, again, how does the PRFAQ process work? Well, there's a customer problem.

(01:05:36):
Well, what was the problem that the Fire Phone was seeking to solve for customers? I would argue this is a case where we made the mistake of what we had a technology solution in mind, which was 3D effects. And then we took that solution and we're then in search of a problem. I don't think it solved any meaningful problems for customers. And candidly, we had to build a version with the music application and the Prime Video application for this phone. And I couldn't figure out how this 3D part would make it better for the customers to discover, watch, or playback any of these media. Maybe there were games that could have been a great solution, I don't know. But I think the simplest place to go when you see a failed product is to ask yourself, what problem did you solve? And I could get into all kinds of other examples outside of Amazon too, but 9 times out of 10, I think that's where... If it wasn't poor execution, if the product was executed correctly, what was wrong with the concept of the product?

Lenny (01:06:48):
I imagine there was a lot of disagreeing and committing on that concentric circle process. Is there anything that you've found of just the number of disagreement and commits in this process of PRFAQ filtering out, I don't know, that tells you maybe this is not a good idea?

Bill Carr (01:07:03):
Not necessarily. So I'll tell you partly also why the Fire Phone happened was, from my point of view, I think that we had had a number of successful products where, in some cases, there were a lot of people who doubted whether it would work. A lot of people inside Amazon doubted that the Kindle was going to be a good idea. I remember contentious board meetings on this topic. So even within a company that was considered innovative, you would have a lot of people that would doubt things. I can tell you that for years is working on Prime Video, I would tell people about what our envision was of you watching on your TV set and we're going to have our own motion studio. We'll make our own movies and TV shows. And they would laugh at me. They thought that was crazy. So that's not necessarily the sign of whether the product is right or wrong. And so that's a problem actually, that makes it harder to know.

Lenny (01:08:02):
Yeah. And I think something Amazon's incredibly good at is being okay with a lot of failures, and I think that's part of the reason there's been so much innovation. Is that true?

Bill Carr (01:08:11):
I'd say it's partially true. I mean, again, it's hard for me to do a compare and contrast with other companies. But I can tell you did we have a lot of things that we launched that failed? Yes. Some of them are very public and obvious. I'll give you one that people don't really realize. It's something called... We had a feature in the early 2000s called Slots. And what it was was it was basically third parties could bid on different search terms and put a little ad in there.

Lenny (01:08:11):
Sounds familiar.

Bill Carr (01:08:42):
Well, obviously, that works now on Amazon, but it didn't work then because we simply didn't have the scale that Amazon has today. So a lot of times a product idea, a perfectly good idea, you just have the wrong time or the technology isn't there. I mean, Jeff wrote about a product that was a puck that sat in your kitchen that you would talk to and ask it for things and could shop from it. He wrote about that in 2004. Well, the technology wasn't there to be able to create that little puck, which one day would become Echo. It was a decade away. But we had a lot of things we launched that failed. We were not afraid to take what we considered a well-calculated risk. I think many, many companies are less willing to do so, less committed to product innovation, and really do not want that fear of... They do fear failure, and they're really focused on their near-term financial goals. It's not their fault. It's the way a public company and Wall Street interact with each other creates this dynamic.

Lenny (01:09:55):
Just to pull on that thread a little bit more. It feels like a lot of companies talk about, "We're okay failing. We're okay launching things that don't work," but then in practice, their performance review is impacted. Teams get shut down, budgets get pulled. Is there something that you recommend to companies that want to actually improve in this? What could they actually change and actually do this well?

Bill Carr (01:10:16):
Yeah, I just spoke with actually a senior executive at a well-known Silicon Valley company about this topic the other day and said, "Well, what is it we had structurally at Amazon, especially from a people point of view, that would enable or encourage people to take these risks?" Because, yes, in a lot of companies, if you go work on the project that fails, then your career is in the garbage can and/or your compensation system, you're going to lose out on that bonus. So there were two things. One was our compensation system. So there were no performance bonuses. So if I was running the book business and I had a killer year from a financial point of view, there was no extra kicker for me. And if I ran the book business and it had a bad year, there was no financial penalty for me either because our compensation was based on the stock price.

(01:11:12):
So we all had an incentive to do what was right for the company, frankly, over a long-term because trying to win off of short-term fluctuations off Wall Street is a losing proposition, which meant that therefore, if I am... Because I had that situation, I moved off of working on our largest P&L, and then the book business and music and video business, now I'm going to go work on digital media. There is zero business there. This might not work. Well, my compensation didn't change as a result of that. It didn't change one way or the other. We tended to also have a performance management system that then would change compensation based on evaluating what did you actually deliver more in an input method. We cared about the outputs too, but just there are plenty of people that could be-

Bill Carr (01:12:00):
Just, there are plenty of people that could be in a business that's up and to the right but has nothing to do with them. And so we tried to focus more on, well, what did you actually build and contribute, ways you improved selection or lowered prices, or whatever that might be. So those two things about the compensation mattered a lot. And then the second thing was having a CEO who was really committed to it and it wasn't something that they delegated to someone else.

(01:12:31):
So Safi Bahcall, I think, writes about this in his book Loonshots, where part of the conditions that are necessary for innovation to occur are that you actually create different structures of decision-making, of approvals, of all kinds of things, if you create some team that's going to go build something new and innovative. Because most of the structures inside a big company are designed to crush and impede a small innovative team that's trying to go build something new. They need speed, but approval here, approval there, it's going to get in their way.

(01:13:10):
We solved that two ways, one was when we went to go build digital media and AWS, we put two of our smartest leaders in the company on those things, Steve Kessel and Andy Jassy. And number two, they were meeting with Jeff regularly. Jeff was deeply engaged with them, reviewing what are we going to go build? Part of the decision to decide where we're going to go build. And so he could then also, between their seniority and of course him being the CEO, they could run interference on these sorts of things too. So even if you want to have innovation, even if you really do crave it, you're willing to take the risk, if you don't set up the organization in the right way, you're just not going to get it.

Lenny (01:13:52):
Amazing. I'm glad we got into that, I wasn't planning to talk about that and I'm glad we did. Final topic, this concept of Bar Raisers, it feels like it's been such a core way of allowing Amazon to scale successfully, and I think that's something a lot of people can implement, it's a very one-off thing you could just implement at your company. Can you just talk about what this idea of a Bar Raiser is in the hiring process and then what people can do if they wanted to add this to their hiring process?

Bill Carr (01:14:19):
So the Bar Raiser hiring process is a process, it was actually one of the first ones that was established and published, pretty early in the company's history back in 1999. And we created it for a simple reason, to quote one senior leader at Amazon, "We had new people hiring new people hiring new people." We were in our hyper-growth phase, okay? The company was only, what, three, four years old, and we were growing like a weed at that point.

(01:14:47):
So this started off actually in our tech org, and what our senior leaders in tech realized is, my gosh, we hire some new engineering leader, and then the next thing is that their job is to go hire the senior managers, and they'll go hire managers. And all these people have been here for a week, so they don't really even know our company yet, they don't know our culture yet, they don't know our standards yet. So what information are they using to make these hires, and what information they were using is obviously they were just using their own personal judgment, and their personal judgment combined with whatever criteria they used at prior companies that they worked for. So let's say if they came over from Microsoft, if Microsoft had some methodology or criteria, they probably would just apply that.

(01:15:38):
Well, is that methodology or criteria relevant to our company? Because every company has a different culture, and I'm here to tell you that if someone's been a super successful vice president at Microsoft, does not mean they could be as super successful at Amazon or at Google or Facebook. Sometimes they can, but these companies are very different, they all do work very differently. The way leadership happens and decisions are made are very different. So how do we fix this problem other than letting it run rampant and basically hire a bunch of people who are, we don't know if they fit our culture and we don't know if they fit our high standards we have for what we expect of engineering leaders or engineers?

(01:16:21):
So they created this Bar Raiser process, which by the way, they borrowed from Microsoft, which had a process called As Appropriate. And the concept was that on every interview loop there's one person, who is not the hiring manager, who doesn't report to the hiring manager, who's not the recruiting manager, they're in the business, they're a software development manager, or they're a marketing manager, and they are on the interview loop and they're a Bar Raiser, which means when we get to the debrief meeting, they will run that meeting, not the hiring manager, not the recruiter, they will run the meeting. And it also means that they technically have veto power over the hiring manager, which, by the way, a good Bar Raiser never uses, or I never saw a Bar Raiser use. I was a Bar Raiser, and in my 15 years at Amazon I never used it, never saw it used.

(01:17:14):
And then finally, which actually was not true in 1999 but later became true, was once we established our leadership principles, we created a set of objective criteria that would be used and an interview methodology that would be used in every interview, which was the objective criteria would be our leadership principles, and the methodology would be behavioral based interviewing.

(01:17:33):
So this Bar Raiser basically would be a subject matter expert on how this process worked, they'd conduct the debrief to make sure that we were actually adhering to the process, that people were sticking to the objective criteria rather than saying, "I don't think we should hire this person because, I don't know, they don't seem to want to work here enough." Maybe that's a valid reason, but it's actually not part of our objective criteria. And so the Bar Raiser was there to act as a balance also on the urgency bias that every hiring manager has, which is like, I got to fill these roles, but rather than filling them with the next warm body they find, make sure they fill them with people who actually meet our standards, fit our culture and meet our standards for functional excellence too.

Lenny (01:18:21):
Such a cool process. Two questions along these lines, one is who has the final decision in hiring, is it the hiring manager?

Bill Carr (01:18:27):
Yes.

Lenny (01:18:28):
And this is just off advice from the Bar Raiser?

Bill Carr (01:18:31):
Yeah, so this often gets confused. The decision maker is the hiring manager, the whole interview loop and the Bar Raiser are actually just there to help the hiring manager make the right decision. Now oftentimes the hiring manager could feel like this is actually a bureaucratic process and a group of people that I have to sell and they're just in my way between me and hiring this person, which is kind of a natural feeling to have.

(01:18:54):
But one of the feedback I would always give managers who are new to this is like, no, no, no, that's not the way to think about it, think about these people are helping you, because the amount of time you're going to put into the hiring process may seem like a lot, but if you hire the wrong person, boy, that amount of time you're going to have to deal with managing that person, that's going to be a lot more, the impact on the team, impact on you. So making a great decision here is important, they're here to help you.

(01:19:20):
So yes, the final decision is with the hiring manager, technically speaking the Bar Raiser could block them from a decision to hire someone, but they would, well done they would help the hiring manager see the reasons not to hire the person through a Socratic method and how they would guide the discussion.

Lenny (01:19:40):
And then when you're choosing a Bar Raiser, is there any suggestions you have of who to choose and how often you pull them into these things? Because it could also be a huge time suck.

Bill Carr (01:19:49):
It is a huge time suck, and it sometimes could be up to 10 hours of my week spent actually as a Bar Raiser. The selection process is you start with, as a company, I would recommend if you wanted to do this, you'd pick a department to pilot it with. Pick people who are A, care a lot about your hiring process, B, appear to be good interviewers, and C, seem to have high standards. It's also a great role for people who are earlier in their career by giving them this additional leadership opportunity. It's a great way to grow and develop leaders, by the way, because this added responsibility is a great way for them to start testing out leadership. And you have to train them properly and you have to have dedication to the process, but I generally would try to pilot it within one group at first.

Lenny (01:20:41):
One last question before we get to our very exciting lightning round. Many people are listening to this, they're considering implementing some of these things, trying to figure out how to actually make these real. If someone were trying to move along the path of becoming more Amazonian, which of these elements and processes do you think often has the most impact? And/or is there something fundamental that needs to change to allow for some change like this to happen at a company, in your experience?

Bill Carr (01:21:10):
Yeah, good question. And the first thing I'd say is one thing to be careful of is a lot of times when I'm talking to a company about these processes they say, well, does this mean we need to turn into Amazon? And first thing I tell them is, well, first of all, I couldn't turn you into Amazon if I wanted to, because you have your own culture. And secondly, no, that's not the idea is for you to try to become Amazon, the purpose is to sort of look at these processes and best practices they have and consider adopting parts or all of them into your organization to improve these, every company of a certain scale has these same processes, so this is just a different way to do them. So you should have scalable, repeatable processes for each one of these, pick one, here's one choice of ways to do these things.

(01:21:58):
The other piece of advice I give is that a lot of these changes are relatively profound, they really require buy-in all the way up to the CEO, if you're really going to change the way you do product development, or if you're really going to change the way you do hiring, that probably requires buy-in of the CEO, and so I would seek to get that probably before I would move too fast. Some of these things, though, can be piloted in your own little group, like your one little product development group. You want to decide you want to start writing PR FAQs, you probably can decide to do that. But again, try to check with your leadership.

(01:22:32):
The other thing I would just tell you is that for any of these processes, these in our book, or any book, implementing a new process is not easy. And if you go into it lightly and dip your toes into it and try it out, it's probably not going to work for you, because it'll be hard at first, and it requires some level of commitment to actually work through that hard part and say, I'm really committed to doing this, and it will take a few months for you to get good at it. So you have to have commitment and discipline to get through it. Anyone can really do these things, it just requires commitment and discipline.

Lenny (01:23:10):
And in our chat we've basically just scratched the surface of a lot of these things, if people want to dig deeper there's obviously your book Working Backwards, which we'll link to in the show notes. I know you also work with companies to implement a lot of these practices. Could you just talk about what it is you can help folks with and then how to potentially engage if they're interested?

Bill Carr (01:23:27):
Sure, great. Yeah, Colin, and I, one of the reasons we wrote this book was to pass on what we learned to the next generation of business leaders at scale with a book, but also because we had a passion to work with companies directly one-to-one. And so we are advisors, consultants, call it what you will, but non-traditional, we don't have a team of people working for us. Each of us just work directly with the companies who engage us.

(01:23:55):
And generally speaking what we do is the right kind of company for us to work with, first of all, has to achieve a certain scale. Companies that are in the product market fit phase, they need to focus on getting product market fit, they probably don't really need to focus much on how they put in scalable, durable processes. Like sure, some of these could definitely be helpful to you even if you're in that phase, but really these are designed for, my company's become complex now, I've got multiple product lines, it's well over 100 million in annual run rate, growing fast, complex. So most of our clients are either large, well past series C private companies, or they're public companies. And in most cases, a C-level leader, or the CEO themselves, has read our book and recognizes that they have a lot of the same problems that we had at Amazon, and looks at these as useful solutions and wants us to help them implement them.

(01:24:56):
So we tend to usually first actually go in and do an assessment of how they do things today, because to help people move from one place to another we have to understand where they are, and then we come up with a prioritized list along with that, the CEO and C-level leaders, of what are the things that would be most useful, what are the symptoms and problems you're having and what are the root cause solutions that could be found in these processes? And then we sort of prioritize those and come up with a plan to work within the organization to help them implement those. And what's also different is that we're very hands- on working at all levels of the company, and as we do it we will be there in the meetings with the teams to help coach them and teach them along so that we make sure that it actually gets implemented properly and to spec, and they get to the outcome they want.

Lenny (01:25:45):
Sounds amazing. How would people engage with you if they wanted to explore this?

Bill Carr (01:25:51):
Simple way is you can just send an email, I'm bill@workingbackwards.com, and Colin is colin@workingbackwards.com. You can also just check out our website, www. workingbackwards.com. We have some information there, we have a contact us form, those would be the best ways.

Lenny (01:26:05):
Okay. Well with that we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions for you, are you ready?

Bill Carr (01:26:11):
I'll try.

Lenny (01:26:12):
Interestingly, as I look through the list, many of them relate to using Amazon, which is pretty funny. The first is, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Bill Carr (01:26:23):
So I'd say in the management world, not surprisingly, Good to Great. I'd say Drucker on Management, or Drucker, The Effective Executive. And then the other one I'd say that's a little bit different is I'd recommend the Steve Jobs biography. I never worked at Apple, but looking at that arc, a lot of the way those things worked was not that different from what I experienced at Amazon, so it's a good window into what it's like to be inside some company, tech company, that goes through product innovation and big growth. On a personal basis, recent books would be Seveneves by Neal Stephenson is a favorite, and A Gentleman in Moscow.

Lenny (01:27:05):
Amazing. Can you get them all on Amazon?

Bill Carr (01:27:07):
Yes.

Lenny (01:27:07):
Another Amazon related question potentially is do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show? Might be on Prime, might not be.

Bill Carr (01:27:15):
Yeah, my favorite recent movie is the latest Dune movie, and I can't wait for the new one to come out.

Lenny (01:27:20):
When is that coming out? It seems like I've been waiting a long time.

Bill Carr (01:27:22):
I think it's supposed to come out next month. I used to know this, I used to have to know the answer to this question, but I don't anymore. But I anxiously await the next one, I thought that last one was awesome. I even liked the original Dune movie, so I'm probably unusual that way. And I just watched, along with my wife, we just enjoyed watching the TV series A Spy Among Friends, which was on MGM+.

Lenny (01:27:50):
MGM+, I have not even heard of that.

Bill Carr (01:27:52):
I had not actually heard of it either.

Lenny (01:27:54):
Another one to subscribe to.

Bill Carr (01:27:55):
But you can basically go onto Prime Video and you can find this show and you can subscribe to MGM+ through that.

Lenny (01:28:01):
Thank you Prime. What is a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really like, maybe that you bought on Amazon, maybe not.

Bill Carr (01:28:08):
This one I did not buy on Amazon, and this one is, most of you may not understand this one, but I'm an avid cyclist and I got myself a new set of wheels for my road bike this year, actually my road bike and my gravel bike. It's the Zipp 303 Firecrest, the latest model, and boy, these are just fantastic wheels. They're light, they're sturdy, they absorb all the bumps well, I can use them on a road bike, I can use them on a gravel bike, awesome wheels.

Lenny (01:28:35):
Wow, that might be the most obscure random product that we've had yet. Recently we had a humidifier, so I like this collection of products we're building here. Create a wishlist on Amazon maybe.

Bill Carr (01:28:47):
Nice.

Lenny (01:28:47):
Do you have a favorite interview question that you really like to ask?

Bill Carr (01:28:52):
Yeah, it's actually quite basic, it's tell me about your most significant professional accomplishment. And I have to always clarify this, by this I mean not some award you won or some promotion you got, I mean something you built, or some product, some process, some organization you built, something like that. And I could basically then, once they get into that example, ask a lot of probing and follow-up questions and I could fill an entire hour interview just sticking with this one example to really understand how they... Using the STAR method, which is to try to understand everything from the situation to the result, and everything they did in between, who they influenced, how they'd influenced, what decisions they had to make, what roadblocks they encountered. If I just pull on that one string I can learn a whole lot about a candidate.

Lenny (01:29:46):
Next question, what's a favorite life motto that you often find yourself coming back to, sharing with friends, that you find useful?

Bill Carr (01:29:55):
Well, one that I end up coming to a lot professionally, and somewhat personally, is this one called slow is smooth and smooth is fast. This is a, I believe the origins of this one are actually from the Marine Corps for the Scout Snipers, so not trying to promote that particular craft, but the point of it is that actually, and we did this a lot at Amazon, it really oftentimes, to really to go fast, you actually need to go slow first and to be very clear on what you're doing and where you want to go. Most people confuse speed with velocity, and the difference between the two is that velocity has both speed and a vector to it, meaning there's some specific destination. And so I see a lot of people who are going very, very fast, but the destination isn't very clear, they haven't really thought that out well. So slow is smooth, smooth is fast.

Lenny (01:30:57):
There's a similar quote that I've always thought of, of you've got to go slow to go fast. And I always thought it was was Stephen Covey, but I just Googled as you were chatting and it's someone named Peter Senge in the book Fifth Discipline.

Bill Carr (01:31:11):
It took me a while, I always wanted to go fast first and not go slow first, so I'd say a lot of my personal development and growth, it's a big thing that I learned from Jeff at Amazon.

Lenny (01:31:25):
Final question, I don't know if you'll have an answer to this, but is there a pro-tip that you could suggest for using Amazon? Something that people may not know about how to get the most out of using amazon.com?

Bill Carr (01:31:36):
Sorry, I have no secret insights. There's not something like if you go on Monday mornings at this time the prices are lower, or something, or in stock is better. No, I know of no such thing.

Lenny (01:31:49):
Which I think is great, because it's built exactly as it should be for customers.

Bill Carr (01:31:54):
I guess so. But it used to be, maybe in the days of the slower internet, that I would tell you to go at non-peak hours, but this isn't really an issue anymore.

Lenny (01:32:06):
That'd be wild if that was still an issue. Bill, this was everything I hoped it would be, thank you so much for being here. You already shared where folks can find you online, so I'll skip that question. So final question is, how can listeners be useful to you?

Bill Carr (01:32:19):
We're always looking for feedback. You can post a review on Amazon for our book, that's probably the best way. You can fill out the contact us form or send us an email telling us what you found most useful in the book, or what you actually found is missing, what would you like to learn more about? If we were to write another book, or write more, what would you like us to tell you about?

Lenny (01:32:46):
Amazing, and that's bill@workingbackwards.com if they have that feedback. Go buy the book Working Backwards on Amazon and other places, and workingbackwards.com to learn more. Bill, thank you again so much for being here.

Bill Carr (01:32:59):
Thanks so much, Lenny, really enjoyed it.

Lenny (01:33:00):
Me too, bye everyone.

(01:33:04):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at Lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny (00:00:00):
You were basically the 10th engineer at Facebook. I imagine there was a lot of pain and suffering that people don't often hear about.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:00:07):
I didn't sleep for more than four hours at a time. I'd wake up every four hours and check the report and see if anyone was attacking the site. They don't tell you about that stuff in the movies.

Lenny (00:00:14):
You worked 120 hours per week., you had no hobbies.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:00:17):
I don't want to take away from the romanticism of it. It's just that most often, we hear those romantic stories from the successes. It's a healthy thing for people to want to throw themselves into something and take that risk, but it is not glamorous at the time.

Lenny (00:00:29):
The newsfeed. That was one of your early projects at Facebook. People did not want it. They were wrong, clearly.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:00:33):
Now, newsfeed was an easier case than people suspect. Everyone was outraged at the same time as they immediately doubled their usage of the product.

Lenny (00:00:40):
In terms of the economic utility, the Venn diagram of Boz, of newsfeed and ads created $1 trillion of value.

(00:00:48):
Today, my guest is Andrew Bosworth, or Boz, as most people know him. Boz is the chief technology officer of Meta. He joined what was then called Facebook in early 2006 as one of the first engineers, and during his 18-year tenure at Meta, he created some of the most impactful and important products in internet history, including the Facebook newsfeed, which was the first ever algorithmically ranked content feed of any social network, and is basically what people think of as Facebook today.

(00:01:17):
He also built the original Facebook mobile ads platform, which he then ran for another four years. He also helped build and scale the Facebook messaging system, the profile, the timeline, Facebook groups, and even the internal engineering boot camp. Most recently, he served as VP of ads and business platform, where he led engineering product, research, analytics, and design. And in 2017, he created the company's AR/VR organization, now called Reality Labs.

(00:01:42):
These days, Andrew leads Meta's efforts in AR, VR and mixed reality, along with consumer hardware across Quest, Ray-Ban, Meta smart glasses, and more.

(00:01:52):
In our wide-ranging conversation, we touch on so many important lessons and stories, what it was really like in the early days of Facebook, why you should be asking your manager for help more often, why communication is the job. Lessons from Meta's turnaround over the past couple of years, Boz's thoughts on the Apple Vision Pro, a bunch of leadership and career advice, what it was like to build the very first newsfeed, and lessons from that experience, and stories of failure and stories of success, and so much more.

(00:02:22):
If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes, and it helps the podcast tremendously.

(00:02:32):
With that, I bring you Andrew Bosworth, a.k.a. Boz, after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:39):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta. When it comes to ensuring your company has top-notch security practices, things get complicated fast. Now you can assess risk, secure the trust of your customers, and automate compliance for SOC 2, ISO-27001, HIPAA and more, with a single platform, Vanta. Vanta's market-leading trust management platform helps you continuously monitor compliance, alongside reporting and tracking risks. Plus, you can save hours by completing security questionnaires with Vanta AI. Join thousands of global companies that use Vanta to automate evidence collection, unify risk management, and streamline security reviews. Get $1,000 off Vanta when you go to vanta.com/lenny. That's Vanta.com/lenny. This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next-generation, A-B testing and feature management platform, built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams. Companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth and for understanding the performance of new features, and Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most was our experimentation platform where I could set up experiments easily, troubleshoot issues, and analyze performance, all on my own. Eppo does all that and more with advanced statistical methods that can help you shave weeks off experiment time, an accessible UI for diving deeper into performance, and out-of-the-box reporting that helps you avoid annoying prolonged analytic cycles. Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insights with your team, sparking new ideas for the A-B testing flywheel. Eppo powers experimentation across every use case, including product, growth, machine learning, monetization, and email marketing. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com/lenny, and 10x your experiment velocity. That's geteppo.com/lenny.

(00:04:47):
Boz, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:04:55):
Thanks for having me. I've been a long-time fan of your program and all the things that you've been putting out, so I'm glad to finally get a chance to join.

Lenny (00:05:01):
Same. I'm really excited to have you here. I have at least a billion questions I want to ask you. But I want to start with a few fun facts that I've found about you, and what if I go through them and then just pick one that stands out, and then tell the story behind it? How does that sound?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:05:17):
All right, sounds good.

Lenny (00:05:18):
Okay. You went to 14 proms.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:05:22):
Yeah. It's true.

Lenny (00:05:22):
Okay, I'm going to keep going. Okay.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:05:25):
Wow, that's a strong opener.

Lenny (00:05:27):
That might be the one. You were a national Taekwondo champion in college. You were Mark Zuckerberg's TA in college in a class on AI, which isn't actually how you landed at Facebook, from my understanding. Harvard was recruiting you to play football for them. You were very active in the 4-H Club, and you raised animals and showed them at county fairs when you were growing up. You once shared a stage with David Copperfield.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:05:52):
That's true.

Lenny (00:05:52):
MC Hammer once told you that your outfit was stylish. And president George W. Bush complimented you on your shoes and the shine of your head.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:06:03):
Yeah, these are all true. I want to say, wow. First of all, I got to make sure that people understand, I was a national collegiate champion, in as a green belt, which that's like being the JV champion. Just so everyone's clear on what that is.

Lenny (00:06:15):
W's a W.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:06:16):
Heavyweight sparring. I'll tell... The prom story is a funny one. It's related to the 4-H story. I was a big-time 4-H'er, National 4-H Hall of Fame, did all this stuff there.

(00:06:29):
As a comeup to that, 4-H is a wonderful program, youth program, it's coed program, and I was all over the state, all over the country, doing leadership events and doing these conferences, and doing a lot of public speaking.

(00:06:39):
And almost every 4-H event has a dance. People don't know that. At the end of a conference, at the end of the, literally camp, you'd go camping for a week, at the end there's a dance.

(00:06:49):
And so, as a consequence, the most important thing, if wanted to go to a lot of proms, I was a good dancer. And it turns out, the high-level bit, at least in the 1990s, for girls selecting who they might want to go to prom with was, will he and can he dance? And the answer with me was yes. And combine that with the fact that I knew a bunch of girls who went to different schools, that's the recipe for success right there, if that's the goal that somebody has. Two my junior year and 12 my senior year. I once went to three in one weekend, a Friday, a Saturday, and a Sunday night.

Lenny (00:07:21):
Another fun fact about you is you were basically the 10th engineer at Facebook, initially, way before it was a clear success story. I imagine there was a lot of pain and suffering and struggle that people don't often hear about those early days. They see a movie like The Social Network. It looks like, "Oh, that was so much fun. I've got to start a company. It's going to become a trillion-dollar success story." I'm curious just what those early days were like. Are there memories that stand out to you?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:07:47):
Yeah, there's a bit of a joke in the 10th thing, which is me and five other guys all joined at the same time, and there was nine engineers before us. We joined the same day, so we're all the 10th engineer. So, somewhere between 10 and 16, depending on how you want to do the numeration on that.

(00:07:59):
I've written about this in my blog, and I tell this story a lot, which is it was fun, and there was tremendous camaraderie and memories that were formed, but they were formed in a kind of forge of really intense times.

(00:08:13):
At that time, almost all of us lived within one mile of the office. We ate most of our meals together because we were working, not to say we weren't also friends, but because we were working, it's like, oh cool, you just roll into a meal and roll back into work.

(00:08:26):
And there's little things that you don't appreciate, which is like there was nobody to help you. There was no expert. And so, it wasn't like, "Hey, I'm struggling with this one tricky problem. Who should I talk to?" It's like, nobody. You should talk to yourself and figure this out. Or it's like, "Oh, man. My servers are out of capacity." It's like, "Cool. You should go to Fry's Electronics, you should buy a bunch of components, you should build a new server, and then you should run it. Maybe drive into the colo, rack it, and then get back and run it."

(00:08:52):
People really undervalue the fact that when you go to work, even a moderate mid-size corporation today, especially with the tremendous growth of startups supporting startups, things like payroll and finance and IT and HR, these things are professionally handled in many cases.

(00:09:10):
That was just not the case in the early 2000s. It was just you, and your personal car, and whatever you wanted to do with your time.

(00:09:18):
So, I don't want to take away from the romanticism of it, it's just that it's most often we hear those romantic stories from the successes. We so rarely hear somebody who went through really sacrificing a lot of my 20s from any kind of social or outgoing, fun environment.

(00:09:37):
It paid off for me, so no one feels bad for me, nor should they. But there are other people who do the exact same thing, maybe they worked harder, maybe they were smarter, maybe they did better, and it didn't play out for them. And it's a big sacrifice.

(00:09:48):
And so, I love the enthusiasm for startups, I love startup culture. I think it's a healthy thing for people to want to throw themselves into something and take that risk. But it is not glamorous at the time. In retrospect, it's like, "Oh, it can be..." We have a little halo around it. But at the time, it doesn't feel glamorous.

Lenny (00:10:06):
Yeah. In this post you mentioned, you said that you worked 120 hours per week.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:10:07):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:10:10):
You had no hobbies, and you gained a lot of weight.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:10:15):
Yeah. We drank a lot to make up for it, so I gained a lot of... And you weren't eating healthy. It was crazy.

(00:10:22):
I think I've told this before. There was a time where one of the first things I built was an anti-spam, kind of anti-scraping defense mechanism. But we didn't have any ops support. There was no 24/7 online support.

(00:10:35):
So, I built this tool. I had to wake up every four hours. For about two years, I didn't sleep for more than four hours at a time. I had to wake up every four hours and check the report, and to see if anyone was attacking the site. And if they were, I was up, and I had to go battle back. And if they weren't, cool, I'd go back to sleep. But that's the thing, they don't tell you about that stuff in the movies.

Lenny (00:10:55):
That's almost worse than having a kid, a newborn.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:10:59):
And nobody asked me to do it. Nobody even asked me to do the anti-spam, anti-scraping stuff. I just thought it was a problem, and I went and did that, and that was the solution I come with. If I was a better engineer, maybe I'd have solved a better problem.

Lenny (00:11:11):
So, maybe just to close out that thread, when you talk to founders, what advice do you give them along these lines?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:11:18):
I want to be cautious about this, because what I tell founders... The first thing I tell founders is that I've never been a founder, and I want to recognize the difference. I joined January 9th, 2006. That's almost two years after Mark started the company. I wasn't involved with fundraising, I didn't have to do any of that side of the things, and I didn't even have to deal with the board or the business side of things. I really was lucky, in a way, to have joined when I did.

(00:11:42):
But the first thing I tell founders is like, "You should take my advice with a grain of salt. I have not actually been in your shoes."

(00:11:47):
If I can compliment you, really, one of the things I like about your program is, there's a whole system of professionals in our industry. And when I grew up in technology in the valley, you always heard about the ACM, right? The Association of Computing Machinery. You heard of these legendary professional organizations that supported people in our fields.

(00:12:09):
And by the nature of the rapid pace of change in the technology, and the nature of the engagement of those institutions, even academics, even academia broadly, kind of are out of touch. The tools that you got from those places weren't useful in our field.

(00:12:23):
So, I do think the mentorship that we give each other has been a critical and sustaining resource. There is, today, now, resources like your podcasts and your newsletter that are actually really designed to help people who are professionals in our industry in a way that is almost kind of missing for 15, 20 years, and I love to see that. Because if you're an up-and-coming [inaudible 00:12:45], literally you used to have to know somebody and ask them a question.

(00:12:48):
And so, a lot of times what I'm helping founders with, I can help them with the strategy, I can help them think through the technology choices, I can help through business, I can think through the management, the organization structure. But I also try to be very clear, there's a bunch of stuff that I just was never exposed to.

(00:13:00):
So, even as we just talk about how tough it was for the average engineer joining Facebook in 2006, man, it was even tougher for Mark Zuckerberg in 2004, probably. And that's a story that's been told, I'm sure, but still. So, I think these are both... It's almost all scale and variant. No matter how far you dial back, the challenges are interesting and are worth talking about.

Lenny (00:13:22):
One of maybe your most popular posts is this quote that you share about the advice you often give. What you say is, "The advice I find I have to give more frequently than any other in my career, as a manager, a board member, an advisor and a friend, is for people to more directly leverage their leaders." Can you talk about that and what that means, and what that looks like?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:13:40):
It's such a normal and natural healthy thing. And by the way, we do it in our personal relationships. Like I said in the post, we want to do it ourselves. We want to do it ourselves to prove to everyone that we can do it ourselves.

(00:13:52):
And we think in our heads, "If I ask for help, haven't I already given up that goal? Haven't I just admitted defeat on one of my top level goals, which is to demonstrate that I can do it myself?"

(00:14:04):
But what so often we forget is, more often than not, your job is not to do it yourself. Your job is to get it done, is to have the thing done, done well, done right, done competently. And a lot of times, the tools that you need to do that live with your manager, with your partner, with your advisor, with your mentor. That's where they live.

(00:14:25):
So, how many times as a manager have I gone through, and somebody's told them, "Here's the job." They're like, "I got it." They go off, they come back, it's done, it's wrong. And I'm not blaming them for it being wrong. They didn't check in with me. They misunderstood. We miscommunicated. I'll take the L on that. That's no problem.

(00:14:42):
But here we are, six months later, it's not done right because they misunderstood the brief. We miscommunicated with the brief.

(00:14:49):
Or they come back, and it took a year. And I'm like, "Why did this take a year instead of six months?" And they're like, "Oh, man. I had all these things I had to deal with." Where, if they had emailed me, I could have bulldozed that stuff. I could have cleared the path. I could have said, " Oh, no, no, no. Don't worry about that. This is the thing." And then we'd have been done six months sooner, and they would've been less frustrated. And so, light touches.

(00:15:09):
Now, I do think as a manager we also have a job to say, "Hey, that's kind of the work, so you got to kind of go figure that out." And one of my things I always tell my managers, one of the most powerful things we do is refuse to rule. Someone will bring me a thing. A lot of times we feel obligated to weigh in and help. I'll be like, "Nope, but look, I think you've got it. I think the challenges you're facing are the right challenges. I think you're approaching it in the right way. Just do your best there." And that's what it is. And so, there is a responsibility as well for those of us who are leaders, mentors, advisors, board members to do that.

(00:15:39):
But, by the way, we do this... Personal relationships. You're with your partner, and you're trying to do something the right way, but you're not talking to them about it. You're just taking a huge risk there, and for very little reward. They're not going to be mad if you ask them, like, "Hey, is this how you wanted it done? I don't know."

(00:15:56):
And so, I do think it's kind of funny how much we build these castles in our mind, these little silos that keep us from engaging the structures that are built around us, that are designed to help us succeed. I saw this great quote, actually just yesterday. I saw Patrick Stewart, who is one of my favorite actors of all time, and whose characters I love, and he talked about people going on casting calls. And this is a brutal thing for actors, right? You're going on 30, 40 things, you're getting rejected. It's tough. Everyone's kind of heard about this. And he said, "No one wants you to succeed more than the person you are auditioning for, because they want you to be awesome. Because as soon as you are awesome, they're done. They want you to be amazing."

(00:16:37):
That's like your manager. Nobody wants you to be more awesome than your manager does, because when you're amazing, your manager, his life gets easier, her life gets easier. So, I just think that's the mentality we get into is like, "No, no, no. They're testing me." They're not. They are rooting for you. I promise you that.

Lenny (00:16:53):
I love that advice. I imagine the reason people don't do this, as you said, is they don't want their managers to think they don't know what they're doing, or they can't solve it. Do you have any advice and guidance for when it makes sense to go reach out and ask?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:17:06):
One of the things I think, for people who are timid about this especially, is I think you can put a framing around it that's really easy for your manager to engage with. You can say, "Hey, I'm making progress on this. This is what I'm blocked on, this is the current program." And I'll even say, "Hey, if this all looks good to you, no response required. If there is something here that you want me to do better, different, that you think you could help with, let me know."

(00:17:32):
I love a typed, five-, 10-sentence email, "No response required. Here's where things are." Even if everything is going really well, I'm like, cool, this person understands the urgency, they understand the assignment, and they're giving me a little heartbeat, a little ping back.

(00:17:53):
And then also, if two weeks later, let's say the blocking issue is bad, then you say, "Hey, I am sorry, but I do actually need your help now. I'm actually blocked on this thing." I have the context. I have a mental model of you toiling away on the right thing, on the thing I asked you to do over there. Even then, when you're blocked, you can make my life super easy. Like, "Hey, what I'd love for you to do, if you could send an email to this person, here's a draft with this thought, that would help."

(00:18:23):
Or it's like, here are specific questions framed up. "I think this is what you want. Is this right? Yes or no? If no, okay, we'll come back and we'll spend more time. If yes, we're all good." So now, not only am I up to speed, I have a mental model, I'm engaged. Also, you've made it super cheap for me to help you. And people are always surprised. People who work for me are always surprised when I tell them how big a part of my job is doing these little types of things.

(00:18:53):
It's a little spinning plates at my scale. I've got 10,000 or 15,000 employees, depending on how you want to count different things. And so, you're just like, every now and then I got to get a whole new plate, a whole new rod, and just really put the effort into it. But for the most part, I'm just trying to touch everything and keep the momentum going. And so, if something falls, and somebody didn't tell me that "Hey, we're losing rotational velocity here. We're losing momentum." Oh, I'm bummed. I'm like, "Ah, now that plate fell. I got to start a whole new thing over here now."

(00:19:22):
So, I think people underestimate. They think of my job differently than my job actually... My job is actually tons of little touches.

Lenny (00:19:29):
So, I think a key takeaway here is, one, index more towards asking your manager and leaders for help. And I love this way of framing it of, it doesn't always need to be like, "Here's what I need from you." It's, "Here's what's happening. Here's things that might be blocking me. Here's questions I have. Here's things that are going on."

(00:19:44):
This is actually similar to something I found really powerful that I'll share real quickly, this idea of a state of... I call it the State of Lenny email. And I sent this email to my manager every week. The State of Lenny. It's kind of like State of the Union. And it's, "Here's my current priorities, here's what's on my mind broadly, and then here's blockers that I need your help with.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:20:02):
We actually used to have a format for that we called HPMs. Highlight, people, me. And every manager at Facebook from like 2008 to like 2014 would send to their manager, or even their leadership group. I mean, at one point when I was running what we called comm apps, I just sent it to Zuck and the whole leadership group.

(00:20:24):
It's like, what's the highlights include? And it highlights [inaudible 00:20:27] flow. What's the big ticket things you need to know? Where are people? Like is somebody in trouble? Is somebody at risk? Is somebody doing really amazing work that needs a shout-out? And then me, how are you personally doing? HPMs, we called them.

(00:20:39):
Actually, it's funny. I hadn't thought about that in a long time. But yeah, no, I think this kind of thing can work. And look, every manager is different, so even at the Meta level, by the way, is another success. I think what people do is they want to treat every manager the same, and that's not going to work because every manager is different.

(00:20:54):
But every manager, you can ask, "How do you like to get updates?" You can ask them when you first start working with them. Like, "Hey, what's your cadence? How do you like to stay informed?" And so, for me, I do regular one-on-ones. As the org's has gotten bigger, those have gotten more distant, so people have replaced those with more written things.

(00:21:11):
But no manager will get pissed at you if you're like, "How do you like to get information about me?" That's a totally reasonable thing to ask.

Lenny (00:21:18):
I love the specific idea you shared of just drafting the email to say the other team leader, "Here's what I need you to tell them. That would really unblock this thing." And that's such a cool idea.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:21:27):
By the way, I always put my own... I don't take that copy paste it. I'm always looking at that and be like, "Okay, I understand." A lot of it is actually not about what you want the other person to hear, it's about the voice, the tone.

(00:21:41):
It includes a lot of history. I don't know. Have you been going back and forth with them for 12 rounds, and this is going to feel to them like I'm really coming over the top? Or is this like, "Hey, first time you're hearing about this, my bad. Here's what we're doing. Need your help."

(00:21:54):
So, a lot of that isn't even about making my life easy because I want to copy paste. A lot of it is, actually, there's a rich set of information in how you tone and how you draft that note that's going to help me land it correctly and not feel like I'm just out of band, heavy coming in.

Lenny (00:22:11):
This touches on something that I often hear is very core to the way Meta works, which is transparency. Anyone can ask Zuck questions at the Q&A's. People are encouraged to post constantly internally of what they're thinking, what they're working on. All the data is shared publicly. Which often leads to leaks, which I hear you hate, and that is a pet peeve of yours.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:22:32):
Just feels like a violation of the team trust. Just feels like... I grew up with playing sports, right? I was football, soccer, track. And you just can't imagine one of your guys calling out the play to the other team. Can you imagine what you would do in that case? "You're off the team. I'm sorry, you can't be here." Anyways, sorry. Carry on.

Lenny (00:22:48):
Yeah, and there's so many more people, it's hard to find. Who is this? So, with this downside as an example, and I imagine there's other downsides also takes a lot of work, and it puts people on the spot a lot of times, what have you seen as benefits and why is that such a big part of Meta's way of working?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:23:05):
Yeah. This kind of comes back to, I think, the principle that really good, talented people, you want to leverage them fully. You really want to make sure that they are fully leveraged. And so, anytime they have the wrong information, or they don't have the information, you've now blocked one of the economically most valuable things that your company possesses, which is this person's time, attention, talent. Not only that, you've also made them more frustrated, and now they are more likely to leave.

(00:23:35):
If the lifeblood of any company are the people inside of it who collectively commit to some kind of a goal and a mission and work together, then you want to maximize that potential. And creating this really open information ecosystem is one of the ways that we do that. So often, great, phenomenal work that has happened at our company has not come from this one top-down mandate, but has come from people understanding not just what we're trying to accomplish top down, but also having way more information at their disposal to be able to act on it.

(00:24:16):
People talk about top-down or bottoms-up culture, and it's a bit of a myth, in my opinion. If you've ever met Mark Zuckerberg, it's not a bottoms-up thing. The ideas that we're pursuing are Mark Zuckerberg's ideas, first and foremost. That's not to say that he's not open to new ones, and of course he is, and that's a form of bottom-up, people can bring ideas to him and he internalizes them and acts them or not. But when he brings things top-down, he's not micromanaging, he's in the details. I'll be careful on that.

(00:24:44):
But he does create the space for you to bring back three or four versions of the thing that he's talking about, and then he shapes it from there. And you can't do that if there's... If you don't have degrees of freedom, sure, but also if you don't have the information. Otherwise, if you don't have the information available, what we're trying to accomplish, why we're trying to do it, what the infrastructure is like, what the availability is like, what the performance is going to be like, well, you just are stuck. You're just going to have to follow the script. That's very boring for high-talent, high-creativity, high-engaged people.

(00:25:15):
Now, it does come at a tremendous price. You have to get really good at managing information on the incoming. Most people at most companies consume all the information that's given to them, but the information itself is carefully managed. They're getting all the information they're intended to get.

(00:25:32):
We've turned that on its head, and it sounds great, but it's not free. Even somebody senior coming from outside of the company to the company, one of the things I have to coach them on is, how do you find signal amongst all the noise?

(00:25:45):
You have to have a system for managing your information. You have to have a system for triaging the incoming, getting rid of a bunch of stuff that is on the wrong channel, or it doesn't matter to you, figuring out what's the... groups that you want to be a part of, but you consume only when you choose to and-

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:26:00):
... groups that you want to be a part of but you consume only when you choose to. And where are the things where you're getting push notice? Like that's the real time thing, and that takes some time.

Lenny (00:26:08):
This point you made about bottom up versus top down is really interesting, because, when I think of Meta, I think it's a very bottom up culture. I hear everyone comes up with their ideas, runs experiments, is very encouraged to just try stuff, and it's really interesting to hear that. And it makes a lot of sense that most of the big ideas actually do come from the top.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:26:26):
It's of these mythology things. I don't think it's the wrong... As a contract, it's more bottoms up than many other companies, because you do have these degrees of freedom within the construct. But make no mistake, like Mark or me or Chris Cox or Javi, they have very strong opinions about what we should be doing as a company, and your bottoms up-ness works within that framework. But it is true that you can ask Mark any question, and he's going to answer it. Same with me, same with Chris, same with Javi and also that we certainly take inspiration from the discussion that we have with employees. So I don't know, it's just not as black and white as people tend to paint it.

Lenny (00:27:02):
I think one of the biggest lessons here is making it at least feel like you have a lot of say, even though a company is very, "Here's the big strategic [inaudible 00:27:10]," you're very good at making people feel like they can have an impact and a say.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:27:14):
And can I tell you, the most important thing is just giving people clear guidelines so they know where they... Like, "Where do they have space and where do they have no space?" One of the things that we go in these reviews with Mark or my team with me I'm sure, and I'm like, "For this part of the UI, it is going to... Like, I will draw it for you. It's going to be like this." And this other part. I'm like, "Cool, that's important, too. I don't have a clear vision of it. Why don't you do it?" So there's just really clear guardrails of like, "Okay, where are we just on assignment? And where do we have more flexibility?"

Lenny (00:27:45):
Is there an example of that that comes to mind where you were just very in the details and drawing the screen?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:27:51):
Over the course of time, there's been quite a few examples. I think early on, when we were working on News Feed, mark was absolutely whiteboarding every single pixel that the team had to put on the front end. On the back end, he was like, "Make it rank, have some ranking." So I felt like I was lucky there. I was just like, "Cool, I'm off to the races on some ranking stuff." And Chris Cox and all these other guys are having to really pixel-match these things. But it's not always that way by the way. So now fast-forward and we're talking about ranking, it's not like Mark is always hands-off on that. When we got into modernizing our ranking systems, which we've done over the last five years, Mark was heavily involved and like, " Hey, what's the mix shift and how are you weighing different things?"

(00:28:33):
And so it can go both ways. For me personally, I've gotten really involved in some relatively esoteric things. I was really adamant, for example, that hand tracking and mixed reality make it into the headset. Let's just say that there weren't any supporters in the team. Obviously we had a hand tracking team, which is phenomenal, mixed reality team, but there was a lot of people who were like... They did not feel those features were going to be critical for this to become a mainstream device. I always believed that they were for ease of use and for... So I just really forced the issue and didn't give anyone any room and held really high standards for the performance benchmarks we were going to hit on the hand tracking. And teams told me it was impossible. And it wasn't. It did great.

Lenny (00:29:11):
This touches on something that comes up a lot on this podcast. And there's this debate between how in-the-weeds founders and execs should be, whether they delegate, empower, versus, "No, we're just going to do it this way. I'm going to be very involved in every mock." And there's always this up and down that happens where it's like, "Okay, cool, we're going to let people run and do their thing," and then things start to not work as well often. And then, "We're going to take back control." You have just a perspective on when it makes sense to go deep, how founders execs should think about that?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:29:41):
Such a useless answer for founders, it depends on the weeds. There are some weeds that really matter and there's some weeds that really just don't, and I should say, that doesn't mean they don't matter at all. You have to do them, but they aren't the hinge upon which success or failure will happen. Yeah, there's people I really respect, Brian Chesky's been on and said, "Look, the Airbnb is going to work only on the things that I can work on. It's that's the extent of what it's going to do." And that's a super extreme form of it. I have a lot of respect for him and how they're working things. I think that if you have great super talented people that you can trust who can own bigger pieces, that's one option. If there are ways to structure it so that you can check in effectively and make sure that it's on track, that's another way to structure it.

(00:30:27):
And there probably is still work happening at Airbnb, that has to happen, finance and accounting and HR, that Brian isn't personally managing. So there are clearly non-technical areas that we do. Or legal. There are areas that we do trust that this is happening at. And so I think a lot of founders regret delegating too much, from my conversations. And I totally get that. Or they delegated something critical that really turned out to be the most important thing. For me, the judgment is like, "How do you, most important, determine what is what matters the most?" And so Mark, we joke inside of Meta, to this day, we call it the eye of Sauron. When Mark has determined that the thing that you're working on is the most important thing, there is no detail too small for him to notice.

(00:31:17):
He will be in a review, and in the same review. We'll be like, "Strategically, I think we're off course. And also, this one pixel is definitely wrong. You have to fix that." That's a big range. Frankly, I'll be a little bit self-congratulatory, I pride myself on being able to do the same. And I think people who work with me often comment that the style of leadership that we have, and I think Chris Cox is the same, is where it's like we will go where hide a low on the things that matter a ton. And there's a bunch of other things that certainly matter. We're glad we're doing them, but either they have pretty clear roadmaps, pretty clear examples in the industry, or it's like that's a feature that you have to have but isn't going to determine success or failure. So getting it into rough shape and then iterating on it is fine. And so I think it really does depend on the weeds, how deep you want to get.

Lenny (00:32:08):
It's so funny, I use exactly that same metaphor, the eye of Sauron, when I talk about working on things that Airbnb that matter a lot to Brian. And my advice to people is, "You don't want to be in that eye of Sauron for too long in your career, because you're just going to burn out if you're working on the most important thing all the time, but want to be close. You don't want to be in the Shire, but you want to be around the [inaudible 00:32:26].

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:32:26):
That's right. They're both... So I worked for years in ads. From 2012 to 2017, I ran ads in a business platform, this big ads group, and it was an area where certainly it was very important, but Mark had so many other things going on with the transition to mobile, he did kind of delegate it to me. And it was awesome, and it was so cool to have that kind of trust from him. And also, you're constantly terrified, because like, "Mark does not know. What if this is all..." My leads would be worried, because they just hadn't had a review with Mark in a while. And it's like, yeah, you suffer in the intensity of the gaze of Sauron. You also suffer in the shadow of its absence. There's no perfect place to be.

Lenny (00:33:09):
That's hilarious. I'm trying to think of the part of Middle Earth that is a metaphor for that.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:33:14):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:33:15):
Okay, so you talked about the News Feed, which was one of your very earliest projects at Facebook. Here's a couple fun facts I know about the News Feed. One is that it was the very first algorithmic News Feed of its kind of any social network and maybe of any sort of product like this. And two, it was the very first AI code that was written at Facebook to rank the actual News Feed. So there were a lot of firsts, and clearly this became a huge deal. The News Feed is essentially what people think of when they think of Facebook now, but it was super controversial when it came out. People were very against this. They did not want to be sharing this much information with people, or so they thought, and then they realized eventually, "Oh, this is actually exactly what I want." What did you learn from going through that experience of building something that people initially reject and then later realize that they actually do want this and this is exactly what they're waiting for?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:34:08):
This is a story that you tell a lot actually through your interviews, which is just like, "You have to have conviction in what you're building." You're choosing your customers as much as your customers are choosing you, is one way I think about it sometimes, and one mistake that you do see sometimes startups make is they get an early cohort of users whose needs actually take them kind of orthogonal to a larger market. And so they become kind of held hostage by their earliest customers now. So time and time again, we've had a vision for what we thought this should look like, and it wasn't the thing we were delivering right now. And so people who were using the thing we currently had were not sure that that change was what they wanted. But we had a confidence that over time they would, and we're not always right, but in these cases we were right. Now News Feed was an easier case than people suspect, because everyone was outraged at the same time as they immediately doubled their usage of the product.

(00:35:05):
So we had a few advantages there, which was, it was literally like everyone was like, "I hate this so much." And they would refresh, refresh, refresh. And so we were like, Okay, wait, there's cognitive dissonance here between what the stated preferences and what the revealed preferences are in the economic sense. So News Feed was a little easier than people suspect, to us, to stick with. But people sometimes misunderstand that. They think, "Oh, the lesson is don't listen to your customers. Not at all." And we certainly care a tremendous amount. And even with News Feed, we did actually screw some things up. I kind of always make this joke that it's almost like... You know when you're at the party and music's loud, you're talking to somebody and the music cuts out right when you're saying something at a super high volume, and so everyone in the party hears the last thing you said?

(00:35:42):
Now you were saying it in a public place, so it wasn't like it was a private comment, but you also didn't mean to broadcast it at that volume. We kind of did that to the entire user base. We took what had been wall posts, which sure, anybody could have gone to that profile and seen and then put it kind of on blast, on Main, as the kids say these days, "Put it on Main," and someone's like, "Ah." So we did that. I don't want to say it like... We did screw things up. It wasn't like, "Oh, this is a clause execution." So another thing to know is like, "When did you screw something small up, and when did you do something big up?" When is the thing itself wrong, versus when were the details wrong? That is an art. That is a real art, and you don't always have user data to determine it like we did.

(00:36:25):
And so a lot of that is, "Do you have a clear vision and intuition for what you expected to happen?" And then what happened instead and can you diagnose the delta there? So in the News Feed case, we made a bunch of little mistakes. The thing itself was right, and I really am quite proud of the work we did there. Me and Chris Cox at the most core probably in the engineering side, which you saw as the PM, there was no ranked feeds before that. We did have some AI that I built before for the anti-spam, anti... things, but it was pretty rudimentary, but it was probably the first consumer AI that was in a website of that kind around content. And we built the most efficient monetizing surface in history outside of Search, I think. [inaudible 00:37:04] for those who are curious, I don't use monetization because I think money's the most important thing. I do think it suggests the economic power you've created, which I do think correlates very strongly with human utility. Although obviously I respect that some people may disagree.

Lenny (00:37:17):
In terms of the economic utility, the Venn diagram of Boz, of News Feed and ads, create $1 trillion dollars of value.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:37:24):
It's not-

Lenny (00:37:24):
Well done.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:37:25):
It's not nothing, not nothing.

Lenny (00:37:27):
[inaudible 00:37:27].

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:37:27):
We're proud of that work.

Lenny (00:37:28):
You have this quote in one of your posts about the News Feed where you said, "It consumed me more fully than anything in life had ever consumed me. It opened up to me the truth that when you're passionate about something, you do better work, you do smarter work and you're, in order of magnitude, more productive."

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:37:43):
There's no substitute for it. One thing I've learned about myself since that post actually is just the degree to which I am somebody who is inclined to be passionate about things. And it's a gift that I'm lucky to have, and I understand that's not every person. And so actually the ads thing is a good example. When Mark told me to go work on ads, I was like, " No, I don't want to. I don't think I have a passion for that." I had this idea of myself. I had a very strong identity of myself as this AI infrastructure product guy, and I was working in this space and nope, I was wrong. I just am a guy who gets excited about things. Once I get into ads, it's like, "Oh, this is fascinating. It's a three-sided marketplace, and there's all these different..." It felt like I was playing chess times in terms of the moves with the other players in the industry, and I was super pumped about that.

(00:38:26):
And then when he wanted me to work on hardware, I was like, "No, I'm not. I'm a software guy. I'm a software guy, Mark." And now, I love this work. That's such a fascinating space that I've learned so much. So I do think that's right. I do think what I find something I'm passionate about that's good. What I have learned since then is to give myself a space to understand if I can get passionate about it. Now, there are parts of jobs that I've had before where I just never found the passion, and after six months I just have to move on. Literally it's like I'll either quit, get fired, I'm doing bad work, I don't care about the work. And so I do have a self-awareness. It's not that I can get passionate about anything, but I do have a pretty broad palette, it turns out.

Lenny (00:39:01):
I think that's a really interesting career lesson of, "Don't assume you won't be excited about something that may come up." Is there anything there that you'd share with folks of just like, "Explore it, give it six months, see if you can get excited about it?"

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:39:14):
Absolutely. So I have a very unusual career arc in some ways, which is I really almost changed jobs every six months for a long time. I was working on this integrity stuff with News Feed in the background. Then I was working on News Feed for about a year. Then I worked on site speed and infrastructure and detecting SAVs and issues. And then I worked on Bootcamp, and then I worked on messaging and groups. I had this really funny thing. I was kind of joking it was like, for those who are old enough to remember Karate Kid, I felt like I was painting a lot of fences, waxing a lot of cars, and at the end I knew karate. I was like at the end, at the end I had the payoff, because I'd gone through and I'd met a lot of people and I'd worked in these different areas and I understood different dynamics. Well, other people who joined in my cohort were getting promoted, but they were in a single track. They just stayed in one place and they got promoted, whereas I kept moving around. And it probably at some point early in my career felt like I was moving more slowly relative to my peers. And then when I finally turned the corner, really with the ads appointment, which I did for five years, I went vertical. I just like my career went vertical. And since then I've kind of been on that trajectory. And so advice I most often give people, for me at least, the lesson that I take from this, is I just was willing to learn aggressively. I would move because I wasn't learning enough. I was bored, and so I wasn't learning enough new stuff. And what was cool about finally getting to the ads job, and likewise in the job I'm in now, is those jobs, I learned a ton for five years. I'd never stopped learning in those jobs. You will occasionally find those jobs where they're super deep and you can just keep learning.

(00:40:50):
Meanwhile, a lot of my friends whose careers were on a better trajectory [inaudible 00:40:55] then earlier, they literally got bored of what they were doing, but they didn't have any place to jump to. There wasn't some other... They'd become domain specialists in a domain that they'd kind of exhausted for themselves. And maybe they'd even stuck around longer than they wanted to because it was comfortable or because the company wanted them to. And it ended up kind of being a hindrance to them in the middle of their career. And so for me, it's like, "Jump into new things, give it six months. If it's not the thing, no problem. You just built a ton of new skills that's going to come in handy, I promise you that. Keep going." And likewise, when you do make that jump early career, optimize for learning, optimize for... Think about a compound interest. It's like the first 10 years of compound interest don't look that impressive. It's like after 10 years it starts to look good.

Lenny (00:41:43):
I love that advice. It's similar advice I always give of, "Variety of experience often ends up being the most valuable thing you build over time," just trying to bunch of stuff, doing some internal tools, maybe working on customer support, I don't know, trust and safety, user-facing products, infrastructure. I'm thinking from a PM's perspective, maybe an engineers, and other functions. One question along those lines. So we talked about the eye of Sauron and working on the most important thing at the company. Do you have any advice on how much of your career you should be working in that center?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:42:12):
Yeah, listen, [inaudible 00:42:12] being equal, I think there's two really good places to be. I think one is carrying a lot of water in areas that the company's not paying attention to but you are important. And it needs to be a lot. You got to own that stuff and really move mountains over there, because I promise you, as an executive, when there's a huge dam holding up the floodwaters, you respect the heck out of the person who is holding that dam up. You're like, "You keep doing that, Atlas, that is good work over there." The second-best place to be, or maybe equally, is on the most important thing. And on the most important thing, that's where you get to the advice that Eric Schmidt gave Sheryl Sandberg, which is like, "Hey, it's a rocket ship. Get on. Don't ask what seat I'm in. Just get on."

(00:42:59):
If it's the most important thing, you're going to get a smaller piece. Everyone wants to be there. Get the piece. If it's the most important thing, get the piece that you can crush, kill, do a great job at and grow from, because you're going to get a ton of visibility, you're going to get a ton of experience. You're going to see what it looks like in the fire, in the fire, and that is invaluable. You will use that everywhere. And so I say that. That's at project selection time, but now I'll be cautious. Understand, projects that start in the fire, hopefully, are forged in some manner of metal that cools and is no longer in the fire, like God willing. And likewise, things like dams that are holding up floodwaters have a tendency to crack or break or floods overcome [inaudible 00:43:42]. So I think you do want to be at selection time in one of those two places, but then you also... You're going to stick with the ride.

(00:43:50):
And again, to my point, if you're not engaged, if you aren't doing great work, if you don't love it, then move on. If you've exhausted it, you used to love it, but you don't anymore, move on. If you still love it and you're engaged, great. That's cool. That's a great thing. You deserve to go from the forge to the dam and back over time. You don't have to always just keep jumping onto the latest fire. I tried to do that once, after the ad [inaudible 00:44:14]. Actually, so I spent six months and we built the first mobile ad product in 2012 and kind of saved the IPO, which had gotten pretty grim [inaudible 00:44:23]-

Lenny (00:44:23):
Yeah, I remember that.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:44:24):
... that point. And I told Mark, I was like, "This is so fun. Maybe you can just keep doing this, just putting me on the biggest fire every six months." And he turns to me, he said, "Buzz, that's not a real job."

(00:44:32):
He's like, "I need you to stay here and usher this forward," which I did for the next four and a half years. And it was amazing. It was amazing. And again, I do give him such... It's funny, I'm going to get a hard time in this. One of our biggest critics as well as being one of his biggest fans. I have both those jobs, but today we're talking about stuff that I think Mark really demonstrates really well. And he did a great job of pushing me in my career to different places where I didn't think I could succeed. And he saw the opportunity that made it happen.

Lenny (00:45:01):
What have you learned about that, giving Mark negative criticism, anything that he accepts? What do you learned about that?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:45:08):
Mark's voracious for all information and all points of view. One of the things that's pretty interesting, I talked earlier about how much, as a founder, I think especially, you have to have tremendous conviction. You just have to have a tremendous degree of confidence. And I think Mark is somebody who is maybe the strongest willpower of a person I've ever met, just in a pure willpower sense. One thing that's interesting about Mark is you'll give him feedback, he listens. He's a kind person to work for, so you'll give him feedback, and he'll listen. Truly. He'll most often tell you that you're wrong, why you're wrong. That's just like most often. And what will happen is... It's uncanny. It's like over the course of the next week or two, you'll just see shifts. And I don't think he's doing it...

(00:45:55):
I've always joked that the information gets to him. So much information every day gets him. And then at night, he re-compiles the whole world with all that information and comes back. And by the way, this is not just true about product work. In my head, I was thinking about product stuff where he was like, "Hey, I think this product is doing this wrong." He's like, "No, no, that's why it's not that way." And the product will start to shift. Also to give him feedback just on his own presence in a meeting or delivery, he'll be like, "Oh, well here's why I did it that way." And then a couple weeks later, you'll get in a similar situation, and he will moderate how he shows up. So I actually find him somebody who's really satisfying to give him feedback. It really works. It's very effective, but you do have to take the long view on it. And he will have a... The things he did, he didn't do an accident. He will have a reason why he did them the way he did them.

Lenny (00:46:39):
It's a great example of strong opinions, loosely held.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:46:42):
Yeah, that's right.

Lenny (00:46:44):
It also makes me think, I think you used the compiler analogy. I'm thinking the model training. He's retrained his model overnight.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:46:50):
Yeah, that's right. It's funny. One of the things that's so funny about Mark is if you give him some feedback in the morning, the next six meetings he has, whether it's about that product or not, he'll ask people what they think of that feedback. He won't attribute. He's just like, "Hey, what do you think about this in this product? And so you'll be in a meeting with him and you'll see him doing it. He'll come to the meeting with you about some other topic. He'll be like, "Hey boss, what do you think about this product and this idea?" And so he will, over the course of the day, take that little note and kind of pressure test it, and he loves to triangulate. Where are all the points of view on this that maybe you didn't see? So he really values a broad perspective on each thing that's being discussed, which is really fun.

Lenny (00:47:29):
Trying to get more training data for his model. I get it.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:47:32):
You can't get me to call Mark an LLM. That's not fair. That's [inaudible 00:47:35].

Lenny (00:47:35):
We could all hope to be as smart as Mark. As you were talking, I noticed your tattoos, and it reminded me that you've got at least two tattoos that I'm aware of.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:47:35):
Oh, yeah.

Lenny (00:47:45):
One is of California, which I completely understand. California is a very special place, but you have this other tattoo that is just the words Veritas. Can you talk about what that's about and why that's important to you?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:47:58):
The funny thing about tattoos in general is I came out of high school, I was like... I don't know if there was an archetype for me, but I didn't drink until I was 21. I was a very rule-following person. I was like, "Why are you going to get a tattoo, affect your body? "Why would you dye your hair? Just let it be what it was." And some of this was I think I was somebody who was privileged and had a great deal of self-confidence in who I was and what I wanted to be, and that was fine. But in some ways I was also weirdly judgey about other people in a way that's kind of off- brain for me, certainly today it would be, but at the time, getting a tattoo is a big deal for me. I was like, "Oh, this is just the vehicle for my life and you can do whatever you want with it. And it's not like a... It's something that you possess, and if you feel like if you want to decorate it, you can decorate it.

(00:48:47):
And so getting a tattoo was a big deal to me actually, and I completely shifted my mindset of how I thought about my body and how I thought about people's body and their presence and their time, maybe to some degree, even an understanding of mortality. Like, "Hey, can't take it with you. It's all going to go..." When you're 18, you think you're going to live forever, and by the time you're 22, a grizzled 22-year-old veteran, you're like, "Ah, tattoo that bad boy up. It's all going down." And so yeah, that's why I got the Veritas tattoo, which is Latin for truth, which is... I will say it's a little cheesy, because it's also Harvard's motto. But I got it in a monotype font. This is the programmer's font here.

(00:49:28):
The other thing that's interesting to me about tattoos was it's also part of a generational shift. We grew up in a time when tattoos were really seen by adults as gangs or bikers or sailors or certain types. Now my understanding, I saw a stat recently that more people in my generation have tattoos than don't have tattoos. And so I think we also just culturally shifted positions in a way that... I find richness of self-expression wonderful. I really think it's great. And so I'm here for all of it.

Lenny (00:49:56):
My assumption from what you're describing is, this idea of truth is very important to the way you think and work.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:50:01):
My reputation does precede me on this point, I'm afraid, which is... I think when I was young, I saw being honest... And I was wrong by the way. I saw being honest as kind of a get out of jail free card. You could say whatever you wanted as long as you're being honest. That's just not the case at all. I've written about this before, but by far my biggest professional regrets were me not being kind. And I used to think... I wrote this note a while back called Be Kind, where being nice, that's like patronizing, or telling somebody things that are half-truths or just getting by. And I'm against that. But being kind isn't that. Being kind is like, "Hey, how can I deliver this feedback in a way that is actually productive and helpful, in a way that is going to help them and not cause them just to feel bad and helpless?

(00:50:50):
And I think I did that wrong a lot as a kid, as a young man. And so being honest is still a big part of my personality. No one would ever accuse me of being dishonest who knows me. And I think people understand and respect that I'm pretty direct, and if I have concerns or issues, I'm going to bring them up. I'm just much better at bringing them up now and expressing a true care and belief. I wouldn't bring it up if I didn't think we could do better, if I didn't think we could fix it, if I didn't believe in this situation. And so being honest is still a huge part of my identity, and I think that's something I'm very proud of. But I will say the contextualization of how I'm honest has changed immensely since I got this tattoo.

Lenny (00:51:29):
That seems reasonable. This touches a little bit on something I definitely wanted to talk about, which is one of your most classic pieces, and this is the way I first learned about you, is a piece that is called Communication is the Job.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:51:40):
Yep.

Lenny (00:51:41):
I know many people have read this, many people haven't. I'd love for you to just talk about what this means and why this is important, why this is something that you wanted to share.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:51:49):
Yeah, it's one of the things that, especially if you aspire to be a leader... And leadership isn't management, and leadership isn't being the only person responsible, it's not even always the same as accountability. But if you want to have an impact...

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:52:00):
It's not even always the same as accountability, but if you want to have an impact on the world around you, it is exclusively done through the creation of artifacts or verbalizations that affect other humans. That is all there is. That's all there is if you want to have an impact, if you want to create some kind of a lasting change. And it could be in your little relationship, it could be in your team, it could be in your company, it could be in the world. It is down to communication. And so often you hear people saying, "Oh yeah, I wrote that up a year ago." It's like, "Yeah, but you did a bad job of writing it up a year ago, or we would've not wasted a year not doing it."

(00:52:47):
People always think that's, "Oh, I had that idea," and that's means anything. It means nothing. It means absolutely nothing. Or it's like, "Oh, I wrote this post." Well, you didn't break through with it. That's on you. It's not on the audience. People want to blame the audience. Well, the audience is just there. I mentioned this even earlier, and I hope people caught it, when I said, "Hey," I give somebody a piece of work and they come back six months later and they have done the wrong thing, I'll take the L. I will take the L on it. It's not great for them. They'll be pissed they wasted their time, but like I said, that's my responsibility. I did not communicate clearly what I wanted, what the expectations were.

(00:53:25):
Could they have also helped themselves? Sure, they could have, and that's a thing that takes all sides. We should work on this problem for both angles. I have another post called Listening is the Job, which is the other side of this. But communication is the job is, I really believe... Actually, it's the relationship to this idea that came out of the US Marines and the SEALs of extreme ownership, which is... So whenever thing goes wrong, I ask myself, "What could I have done differently in terms of how I communicated things for this to have gone better?" Could I have set priorities better? Could I have set expectations better? Did I need to have a better metric that I pointed the team at? Did I put the wrong people on it?

(00:54:04):
By the way, the thing I talk about is org charts are communication devices. They don't exist. There's not a physical string between you and your manager. They're just communication tools that are supposed to give people a rough sense of how things are organized and where to go with who. And so all these things are communication. Silence is communication, me not reaching out to you to check on you, to check on your project. We talked about the [inaudible 00:54:29] earlier. What does that mean? That means trust. That means responsibility. The absence of check-ins has meaning. You cannot not communicate. You are always communicating something with your face, with your clothes, with your body. What are you communicating?

(00:54:45):
I'll give you a funny example, which I hope we get to put in the podcast, because if you're watching this on video, you will have noticed that my camera cannot stop adjusting light. It's just constantly too dark or too bright. I'm trying a new camera. I'm a nerdy guy. I try a lot of camera gear, I try a lot of microphone gear. I love to have all the latest gadgets and gizmos, so I'm trying something new. It's not working. And in my head I'm like, what is this communicating about me? People are going to think that I don't care or that I'm not competent.

(00:55:15):
That's what I'm talking about. And now, I felt compelled to explain it in the podcast so that I can communicate clearly that that's not the case. I really just think so much of what I try to do in my professional life is understand the mental model of other people. Where are they right now? And I mean specific people, like my managers or my key technical leaders, and I mean general people like teams, and I mean broadly just the average human. Where are they at in this conversation? And how can I craft my language, my presence, my persona, everything to usher them from where they are to where I want to get them?

(00:55:52):
And that requires me to have a very clear idea of where I want to get them, have to have a clear idea of where they are. And I want to tell you, it's not as much work as it sounds like. I think no one would accuse me of having this big fabricated persona. It's not that. But it is having tremendous empathy for where people are starting. That was the lead for me. All the rest of it, all the rest of how I show up in meetings trying to smile more, because I'm like a big scary guy, those things are little things that you work on and they become second nature and they're easy. The hard thing is just having the empathy for your audience and being, "Where are they? Where are they starting?" And when you miss taking responsibility for that, extreme responsibility for that.

Lenny (00:56:31):
There's so much good advice in that. There's so many threads I want to follow, but let's just follow this last one of trying to understand how someone is best communicated to. Is there an example to make that a little more real for people of just what you've done to, "Oh, here's how I'm going to communicate with this person?"

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:56:46):
I'll give you a couple. One is multimodality. There's an old saying, repetition never spoiled the prayer. And I think most experienced communicators, whether they be writers, whether they be public speakers, talk about the importance of reiterating a point several times and in several different ways to make sure that people have a chance to internalize it. You want to use it, you want to say it directly, you want to use metaphor. And so for me, I will give an all-hands and then write a post with the content of the all-hands, because different people are going to respond differently to these modalities and are going to absorb information at different rates on these different modalities. That's a trivial one.

(00:57:23):
Another one that I think of all the time is making sure that you address people's fears and concerns. People will not listen to you if they think you don't know what's going on. And so, one of my favorite things to do when we're talking about some kind of issue is right up top and say, "Hey, let me be clear. This is the issue we're having. I know we're having it. I know what matters." And then I'll say the same thing that I would've said, but they would've literally ignored me, because how can they trust my conclusions if they don't accept the premise? You know what I'm saying? I think there's a whole piece there. Obviously when you're in person, it's a lot easier because you're reading facial expressions. Even on this, I'm reading you nodding on that. I'm like, "Okay, he's with me." And then I throw in a, "You know what I mean?" Whereas if you give me a cocked head, I then bring a second example to try to drive the point home. But you build yourself up. Most people are going to realistically start in their careers trying to influence one or two people. That's where you start. One or two people. That's who you got to communicate with. Your manager, one teammate, that's who you got. And then you build up and build up and build up a skillset to do it at a larger and larger scale.

Lenny (00:58:36):
I love so much of this advice. I think it's also helpful for relationships. "Here's what you're upset about."

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:58:42):
Totally, a hundred percent.

Lenny (00:58:43):
"Here's what I think we can do."

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:58:46):
Again, the work that I've had so graciously supported to do on myself at Meta with great mentors, Sheryl Sandberg, Mark Zuckerberg, a bunch of others and coaches absolutely made me a better partner and husband, and my wife. And then by the way, vice versa. Having kids and getting deep in the literature around raising children. Congratulations to you, by the way. Getting deep in that literature made me a better manager. Absolutely made me a better manager in terms of thinking about how people are managing their emotions and how to engage with them in those times.

Lenny (00:59:16):
Amazing. We need a second edition of this Boz's Parenting Advice.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:59:19):
That's right.

Lenny (00:59:20):
And relationship advice.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:59:21):
It's all the good stuff. No bad kids, Lansbury, it's good inside, Dr. Becky. It's all-

Lenny (00:59:28):
I like Dr. Becky.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (00:59:28):
I really think that the modern parenting canon is really rich.

Lenny (00:59:33):
Amazing, so much good content. This episode is brought to you by Explo, a game-changer for customer-facing analytics and data reporting. Are your users craving more dashboards, reports, and analytics within your product? Are you tired of trying to build it yourself?

(00:59:49):
As a product leader, you probably have these requests on your roadmap, but the struggle to prioritize them is real. Building analytics from scratch can be time-consuming, expensive, and a really challenging process. Enter Explo. Explo is a fully white-labeled embedded analytics solution designed entirely with your user in mind. Getting started is easy. Explo connects to any relational database or warehouse, and with its low-code functionality, you can build and style dashboards in minutes.

(01:00:18):
Once you're ready, simply embed the dashboard or report into your application with a tiny code snippet. The best part, your end-users can use Explo's AI features for their own report and dashboard generation, eliminating customer data requests for your support team. Build and embed a fully white-labeled analytics experience in days. Try it for free at explo.co/lenny. That's E-X-P-L-O dot C-O slash Lenny.

(01:00:47):
Okay. You mentioned this gadget and these cameras you like to play with. Let's talk about the Vision Pro and VR headsets. Have you tried the Vision Pro? Thoughts?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:00:57):
Actually, Mark and I tried it together and I want to say, first of all, when the headset came out, we breathed a little sigh of relief because the stuff inside of it didn't represent a fundamental breakthrough. Everything inside of it was something that we probably could have gone and done, with the exception of Apple silicon, which is a marvel, but it's worth nothing. Apple Silicon is like a 2X marvel when doing things like scaling display resolution is unfortunately a quadratic proposition, and so a 2X linear scaling advantage doesn't buy you as much as you might expect when you're trying to scale resolution. And so that was step one. But we still assumed at that price point, with their legendary attention to detail and polish, they probably produced a great product. And the line that I said actually my own podcast with Matthew Ball a week ago was, "Look, I was prepared to come to market and say we have the best value headset. If you want an outstanding, best possible headset for the money, we've got it. It's the Quest 3."

(01:01:55):
And I was so thrilled when I tried the AVP next to Mark, we were like, "No, we think we have the actual best headset." Now, we're not saying it's the best at all things. If you're sitting still and watching a movie a high-res movie, Apple Vision Pro is really great. It's really great. The resolution shines. The way they've tuned the pass-through shines if you're stationary and looking straight ahead. And they've done some really nice things with the UI. It's one of these things that we do get annoyed about, a mile aside, we get a little bit annoyed about as product people.

(01:02:31):
I know that this happens to all of us. It happens to Apple, happens to Google, happens to us. We have a bunch of internal things we've been playing with, which will at some point ship and we will be accused of having stolen them when we actually did not steal them. If you want, you can go see my Quora answer on the history of the like button where this happened previously, where we had built the like button internally before it was launched elsewhere. Anyways, it's a whole thing. This happens in our industry a lot, and I really shouldn't care as much. It's a little bit of my ego peeking through, which I should control and tamp down, if I'm being responsible.

(01:03:03):
The beautiful UI polishes, they did a tremendous job with eye tracking. One of the things that's interesting about the eye tracking is, to do it the way they've done it, that's why you have to have the prescription insert, so it doesn't support your glasses. You have to get prescription inserts. They're expensive. And they can shoot the cameras that track your eyes through the lens as well as the light around it. Ours go from the side on the Quest Pro, and that allows you to wear corrective lenses.

(01:03:27):
And so different choices like that have trade-offs, but it's still cool. It's great that they got that in there. At the same time, our hand tracking is better. Obviously, the app library we knew was going to be better. That's not totally fair to them. They've just launched and they have small volume still, but I just find the comfort... The thing that really got me the most, the field of view is really small on the Apple Vision Pro. And some people are characterizing it incorrectly on the internet. They're doing a characterization up close to the lens. Once you factor in the eye relief, the distance between where the lenses are and your eyeball is, their field of view gets pretty narrow for almost all faces relative to ours, which I find distracting.

(01:03:59):
Their displays are much dimmer than ours, and I find the motion blur really distracting when I'm in mixed reality use cases. And as I mentioned earlier in the podcast, I'm a huge mixed reality buff. I'm a huge fan of that potential for exactly the same reason that they are, by the way, which I think hands and mixed reality make it feel much more accessible to more people. I'm pretty glad we have the controller in our set though, because it really expands what you can do. And we don't just operate our computers with just one thing. We have a keyboard, we have a mouse, we do multiple modalities all the time. I really feel like the comfort, the lack of persistence and motion blur in our pass-through, the brightness of our displays, I was like, "Oh man, if you gave me one to take, I would take Quest 3."

(01:04:40):
Now, people have rightly said, "That's pretty biased." Of course it is. Go get your own opinion. But what kills me is most people haven't done that. They have not tried the Quest 3. That's what kills me the most. If you go and try Quest 3, ask yourself if you'd rather have seven of those, one for you and six of your best friends, or one Apple Vision Pro. I'm sure the answer isn't Quest 3 for every person. There are people for whom there are use cases that really fit their life, the Apple Vision Pro, I'm cool with it.

(01:05:05):
But people don't even know that the Quest 3, you can do Remote Desktop. You can do it both through an app called Remote Desktop, which is very popular, or you can go into workrooms and you can have three monitors surrounding you streamed from your machine. I think some of this is just people have not even done the work. They haven't even tried it. I welcome all of you who think I'm biased to prove one way or the other what you think, but don't do it without putting the Quest 3 on and giving it through its paces, because it's a pretty great device. And you can do a lot with $3,000 extra dollars.

(01:05:38):
How did they get away with that, by the way? We launched a headset that was $1,299 and people lost their minds about it. They're like, "Ah, $3,500, it's fine. This is fine. No one cares." I don't know. Fairness is too much to ask, and I don't care about that. Apple has earned the great brand that they've built. They truly have. I think it's tremendous. I certainly celebrate a large number of Apple product. I'm a huge fan of their work. I'm a huge fan of what they do. That's probably why I expected more from the AVP.

Lenny (01:06:06):
Well, I'll show you my favorite AR device, which is these Ray-Bans. I actually bought them.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:06:13):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:06:13):
Here, I'll put them on it. Here, what I'm going to do is I'm going to record. I didn't tell you I was going to do this. I'm going to record this as we're talking. Look at this.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:06:20):
I like that. They look so good on you too. This is a good fit.

Lenny (01:06:23):
My mother-in-law's like, "You look so sophisticated. You look really smart with these on." And we bought these actually to film our kids, or our kid, instead of having Cameron's face. And it's been awesome.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:06:34):
It's really the best. It is so hard to look at a phone screen and have the real thing be in between you. No, the glass is the way to do it.

Lenny (01:06:43):
Look at this, my new look. I'm just going to have glasses on all the time.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:06:46):
We got to get you the multimodal. I've been playing with that since December, where you can use the camera to ask a Meta AI assistant about things. It's really good. I was in a ski village recently with my family and I had them on. I'm just like, "Hey, take a look. Tell what you see." And I had found a sign and it gave me directions. "Hey, the bathrooms are down those stairs to the right. Do you want food? It's over to the right." It couldn't tell what village I was in, but it was like, "You're in a ski village somewhere. Here's the amenities." And I was like, "Wow." There's something real magical here.

Lenny (01:07:18):
I feel like I need this for my podcasting interview so I could just have a little voice tell me questions to be asking and where I'm at.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:07:25):
Right, totally. Yeah.

Lenny (01:07:26):
How helpful would that be?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:07:27):
Okay, I'm going to cheat on this one and say, obviously we've been talking for a while, but playing with glasses that have full AR capabilities, and we've got one that has rumored to be coming internally soon, so heavily rumored in fact that you might even say it's almost been confirmed. And what's been really fun is being able to play with these time machines, really, in terms of what they are. It's amazing technology. People were giving us speeches, big company-wide speeches, and had all their notes on the glasses. And they could control the slides just using a gesture.

Lenny (01:08:05):
Oh my God.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:08:07):
There's exciting things afoot. The future's looking pretty bright.

Lenny (01:08:10):
Something that I wanted to touch on, which is when Mark put out this whole video of, "Here's what I think of Apple Vision Pro versus the Quest," a lot of people are just like, "Oh man, because he's putting out this video, he must be so afraid of what's happening and it's not the right move." What went into thinking? Was there strategic thinking there? Was it just him, "Here's what I think?"

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:08:29):
This guy does [inaudible 01:08:30] about the modern era. Everyone's in their Meta head about everything. Everything's a four-dimensional chess. That was just what Mark thought of the thing. That's what he thought about it. I think he wanted to make sure people remembered, hey, Quest 3 is literally a better device, and people haven't even tried it.

(01:08:46):
And so we're not always playing four-dimensional chess over here. Sometimes we're just like, "Here's a thing that I believe is true. I'm going to say it out loud with my mouth." That's what he did. It's not that hard. When I do it, everyone expects it because of my persona or brand or whatever the thing is. I guess people are surprised when a CEO does it. All right, I get that. That's cool. There's other sets of societal expectations there.

(01:09:08):
And we're all familiar with Apple putting the Welcome IBM ad in the New York Times, and then Slack doing the same thing with Microsoft and the Ballmer iPhone comments. None of those were true discussions of the technical merits of a product. Those were all just big, rally the troops gestures. This is not that. Mark is deep. He's an expert in this stuff. I'm an expert in this stuff. I feel great about our choices.

(01:09:39):
By the way, when I've used it, I could get myself completely into the head of the person who designed it. I can tell you from using it what instructions they were given, that team was given. I can tell you what they were optimizing for. I can tell you what constraints they were under. By all the choices they made, I can tell you all those things and I understand it coheres in that way. We made different choices. It shouldn't surprise anyone. We like our choices better. We could have made those choices. We didn't make those choices. We made these other choices.

(01:10:06):
And so for me, the weight, the wire, which just always brushes against my ear, the pocketable thing, I get it. That's not what I would've done, and I know that because I had the chance to do it and I chose not to. I don't know. I don't know why people are surprised. This wasn't some big, savvy strategic move. This was just, Mark's got a chance to use it. He's like, "Oh man, I think we should tell people what the real story is here." And we did.

Lenny (01:10:34):
I love that insight. And I know a lot of people watching are like, "Oh, shit, he's right. Wow. I didn't think of it that way." And so I think it had a lot of that impact.

(01:10:41):
I want to zoom out a little bit and talk about Meta's journey over the past couple years. It feels like there is a huge downturn in public perception of Meta and the stock price, and then over the past couple of years there's been a huge turnaround. And it feels like there's always a lot to learn from these periods. Just as an example of the stock price, I was just looking at it, it was down to $80-ish, and now today it's $487.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:11:05):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:11:06):
I'm curious just what you've learned from going through that downturn and turnaround. And I know it's still in progress, but just what have you learned from that journey?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:11:16):
Yeah. Well, there's a lot to take away, I got to tell you. I think we had the largest single day stock drop in history, followed 18 months later by this largest single day gain in stock market history.

Lenny (01:11:27):
Oh my God.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:11:27):
As the legendary Lou Holtz said, " You're never as good as they say you are when you're winning, and you're never as bad as they say you are when you're losing." Mark has always brought that quote out to guide us internally to try to insulate ourselves a little bit from the vagaries of external opinion. And that's not just true with stock prices. That's true with media and press. It's true across a lot of things.

(01:11:53):
One of the things I told my team, and I still have to repeat it to them, is, "One of the things that's hard to remember when you're in it is that you know more than the critics do. You know more than the analysts in the marketplace do. You know more than the media does. You know more than the podcasters do. You know more than the Twitter does. You know more about what's real and substantial of value about our company than they do. That doesn't mean ignore them, because they have a different perspective and you need to understand it. Even if the totality is less than what you know, it may contain parts that you do not know." I'm a huge fan, I read the criticism of everything, and I read it very carefully, looking out for confirmation bias, looking out for things that I might be inclined to resist but are maybe true. I invite all critique, but I also don't accept the critique blindly. I don't just say, "Yes, this is obviously true."

(01:12:55):
Gell-Mann Amnesia is a great concept for everyone to understand. Gell-Mann Amnesia is this property where you'll read a newspaper article, let's say newspaper, why not, about a thing about which you are an expert, and you'll be baffled because here is an article that is not just wrong, it's inverted causality. Michael Crichton, I'll steal Michael Crichton's quote on this, "It's a wet sidewalks make rain story." And you'll be like, "What a terrible, bizarre story."

(01:13:22):
And then you will turn the page of the newspaper and it will be another article about a topic about which you know nothing, and you will read it as if it is the gospel truth. You'll figure it's, "Oh, no, look at this information about this foreign situation." Like I said, perfectly true. We should be smarter than that. And so does that mean you don't read the thing? No, you read it. You just read everything with that perspective of, "Wait a second, this is another point of view. And how do I integrate that into a whole perspective that I can have and be informed about?"

(01:13:55):
The first, the macro thing is taking the long view, realizing that when you're in the dumps, it's not as bad as you think, when you're at the top, it's not as good as you think. It's somewhere in between at all times. The second thing is communication is the job. We really did not communicate effectively, I think, with the market around our future investments. And listen, we've had two 10-year long huge investment areas. One has been AI, one has been reality labs. And AI's looking pretty good today. I can't think we can all agree with Lama 2, with Fair, the breakthroughs that we've had.

(01:14:33):
People don't notice that Fair, our AI research lab, is the second most cited research lab in AI behind Google. We've been doing this work. We didn't come here casually. We've been doing it, and so that's looking pretty good. I don't think we did enough to explain those best to people. Previously, the core business was going strong enough and they were willing to ignore them. And with the old Warren Buffett quote, "It's only when the tide goes out, we see who's not wearing swimming trunks." And so when the tide went out, when you have the Ukraine war and an interest rate hike and recessions, now everyone's scrambling for that incremental dollar and they're like, "Go get rid of this stuff."

(01:15:15):
And we had to tell the company, "You don't want to work at a company that, when times are tough, kills all future growth and just shores up in the core business." That's a company that's just committing itself to dying at some point, a little later than expected, but dying at some point. You want to work at a company that has a balanced portfolio of investments, which we had. We didn't explain that well, and so we spent that time explaining that to the market, to the press, to everybody.

(01:15:38):
And now, I think as people understand the size of it and the scope of it, and of course it helps that the core business has overcome its challenges there from ATT and the other kinds of stuff, it's looking pretty good. I do think one part is, as an internal person, really moderating your attachment to the external narratives and swings, that's super important. And you do that based on understanding your own expertise. And the second part is understanding why is there a delta. What is there? And grab that. It's usually communication.

Lenny (01:16:10):
There's also a big flattening of the org. This was something a lot of people talked about, where managers became ICs. Is there anything more there that you've learned of just how to adjust the org to be more efficient?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:16:22):
Of course, and I should have included that in the first section. I was a bit eager to wrap it up elegantly in the two. But you're right.

Lenny (01:16:27):
I appreciate it.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:16:29):
We made significant shifts in how we operated the business, which was super painful. And listen, this goes back to the boom times of COVID, when it looked like there was a real lasting secular shift in things like e-commerce and in working remotely and these tool sits, which are exactly what we build, and it's primed us. And so we built up a huge workforce to pursue those opportunities. We still believe in those opportunities, but they're back on their original timeline. And actually, literally, if you look at a bunch of graphs that we have internally, it's literally the COVID boom and then, not bust really, but as it receded, everything's back on its original trajectory.

(01:17:16):
We didn't lose ground or lose time, but the pull forward didn't happen. Well, that means your economics don't make any sense anymore. Now, you made a bunch of investments that are going to yield too distant in the future, and getting there faster isn't going to help you and you're carrying a much extra cost. That sucks, man. It sucks. And we don't feel great about it. We really don't. It's a business, it's awful, and it happens.

(01:17:41):
I do think one thing that was interesting about that time was, for those of us who grew up and saw the .com boom firsthand, I was born and raised in the valley, so that was all around me when I was graduating high school and going to college, and then in the 2008 major recession on the housing crash and on the market and all that stuff. Now, let's imagine you graduated college in 2009-

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:18:00):
... all that stuff. Now let's imagine you graduated college in 2009 and got a job. Well shoot, you're 15 years in your career, you could be a director and you've never seen a downturn. I think we also had, in addition to what was very unfortunately conventional mis-forecasting in the business that caused us to over hire, that we had to correct for. You also had a workforce that was just not at all of a mentality that this could ever happen. This felt like it was an act of God when in fact it's like a cyclical nature of all businesses that this will happen at some time and you hope it doesn't and you wish it didn't, but you have to deal with it. And so I think we have a bit of a tough storm there for the whole industry and we're still feeling it. I think we're still feeling it.

(01:18:45):
Certainly we're happy at Meta to be beyond that point and we're growing again and executing at a stable rate and feeling really good about that, but quite a few of our other companies in the industry. And it's a very uncertain time for engineers, for PMs, for designers, for everyone and all the support functions around them. I'm super sympathetic for that. I think obviously the mis-forecasting that happened inside of Meta's walls happened everywhere and now that you have, especially with higher interest rates and cash isn't as cheap, runways are tighter. People are just making those pragmatic calls. I think we'll rally back from this. I think this is a normal thing that happens to industries, but it doesn't reduce my sympathy and empathy for those who have been affected by it or who live in fear of it.

Lenny (01:19:29):
I was talking to a friend who works at Meta and I was asking them what it's like to work at Meta and she was just like, "It's intense, and it used to be more chill. There were people that were coasting here and there," and now she's like, "No, all those people are gone now. It's just only the intense people left and we're working really hard." Does that bring up anything?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:19:48):
Yeah. I don't want to comment on people who left. People left Meta for all kinds of different reasons and likewise role elimination happened in many cases because we just decided not to do this work at this point. We were going to do it two years from now and don't need to carry a team to do it. I think it's really hard to generalize because each of these is a specific person with a specific life and a story that is rich and deserves to be told. But I do think that if there was somebody coasting and you as a manager have to make tough calls on who you're bringing in which way you're going to bias my profound suspicion, and again, I don't know your friend who you spoke with, my profound suspicion is that person's probably already working hard. You know what I'm saying? That person's already probably working hard. I don't think we changed how hard any individual worked. I really don't believe that.

(01:20:35):
I do think there was a selection bias as to what was going to happen, and I think that's probably what you saw play. In fact, if there is a generality that can be found.

Lenny (01:20:43):
Maybe as a last question, I have this segment where I call Failure Corner where I ask people to share a failure of their career and what they learned from that experience. Is there something that comes to mind?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:20:55):
I've failed tons of times. I've built products that nobody used. I've built technical architectures that didn't scale. I've failed all kinds of times. I don't regret most of those. Almost every one of those I learned from. It was a stop on the path to a better solution or it was a recognition that this thing wasn't going to work ever, which is its own kind of a gift. All the failures that I regret, that I take seriously are personal failures where I affected a person in a way that I'm not proud of, maybe wasn't proud of the time because I wasn't in control of my own emotions or mood. I was feeling fearful, I was feeling scared, and there's a bunch of these one or two that stand out that I don't feel comfortable sharing because the person affected, I think would prefer I didn't share.

(01:21:46):
I'll share one that was... I think the person's and I are tight now. We have this really silly discussion. I remember it so vividly. In the early days of client server architectures, which Facebook obviously is a website, so you're calling to a server to get the webpage, but then that server is going to call the other servers to gather things and that was one of the major clients of remote procedure calls because newsfeed ranking was all done on this other set of servers that had its own special requirements and special build and how it was put together. And so your main web server would put a call-out over a remote procedure, call to the remote server and get a response back. And we had this really janky RPC system that, I won't say who built it, but it was built and it was just a piece of garbage constantly failing. It was not robust at all. And one of our best engineers, Mark Sleek, built a new one called Thrift. It was a great, really great RPC infrastructure.

(01:22:47):
And one of my best friends, Dave Federman, one of my really good friends and a brilliant engineer, we were talking about how to do the encoding and I was like, "I want it to be binary encoding." I was like, "You should binary encoding. I want it to be super efficient on the wire," because I'm storing these RPCs. They do two jobs for us, one of which is the active RPC, but I also store the RPCs in a log and replay them to do the work that we were doing in newsfeed ranking. That's how it was done back in the day. It was all kind of asynchronous offline and so I wanted to be as tight as possible. My memory bandwidth was very limited and memory was so expensive back then and Dave Federman was like, "No, no, no, that's short-term thinking Boz, we should be using Linux style descriptors that are plain English language. Then you could look at the log, you can see what it is. It's possible memory bandwidth will get cheaper, but these logs being scrutable to development is going to be a better thing." This is nerd bait.

(01:23:42):
Those of you who have been engineers in this call, this is like Vim EMX. This is nerd bait. This goes deep. This is like a long old thing.

Lenny (01:23:51):
I love it. Keep it coming.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:23:52):
It's a room full of engineers at the company and the company's not that big, and so there's probably half the engineers of the company in this room. I was yelling. Literally I'm turning red, I'm sweating. I'm so angry at Dave Federman for countermanding my proposal and I'm the major RPC customer. A couple things. This is so dumb. Mark Sleek just built two encoders. It's not that hard. You pick which encoder you want for your things. That's the easiest solution ever. Second thing is Dave was right, by the way. Within a year, the memory bandwidth definitely didn't matter relative to how inscrutable it was to try to get into these logs. I had to build a ton of extra custom software to parse the logs and understand what what's going on. But also it was a case where my identity was caught up in being right. And for those who don't know, identity threat is just the biggest... Your worst behavior is always going to come out when you think you're under identity threat.

(01:24:51):
When you feel like some core part of how you see yourself is in question, you will react with every ounce of your fiber to defend that conception of yourself because it's so expensive to reconceptualize who you are that you defend yourself. So my identity was being right. [inaudible 01:25:08] on the wrist. And it caused me to take one of my best friends, one of the best engineers I knew, a guy I literally lived with and getting a really embarrassing for me conflict, which everyone was just scratching their head like, "What is going on with Boz right now?" I looked like an unhinged crazy person. I remember the room, I remember where I was standing in the room. I remember everything about that moment and I had to go home and be like, "What the fuck was that? What happened?" I'm asking myself like, "What happened there?" And that was one of the many steps in the journey to recontextualizing what it was was not to be right and what meant to be open-minded and curious and how to engage in this competition.

(01:25:47):
I was 22. I don't make excuses for it now, but I remember there was a couple other examples like that in things that were less technical and more personal that I won't share, but I remember each of them vividly and those are the real failures for me.

Lenny (01:26:01):
I love how this story is so long ago at this point and it's still stuck with you and such an impact, I think.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:26:06):
Oh, my god, I'll never forget that. It was embarrassing. And for those, that's the old quote, it's really one of the truest quotes, and I know it's cliche and sometimes cliches are cliches because they're good. It's like, "People, they don't remember what you said. They just remember how you made them feel." That's all anyone remembers is how you made them feel, and I think in that room, I made people feel unsafe, maybe. It was bad.

Lenny (01:26:27):
I like this concept of identity threat. They call this podcast episode identity threat.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:26:32):
There you go.

Lenny (01:26:33):
Boz, we started this episode with a billion questions. I have a billion and one questions now. I wish we could keep going, but I know we have to wrap this up. Is there anything you wanted to share or leave listeners with before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:26:46):
Well, in the off chance that we do end up labeling this episode, identity threat, let me give you what really was... I made a lot of breakthroughs with coaching, learning about the feeling inside of my own body when I was feeling that identity threat and learning techniques and tactics to reduce the likelihood I would feel it and how to deal with it when it happened and how to repair when I did, I went through all that stuff. I would say the greatest lesson I learned would come years later and it was just from observing somebody. Ami Vora who was a legendary, long time came in and worked on our development platform, then worked with me on ads for a long time and then was the PM lead for WhatsApp for a long time. She's since gone on to do even more great things outside the company. Working with her, it was like watching an alien because her and I were so different in our approach and she approached...

(01:27:38):
She could have the most profound disagreement with somebody in the world and they would say the thing that she thought was not just wrong, but crazy wrong and she would respond. She would say, "Fascinating. You have to tell me more about why you think that." And I can't do it justice, she meant it from the core of her being. She saw this schism between her and that person and it could have been personal, it could have been professional, it could have been anything. She saw this schism and how they saw the world and how she saw the world and rather than reacting as if it was a threat that somebody saw it differently or rather than reacting afraid that maybe she was wrong and had done things wrong before, she reacted with the most genuine and profound curiosity. I just watched it absolutely tear down walls between points of view. People felt immediately her genuine heartfelt curiosity and would lean in and that would cause them to be open-minded.

(01:28:36):
And if she was right, which by the way she usually was, then they would leave being like, "Oh, okay, I was wrong about that," but she also would change her mind and that was the key. Ever since then, I really have tried to model that. When I have a strong internal clinch, I try to embrace curiosity like, "Wow, we do not see this thing the same way. That is fascinating. Tell me why you see that." And that can be by personal feedback. Someone's like, "Hey boss, I don't think you talk enough." "Wow, you don't think I talk enough? That is unexpected. I would love to hear more about that because no one's ever said that to me," so I wanted to give that to anybody who might recognize this behavior in themselves. There's lots of things that you can do and you should do that work.

(01:29:22):
The work of improving yourself is always fruitful and satisfying and it pays off, as we discussed, in every aspect of your life with your family, with your friends, and professionally. This is one that I really thought was so great was just curiosity. Embracing curiosity in those moments of challenge has really completely changed my life and I owe that to Ami Vora.

Lenny (01:29:40):
Wow, I love this example. It's basically an example of, "Yes, and?", but in a really... no one's going to be like, "Yes, and?" It's a really nice way of saying it, "Just fascinating. Tell me more."

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:29:50):
Fascinating. You've got to tell me why, I want to understand it.

Lenny (01:29:54):
I love that. Maybe that'll be the new title, fascinating.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:29:56):
There you go.

Lenny (01:29:58):
Anyway, with that, Boz, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:30:03):
I'm ready.

Lenny (01:30:04):
First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:30:09):
The Dream Machine, which is a tremendous history of pre-history, really of modern computing ostensibly following the life of J.C.R Licklider, but really it's much broader than that, is a tremendous missing piece of history in my opinion. I think in my discipline, in computer science, we were not properly educated. We learned about Alan Turing and we learned about some of the technical underpinnings of computer science theory, but the modern computer and the path to it is a profound and fascinating one, and it has particular resonance today as J.C.R Licklider's observation was human in the loop computing and I think we are now in human in the loop AI, and I think there's a tremendous resonance there. The second one is Good Inside, which is Dr. Becky's book, and again, I think it's a tremendous parenting book, but more than that, it does contain lessons for how we think about our own emotions and how we manage those, which I find to be useful in any context.

Lenny (01:31:00):
Amazing recommendations. She's also got an online community for people that-

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:31:03):
She has a wonderful online community, she's very engaged in it. And for those parents out there, you're a little early for this Lenny, but you'll get there. Having little scripts that I'm reading on Instagram that when I'm in a moment of tremendous emotional challenge with my children, I have the words handy. They're just top of mind for me. They've been cashed in, right? They're primed, is a big game changer.

Lenny (01:31:24):
This will be for our parenting episode down the road.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:31:27):
That's right.

Lenny (01:31:28):
Is there a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:31:32):
Yeah. This is super conventional, but Mandalorian. One of the things that's been fun about that is really my kids again is we watched it with my kids, so we had a chance to go on the Galactic Star Cruiser. Again, y'all know I am a genuine and true nerd through and through. Huge fan of Scott Trowbridge and his work at Star Wars service lands in Disney and also of that. And so before that we got our kids who were nine and six and watched all the movies together, and then we were watching Mandalorian together as a family, and it's super fun and it's fun to have that kind of lore, a connection. So it's not just the classic kids movies, but there's something more, and I think for them they feel like it's an adult kind of conversation they get to be a part of. I've really enjoyed that. And I think the world of Dave Filoni and John Favreau and the team that's building that universe out.

Lenny (01:32:19):
This is the way.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:32:19):
This is the way.

Lenny (01:32:20):
Do you have a favorite interview question that you like to ask candidates that you're interviewing?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:32:25):
One of the most important things that I always ask people is what people who've worked with them would say are their greatest strengths and weaknesses. I like this for a couple of reasons, not least of which is I often do follow up with references and I like to triangulate their awareness of how other people calibrate though. And also how they respond to criticism. Sometimes candidates surprise me. They say, "Hey, you'll hear this critique a lot from me. I don't think it's fair." That can be an okay answer, but they've got to be a pretty robust there. Or it's like, "Hey, this is something I'm working on, here's what I'm working on." But I also like to hear what they think their superpowers are. And too often a lot of attention in interviews is paid to weaknesses, which I care about because I want to know what the downside is. But way more important to me is like, "What are you awesome at? What is the thing that if I can just hitch a wagon and ride, that's what I want to know. Where's the superpower that you're crushing it at?"

(01:33:22):
And what's funny is people are pretty rarely give my reference checks. They're not that often accurate about what the critiques are, but they're usually pretty accurate about what their strengths are.

Lenny (01:33:31):
Interesting. I'm also a huge proponent of strengths and not worrying too much about your weaknesses.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:33:36):
But asking people to contextualize their performance through the team, that's so important. We do not achieve very much on our own.

Lenny (01:33:44):
Communication is the job. Amazing. Is there a favorite product that you recently discovered that you love? And Meta products are acceptable answers.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:33:55):
The Ray-Ban Meta glasses would be a tempting answer. The multimodal stuff, which I'm going to get in trouble because I've been teasing this for months on social media and it's still a closed beta, and it's like, "We're growing the beta slowly," but it's like, "People already really badly want it." It was probably one of the most magical things I've gotten to try recently. It's not totally fair because it's also not you can buy the Ray-Ban Meta glasses and very soon, I won't say when, but very soon they'll have this capability, but it's more fun to think outside of the box. All right, this is such a... I'm going to get in trouble for this answer because it's a bit of a pretentious one. I'm not a car guy, let me say that right now. I don't like cars. I don't care about cars. I want a car that works and doesn't break. All my cars growing up, had over a hundred thousand miles in them because we only ever had used cars.

(01:34:38):
They were constantly breaking down and the power steering would go out while you're driving and you have to [inaudible 01:34:43] the thing and the brakes would go out or you'd throw a rod. I've done it all. I just wanted a car. And so then I drove a Honda Accord that I bought for 10 years and then I drove a Tesla Model S for 10 years. And a Tesla model S had a thing happen to it while it was parked, I will get into that. I get a new car and again, I'm like, "I want to get an electric car." And I was like, "I'm going to get something nice. I'm going to get something nice. I want to get something nice." I'm driving a Mercedes-Benz AMG EQS, and I didn't know cars could be this nice. I grew up driving used cars and whatever, I did not know it was possible. It is the best augmented reality product I think you could buy in the market today.

(01:35:29):
With the heads of display, it puts your turn in three-dimensional space. It's got cameras facing your eyes, so it's positioned correctly on this display relative to your eyes, the turn. And so when you come up, it's like you're hitting a little wall, you got to turn before you hit the wall. And I was like, "Oh my God, I think this car has a great augmented reality." Not a car guy, and I'm not trying to flex on this car or whatever it is. I like it a lot. I didn't know they could be that nice, but the thing that I thought was so impressive was they did an amazing job with augmented reality in this car.

Lenny (01:35:58):
Wow. Mercedes-Benz, a player in the augmented reality, mixed reality space.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:36:01):
Big time. They're out there, they're in the lead.

Lenny (01:36:04):
I sometimes think about having a contest where I give away products people mention in this segment, and now you've blown my budget way out of proportion.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:36:12):
Ray-Ban Metas, you can afford that.

Lenny (01:36:15):
That's an amazing, I'm going to have to check that out. I think we're going to increase some sales for Mercedes. Next question. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to think about, share with friends and family, find useful?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:36:27):
Yeah. We have a funny actually how we came about this. The motto my family has, my immediate family, me, my wife and kids is just trust yourself. Just trust yourself. Actually, the reason we have that motto is when we have a house, we have a few nice art pieces and one of them is a Tracy Amen, a famous UK based artist, and she does neon pieces and it says, "Trust yourself." And so it's in our bedroom hallway where me and all the kids and my wife are, it says, trust yourself and every morning the neon lights up and it's trust yourself. And then I had the chance to have a crest made in the UK and my family's English from way back. And so in the crest it says, "Trust yourself." And I always talk to my kids, especially. I really think people, when you're experiencing peer pressure like, "Who do you trust? Them or yourself? When you're having a lot of self-doubt and uncertainty, you have to trust yourself."

(01:37:17):
I just think so much of the success I've had, I think this is probably true of most people who went to startups and succeeded, was like, "I just had faith that I was making good decisions." I mean, this comes back to the conviction point I made earlier about how you do things like newsfeed or controversial things or how you make big expensive changes, just conviction. You have to believe you, your eyes, ears in an intellect have combined to give you a point of view that has intrinsic value and deserves your respect as opposed to reading that newspaper article about your company and believing it over what your own eyes and ears have told you. That's the motto that we go with.

Lenny (01:37:57):
And I think it's also important to say you won't always be right and that's okay.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:37:59):
Totally. That's right. Trusting yourself also includes taking risks because you trust that you can deal and handle with what happens when the risks don't pay out.

Lenny (01:38:07):
Beautiful. Final question. I know that you're an amateur photographer, maybe semi-pro photographer, a lot of travel photography.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:38:13):
Amateur. Amateur, amateur.

Lenny (01:38:15):
Amateur. Okay. You also have this website that I came across that I don't know if people know about it, it's this funny name. I'm not going to mention that. I don't know if you want people...

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:38:22):
Warden Shortbow, it's an anagram of my name. Warden Shortbow, an anagram of Andrew Bosworth, wardenshortbow.com. I love photography. I love it. It's a real passion of mine.

Lenny (01:38:30):
So here's the question. What's your favorite photo that you've taken?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:38:33):
Art is actually a great place to talk about trusting yourself, by the way. And I know it's cheesy to say it, but I think Rick Rubin's recent interviews on what art is and how people make it is spot on. You have to make it for yourself and you have to love it. And if someone else loves it and it finds broader resonance, that's awesome, but that's not why you do it. And if you start to try to do it for broader resonance, then you're kind of chasing something else. It's media, it's entertainment, but it's not art. It's some other thing. And I say all this to basically tap dance and say, I kind of love a lot of my photos and it's very hard to pick a favorite. The one that is popping to my head, which has more emotional [inaudible 01:39:12] is a picture I took of my son playing in the street and just jumping in a puddle, wearing a rain boot, rain slick kind of a thing. And it's not sharp, it's not in focus. It's a vignette, it's an idea.

(01:39:27):
And I really do think Ansel Adams talked a lot about how the goal of the photographer is to create a capture that expresses to the viewer what it felt like to be there. And people forget that he was a master of the dark room even more so than maybe than the capture, the print. The print was where he did amazing work. And I've had the pleasure to go to his dark room in Big Sur and spend time with his son and watch them do development in that room. And he had elaborate scripts of how he would highlight, dodge and burn different parts of the photograph to get it to have the resonance that he wanted. And he fought for photography to be accepted as an artistic medium, which it wasn't, which I find so resonant in today's AI art conversations where once again, we're trying to gate keep what is art and you just don't get to do that unfortunately.

(01:40:20):
So this picture of my son, no one would call it a technical marvel, but as a vignette of it capturing for me personally, but also I think in general for parents, the ephemerality of these tremendously touching, charming human moments that you have with your children, that's the one that comes to mind.

Lenny (01:40:39):
Amazing. We're going to try to find it and link folks to it. And on the point of Rick Rubin, something he says along the same lines is that you think of art as your diary. I am just describing what I find interesting and important and nobody can come to me and say my diary is wrong. It's my diary, this is how I see the world, and that's okay. And that's where the best art comes from is just emboldening to this... there's an awesome video of him saying exactly this that I was recently watching actually. Boz, this was so much fun. I am so thankful we made time for this. I'm looking forward to our parenting and relationships podcast in the future. Joking, not joking. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to follow what you're up to and how can listeners be useful to you?

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:41:19):
Sure. I'm @boztank on Instagram and on Threads and also on X, facebook.com/boz. And I also have my own podcast, which is a technical deep dive, so it's pretty different, I would say. It's a technical deep dives to try to go deep on one or two topics each time. That's called Boz to the Future. You can find that on Spotify or iTunes.

Lenny (01:41:41):
Boz to the Future, buy some Quest stuff.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:41:44):
Get yourself a Quest 3. Let's be honest. Dude, treat yourself.

Lenny (01:41:48):
There you go. Or these Ray-Ban sunglasses. I'm a big fan. Boz, again, thank you so much for being here.

Andrew ‘Boz’ Bosworth (01:41:52):
Cheers. Thanks, brother.

Lenny (01:41:53):
Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
You're CTO of Meta. You are a co-CEO of Salesforce, you're chairman of the board at OpenAI. How do you think the AI market is going to play out?

Bret Taylor (00:00:07):
The whole market is going to go towards agents. I think the whole market is going to go towards outcomes-based pricing. It's just so obviously the correct way to build and sell software.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:16):
This makes me think about, I had Marc Benioff on the podcast. You guys were co-CEOs. He was extremely agent-pilled.

Bret Taylor (00:00:21):
It's so hard to sell productivity software, which I learned the hard way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:24):
What's a story that comes to mind when you think about your biggest mistake?

Bret Taylor (00:00:27):
I was the product manager for, it was called Google Local had a pretty tough product review with Marissa and Larry, and to not do that well with a link from the Google homepage is embarrassing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:37):
I think it's really empowering for people to hear it's possible to succeed in spite of a massive failure like this.

Bret Taylor (00:00:41):
They gave me another shot to do the V2 of it that resulted in Google Maps. We got about 10 million people using it on the first day.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:48):
What mindset contributed to you being successful in such a variety of roles?

Bret Taylor (00:00:52):
Waking up every morning, what is the most impactful thing I could do today?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:56):
Today, my guest is Bret Taylor. Bret is an absolute legendary builder and founder. He co-created Google Maps at Google. He co-founded the social network, FriendFeed invented the like button and the real-time newsfeed, which he sold to Facebook. He then became CTO at Facebook. He then started a productivity company called Quip, which he sold to Salesforce for $750 million. He then became co-CEO of Salesforce. He's also currently chairman of the board at OpenAI. At one point he was chairman of the board at Twitter. Today, co-founder and CEO of Sierra an AI started building agent to help companies with customer service sales and more.

(00:01:32):
In our conversation, we cover so much ground, including what skills and mindsets have most helped Bret be so successful in so many roles, why we're all still sleeping on the impact that agents are going to have on the business world. How coding is going to change in the coming years, where the biggest opportunities remain for startups, lessons on pricing and go-to-market in AI, the story behind the like button and so much more. This is a truly epic conversation with a legendary builder.

(00:01:57):
If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. Also, if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of a bunch of incredible products, including Replit, Lovable, Bolt, n8n, Linear, Superhuman, Descript, Wispr Flow, Gamma, Perplexity, Warp, Granola, Magic Patterns, Raycast, ChatPRD, Mobbin and more. Check it out at Lenny'snewsletter.com and click bundle. With that, I bring you Bret Taylor.

(00:02:22):
This episode is brought to you by CodeRabbit, the AI code review platform transforming how engineering teams ship faster with AI without sacrificing code quality. Code reviews are critical, but time-consuming CodeRabbit acts as your AI co-pilot providing instant code review comments and potential impacts of every pull request. Beyond just flagging issues, CodeRabbit provides one click fix suggestions and lets you define custom code quality rules using AST GREP patterns, catching subtle issues that traditional static analysis tools might miss.

(00:02:55):
Coderabbit also provides free AI code reviews directly in the IDE. It's available in VS. Code, Cursor and Windsurf. CodeRabbit has so far reviewed more than 10 million PRs installed on 1 million repositories and is used by over 70,000 open source projects. Get CodeRabbit for free for an entire year at CodeRabbit.ai using code, Lenny. That's CodeRabbit.ai.

(00:03:20):
This episode is brought to you by Basecamp. Basecamp is the famously straightforward project management system from 37signals. Most project management systems are either inadequate or frustratingly complex, but Basecamp is refreshingly clear. It's simple to get started, easy to organize and Basecamp's visual tools help you see exactly what everyone is working on and how all work is progressing. Keep all your files and conversations about projects directly connected to the projects themselves so that you always know where stuff is and you're not constantly switching contexts. Running a business is hard. Managing your project should be easy. I've been a long time fan of what 37signals has been up to and I'm really excited to be sharing this with you. Sign up for a free account at basecamp.com/Lenny. Get somewhere with Basecamp.

(00:04:10):
Bret, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Bret Taylor (00:04:14):
Thanks for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:15):
My pleasure. There's so much that I want to talk about. You've done so many incredible things over the course of your career. Just boggles the mind, the things that you've done, and we're going to talk about a lot of that sort of stuff, but I want to actually start with the opposite. I want to talk about a time that you messed up, a time that you screwed up in a big way. We have this recurring segment on the podcast called Fail Corner, and so, I thought it'd be fun to just start there before we get into all the great stuff you've done. What's a story that comes to mind when you think about maybe your biggest mistake in building a product?

Bret Taylor (00:04:43):
It may not be the biggest, but it was my first prominent mistake as a product manager at Google. So for me, it feels big because it was very formative for me as a product designer. So I joined Google in late 2002, early 2003, and I was one of the earliest associate product managers at the company and first, was working on the search system, essentially expanding our index from 1 billion webpages to 10 billion, which was a big deal at the time. It seems quaint now. Then I did a decent job and so my boss, Marissa Meyer, gave me the opportunity to lead a new product initiative, which was a big bet on me and it was both an opportunity to do something for Google, but I was also being pretty scrutinized just as a young new product manager and the premise given to me was work on local search.

(00:05:40):
At the time, the Yellow Pages was still dominant and well, Google was really good at searching the web. It wasn't really good for finding a plumber or a restaurant just because it wasn't really a huge part of the internet at the time. So this content wasn't necessarily on the internet and even if it was, you didn't really want to find plumbers in Manhattan, you wanted to find plumbers in San Francisco, if you're me. And so it was both a technical problem and a product problem and a content problem.

(00:06:11):
We launched the first version of that product that I was the product manager for, was called Google Local and it was, I'll be a little bit more critical now than I might've been at the time, but it was a little bit of a me too version of Yahoo Yellow Pages, essentially grafting on Yellow Pages search on top of Google Search and with a properly crafted query you could see those listings at the top of your search results but a standalone site at local.google.com. Actually, it was an important enough initiative that actually, there was on the Google homepage, it had Web, Images and Local was up there as well, so it's got top bill.

(00:06:54):
I mean you could put almost any link on the Google homepage and get a lot of traffic to it. And despite that, it didn't do that well and to not do that well with a link from the Google homepage is embarrassing. There's not much one can do more than giving you that kind of traffic to give you an add that as a product leader or a product manager. And the product was fine, it worked, but it really wasn't differentiated. And in many ways, I think, again, I think I've had these reflections more sense than at the time, that I had some of the time, but why use this instead of Yahoo Yellow Pages? But more than anything else, why use this instead of the Yellow Pages? It was a digital version of something that had come before. Had a pretty tough product review with Marissa and Larry and others and it was fine. I wasn't about to get fired or something, but it was, I don't know, the shine on my reputation was waning a little bit.

(00:07:52):
And they gave me another shot to do a V2 of it and I got the impression it wasn't like my last shot, but I certainly was feeling a little dejected from going from a hot shot, new PM to a new thing. So, we spent a lot of time thinking about how can you make something that's just much more compelling and not just a digital version of the Yellow Pages and not just so similar to some of the other products out there. And that ended up being the thread that we pulled that resulted in Google Maps. We had licensed from MapQuest, the ability to put this little map next to the search results, it was always the ugliest part of the product and we always made these backhanded comments about it internally and we spent a lot of time saying, what if we inverted the hierarchy here and made the map the canvas?

(00:08:49):
We ended up finding Lars and Jens Rasmussen who had been working on this Windows mapping product and we got them into the company and started exploring this space and it ended up where, through that exploration we ended up integrating a lot of different products. We ended up integrating mapping local search, driving directions, like all of these products at the time were actually separate product categories and ended up with something that redefined the industry and certainly my career. But it took, I think for me as a product leader, it changed the way I think about product just because there's feature and functionality and then there's like why should I use this thing in the first place? And it was notable, there was a couple of interesting moments.

(00:09:34):
When we launched Google Maps we got about 10 million people using it on the first day, which at that scale of the internet at the time was huge. And then in August of 2005, we integrated satellite imagery from a recent acquisition called Keyhole, which became Google Earth and we got 90 million people using it on the same day. Everyone wanted to look at the top of their house when the imagery came out. And it was really interesting because there's so many subtle product lessons in there. First is, I think as you have these new technologies, rather than literally digitizing what came before, if you can create an entirely new experience, it answers the question for a new customer, why should I give this the time of day? And so, really disassembling the Lego set and reassembling into something new rather than just digitizing what was there before. Certainly, that was the lesson I think in Google Maps, really was native to the platform in a way that a paper map couldn't be and that was a really meaningful breakthrough.

(00:10:35):
And then with satellite imagery, it honestly wasn't the most important part of Google Maps, but it was the sizzle to the steak and it created, I don't think the term viral was a thing people said back then, but it created a viral moment. We were on Saturday Night Live, which is the coolest thing. Andy Samberg in, I think it was called Lazy Sunday rapped about Google Maps and Lars and I were texting each other. We did it. We're on Saturday Live. Mission accomplished. And it was also showing that as you're there thinking about products, there's the why you decide to use a product and then what is the enduring value. And those are deeply related but not all the same thing. And I just learned so many lessons that I took with me for every subsequent product that I worked on.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:18):
That is an awesome story. One I think it's really empowering for people to hear, even you Bret, who I'm going to share all the successes you've had, have had a massive failure with the CEO of Google [inaudible 00:11:30] just like Bret, you screwed up. And it was such a big bet. So one, just it's possible to succeed as you have succeeded in spite of a massive failure like this. And then some of the product lessons you shared, just to highlight a few of these things because I think this is great, is just you will often not win if you just make something that's a better copy of something else, what you want to look for is something that is an entirely new experience, something that's differentiated, something that's a lot more compelling. Let's flip to talk about what you've learned from actually being very successful at a lot of things.

(00:12:02):
So I was looking at your resume and you basically have been very successful at every level of the career ladder and in such a huge variety of roles. So let me just read a few of these things for folks that aren't super familiar with your background. You were CTO of Meta, you were co-CEO of Salesforce, you're also CPO and COO at Salesforce. At Google, you joined as an associate product manager where you famously, you didn't mention this but you rebuilt Google Maps on weekend. We're not going to talk about that. You're chairman of the board at OpenAI. You were chairman of the board at Twitter. You've also founded three different companies, one social network, one productivity docs company called Quip, and now, Sierra. Fun fact, at FriendFeed you invented the like button and I don't know if people know that and also just the newsfeed, I'll just throw that out there to give you some credit.

(00:12:50):
So you're basically an associate product manager, an IC product manager, an engineer, CPO, COO, CTO, CEO of three different companies including a public company. Very rare that somebody is successful at all these types of roles and all these levels. So, let me just ask you this question. What mindsets or habits or just ways of working have you worked on building in yourself that you think have most contributed to you being successful in such a variety of roles and levels?

Bret Taylor (00:13:19):
Yeah. It's actually something I am proud of. I like the fact I've worn different hats. It's actually amusing when I meet colleagues that I've known from one of those jobs, they'll often think of me through the lens of that job. And so, I'll go to meet folks from Facebook and they think of me largely as an engineer. I'll meet folks from Google, they think me largely as a product person. At Salesforce, a lot of the folks there interacted with me as like a, lack of a better word, a suit, the boss. And I'm not sure they think of me as an engineer at all, even though I was still probably coding on the weekends for fun. And one of the things that is a principle for me is to have a really flexible view of my own identity. I probably would self-describe as an engineer, but more broadly I think of myself as a builder and I like to build products and I think companies are one of the most effective ways to build products.

(00:14:17):
There's also things like open source, but I think I'm a huge believer in the confluence of technology and capitalism to produce just incredible outcomes for customers. And as a consequence, I think to really build something of significance, I think to be a great founder, you really need to be able to not have such a ossified view of your identity that you can't transform into what the company needs you to be at that point. And every founder you'll talk to, one day, I think selling is a big part of being a founder. You have to sell investors on wanting to invest in your company. You have to sell candidates on wanting to work at your company. You have to sell customers to want to use the product that your customer produces. You have to have good design taste, not just for your product but for your marketing and essentially, soliciting your customers.

(00:15:09):
You have to have good engineering. If you're building a technology company, the technology comes first. It's why this industry is so transformative. I probably credit, and I've told this story before, but I'm very grateful for her, but I probably credit Sheryl Sandberg for really changing the way I approach new jobs. The story, and I might be embellishment a little bit, but I think it's broadly accurate. So I had just become the chief technology officer of Facebook and when I first got the job, it was the flavor of CTO or that relatively small group reporting into me, but contributed almost as a very senior architect on a number of projects. And then at some point, Mark Zuckerberg reorganized the company and split it into a bunch of different groups. I ended up with a very large group, 100 under me and I was essentially running our platform and mobile groups, products, design engineering.

(00:16:10):
So I went from a handful of reports to, I don't know, over 1,000 or something. It was a big group. And it was the largest management job. I had become a manager at Google, but a modest team. And so, I was doing okay but not great. And I had this moment where Sheryl saw me, I think I was editing a presentation for a partner just because the presentation I got didn't meet my quality bar and I was editing it and griping about it. She pulled me into a room and gave me talking to a little bit about holding my team to as high of a standard as I have. If someone wasn't meeting my expectations, what was my plan to manage them out of the company or... Just giving me management one-on-one.

(00:16:57):
And she's a remarkable mentor in the sense she can give you feedback that's very direct and often, a bit uncomfortable, but you know she cares about you. And so it was the type of feedback you listen to. I went home that night and I was stewing on it and not very happy. I was like, you get naturally a little defensive in those moments. Is that really true? Am I really fucking it up or is she overreacting? And then I woke up the next day, I was like, "No, she's right." And I had realized this subconscious limiter that was limiting my success in the job, which is, I was trying to conform the job to the things I thought I liked to do. So, I was spending a lot of my time on some product and technology things that I was passionate about, thinking I'm the boss. I should focus on what I want to focus on instead of thinking about, okay, I'm running the mobile and platform teams at Facebook. What's the most important thing to do today to make our mobile and developer platform successful?

(00:18:03):
And when I reframed the job that way, I did different things. And the thing that was the biggest pleasant surprise to me was I liked it. I thought I liked engineering and product, but in fact, when I changed an organization and it turned out to be more successful, I derived a great deal of joy from seeing that success. Our developer platform had a lot of partners and when there was an issue there and I'd spend time on partnerships and it worked and our platform became healthier, the partner became more successful. I took pride in that success and then I just started being better at my job and I realized that the actual act of engineering or product design or all the things I thought I liked, what I really liked is impact.

(00:18:49):
And so, that conversation led to my waking up every morning, sometimes literally, but certainly, in the broadest sets of the words saying, "What is the most impactful thing I can do today?" And really thinking almost like, if you had an external board of advisors telling you what are the things where if you focus on them, you can maximize the likelihood that what you're trying to achieve will happen? Sometimes, it's recruiting, sometimes, it's product, sometimes, it's engineering, sometimes, it's sales. And I've become much more self-reflective just about what is important to work on. And I have become much more receptive to doing things that I previously would've said aren't my favorite things to do because I derive so much joy from having an impact that I enjoy a lot more things now. And so, I really credit Sheryl, I'm so grateful. And actually, it's interesting, I think a lot about this when I give feedback to people now, just those moments that can change the trajectory of your career. I give her all the credit for it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:53):
There's so many people that share stories of Sheryl Sandberg giving them advice and that changing their life. What a mensch.

Bret Taylor (00:20:01):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:01):
My biggest takeaway from this, which is this question of what is the most impactful thing I could do today? Such a powerful heuristic just to keep in mind. To your point, you may realize you don't want to be doing sales or hiring, but if that's the most impactful thing and you end up doing it, you may realize I like this and I'm good at this and have thought about-

Bret Taylor (00:20:18):
Can I double click on that though for a second?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:19):
Absolutely.

Bret Taylor (00:20:20):
I think it's really hard. One of the dangers for founders and product managers, but I think particularly for founders is incorrect storytelling. People don't like my product because of X. And if you tell that to yourself and you tell it to your team, all of a sudden, it goes from being an intuition to being a fact. Well, you better hope you're right because if you orient your strategy around fixing a problem and you're wrong, your company's going to fail. So why did you lose a deal? You could talk to the salesperson who is on the account or perhaps maybe a product manager was involved in the conversation. It's very important to have intellectual honesty in those moments because you could say something like, "Oh, they didn't buy it because the platform cost too much." And that's something a salesperson might say.

(00:21:16):
Maybe the real reason is they didn't actually see much value in your platform. So it was communicated to the salesperson as it was too expensive. But in fact, the problem was product differentiation. And you could end up going into a discussion on pricing when in fact, there was a much deeper, much harder problem to solve there. But just like when you break up with someone, you don't say, it's because I don't like you anymore. You say it's not you, it's me. You say all these pleasantries because we're all social animals and you want to be pleasant with the people around you. So literally taking what a customer says or what a user says in a focus group or a usability study is rarely correct. It often is related to what the truth is, but it's very important to get right. And so, I think one of the things I've observed with first time founders in particular is you're often a single issue voter based on your skillset.

(00:22:14):
So if you're a great engineer, the answer to almost every problem in your business is engineering. If you're a product designer, the answer almost to the proverbial redesign, I joke, it's like the dead cap balance of a consumer product like this next redesign will fix all of our problems. I don't know if it's ever, ever worked. And then I met a lot of entrepreneurs who come from a business development background, they're always thinking about partnerships and oh, if we just get this partnership done for this distribution channel, everything's going to change. And I think it's really important when you're a founder to be self-aware that you will naturally, subconsciously pick the thing that is your strength, your superpower as a solution to more problems. And in fact, if you think that's a solution to your problem, it may be right, but you probably by default should question it.

(00:23:03):
If you think the thing that you've been doing your whole career is the way to fix your problem, it's at least 30% likely that you've chosen that because of comfort and familiarity not truth. And so, I think one of the skills I think is, it really goes around to do you have a good co-founder? Do you have a good leadership team? If you're a product manager, you're a partner in engineering, you're a partner in marketing, you really want to have very real conversations to ensure that you're actually working on the actual correct thing. And I think it's easy to say what's the most impactful thing to do today? My guess, if a lot of people try that, they'll lie to themselves more often than not. And it's a very challenging question to answer. The question's interesting. Being able to answer it accurately is actually the hard part.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:50):
This feels like such an important lesson you've learned. Is there an example that comes to mind where you learned this the hard way where you actually ended up-

Bret Taylor (00:23:57):
Oh, yeah. You just want to spend this whole thing on my failures, but I'm fine with that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:02):
You've had too much success.

Bret Taylor (00:24:04):
Frontier was my first company. At our peak we had 12 employees, 12 of the best people I've ever worked with. Started the company with Jim Norris, who's an engineer I've known since Stanford and Paul Buhite and Sanjeev Singh who Paul started Gmail. Sanjeev was the first engineer at Gmail, so we had the Google Maps people and Gmail people. It was a pretty awesome founding team. We made a social network, as you said. We invented a lot of concepts that became popular in the newsfeed. We invented the like button. It was really neat. It was a fun time. We were only really popular in Turkey, Italy and Iran, and at one point, we were blocked in Iran, so we were only popular in Turkey and Italy and Silicon Valley. To this day, actually a lot of folks in Silicon Valley are like, "I love FriendFeed." I'm like, that's awesome.

(00:24:51):
It wasn't really a successful business. We were a follower-oriented social network, not a friendship-oriented social network, which meant a lot of our content was more like X or Twitter than it is Facebook in that respect. And a lot of sharing newspaper articles, interests, scientific communities, things like that. And there was a period when Twitter, which was one of our competitors at the time, that there was a lot more social networks at the time. I am probably screwing this up a little bit. I think Obama, Ashton Kutcher and Oprah Winfrey all went on Twitter in a summer and we just got our ass kicked.

(00:25:31):
And it was a great example of you... I think 11 of those 12 people were engineers and we were just making product and I think it was Biz Stone. If you talk to the Twitter folks, they could give you the history on this, but I think Biz was really focused on getting celebrities and public figures onto Twitter, which is totally obvious. If you have a social service that's oriented towards following people, put some people on there worth following and instead, we were exclusively focused on polishing the product.

(00:26:00):
And we actually, I think at our peak of popularity, we were very confident just, I think it was a time when Twitter had the fail whale and it was down half the time and people couldn't even use it. And our product, we were innovating faster, we had more features, people liked it and we were up 100% of the time and we totally lost for no reason related to product at all. And it was an example of, I think somewhat famously not a lot of great entrepreneurs have come out of Google because Google was so successful, I think it's hard as a product manager to see distribution and product design and even business model when you have AdWords and money's raining from the sky. There wasn't as much scrutiny and I think folks like the PayPal Mafia I think learned a lot more about entrepreneurialism than a typical PM at Google. So, we're just getting punched in the face and learning this the hard way.

(00:26:57):
And so, that was probably the most prominent example of it and I think we probably did have a... I can tell you all the flaws of that product, but I don't think that was the reason why we lost. There's a lot of reasons. I think there was a lot of flaws of the product, but it was a lot of other stuff. And so, I've learned, accumulated these skills over time, but I say the hard part of that question is answering it correctly, is it's hard when you don't have experience in something, than to have intuition in it. So I think if there's probably a structural flaw, it wasn't that... I don't know if I could have figured out how to reach out to Ashton Kutcher [inaudible 00:27:28], it's not he's on my Rolodex. But I probably wasn't soliciting advice from the right people.

(00:27:36):
I think that what's great about the technology industry is there's a lot of advice. Choosing whom you listen to is actually quite difficult, but I think we're somewhat myopic. We're in our own little world, creating this product and we weren't asking people from the outside in to say, what are you seeing that could go wrong? What are you seeing that could go right? What are you seeing in the industry that we're not doing that you think we might want to do? And this is why boards are important. This is why finding the right advisors, the advisors will actually tell you what you not [inaudible 00:28:09] want to hear, but you need to hear. I think that was probably the missing part. I'm not sure I was great at market at the time, but if I had solicited the right advice, I could have learned that that was a shortcoming. And I think that was a deep lesson I took from that. I'm a huge believer in boards and getting good advice.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:26):
Any heuristics or advice for people to know whose advice to listen to? What do you pay attention to when you're like, okay, ignore this person but listen to this person?

Bret Taylor (00:28:35):
Yeah, that one's tough. It does come down to good judgment and being judge of people's character. One thing that is particularly hard is there's not a strong correlation between the confidence with which someone expresses an opinion and the quality of that opinion. I don't want to say it's inversely correlated, but that's funny, with all the podcasts out now, if there's topics I know a lot about, sometimes the most eloquent, confident statements about things I know a lot about, are the least accurate and it sounds extremely persuasive. And so, it does require very good judgment. One thing is I think, not just asking for advice but asking people, who should I talk to get good advice? And you'll find some common answers there and that's often a really strong signal of good judgment.

(00:29:26):
And then one thing I found is when you ask for advice, don't just ask what to do but why. Be an obnoxious two-year-old kid, why? Why? Why? Why? And really try to understand the framework that someone is using to give you advice. The interesting thing about advice is people are often extrapolating from relatively few experiences. So they will say, never do this or always do that. And it's because they had one experience where something backfired or something could have gone better if they had done it. So it's a useful anecdote, but if you don't ask why and understand they had one experience and here's what happened, it can come across as a rule when in fact, it's [inaudible 00:30:08] data and if you ask advice of three people and they all have very similar interactions, you can create a first principles framework from which that advice emerges. And when you start applying it, you're applying it with a degree of nuance that you couldn't if you're just following a rule. So, I think one is, it does come down to good judgment, I think. I don't know how to teach that.

(00:30:30):
I'm a huge believer in good judgment. It's one of the things I hire for. I just think that's something that probably comes from a mix of self perfection. You really need to hold yourselves accountable as an entrepreneur, as a product manager. If you made a bad decision, spend time reflecting on it, number one. And really, try to understand why and try to always improve your judgment. I think at the end of the day, that is why you are a good entrepreneur, a good product manager. And number two, when you get advice, really understand where it's coming from and why so that you can create your own independent view of where that advice came from and recognize that no one's advice is statistically significant or very rarely is it. If you're getting advice on investing from Warren Buffett, yeah, okay, it's statistically significant, but most advice is like something happened to you once and you have regrets.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:28):
I love that you're like, I don't know if I have a great answer then you just give us an incredible answer to this question. I want to go in a different direction. You mentioned that you describe yourself as an engineer. I know I heard you code to relax still. Let me just ask you this question, something a lot of people in college are thinking about. Do you think it still makes sense to learn to code? Do you think this will significantly change in the next few years?

Bret Taylor (00:31:47):
I do still think studying computer science is a different answer than learning to code, but I would say I still think it's extremely valuable to study computer science. I say that because I think computer science is more than coding. If you understand things like Big O notation or complexity theory or study algorithms and why a randomized algorithm works and why two algorithms with the same Big O complexity, one can then practice perform better than others and why a cache miss matters and just all these little... There's a lot more to coding than writing the code. The reason I think that is I do think the act of creating software is going to transform from typing into a terminal or typing into Visual Studio code to operating a code-generating machine. I think that is the future of creating software. But I think operating a code-generating machine requires systems thinking and I think that computer science, there are other disciplines as well, but computer science is a wonderful major to learn systems thinking and at the end of the day, AI will facilitate creating this software.

(00:33:08):
We may do a lot more in the next few years we can't even imagine, but your job as the operator of that code-generating machine is to make a product or to solve a problem and you really need to have great systems thinking and you're going to be managing this machine that's doing a lot of the tedious work of making the button or connecting to the network. But as you're thinking of the intersection of a technology and a business problem, you're trying to affect a system that will solve that problem at scale for your customers and that systems thinking is always the hardest part of creating products.

(00:33:40):
I'll just give you, it's this cheesy simple example, but I think it's representative. At Facebook, we spent a lot of time designing the newsfeed and if you ever had a really, really good designer and they showed you at the time, a Photoshop mock-up of the newsfeed, it was just all as beautiful. The photos, the family was happy and the photo was a perfect photo and the posts were all perfectly grammatically correct and of a completely normal length and the comments and there was the like... Everything was just perfect. And then you'd implement that design and you'd look at your own newsfeed and it looked like shit because it turns out not everyone's photos were made by a professional photographer. The posts were all these different lengths. The comments were like, you suck and... All that stuff.

(00:34:29):
And then all of a sudden you realize that designing a newsfeed, Photoshop is the easy part. You need to actually design a system that produces both in content and visual design, like a delightful experience given input you don't control. And that's a system, it's sort of a design and it's just, what we did practically, I am sure it's changed a lot since I left in 2012, but we made a system so designers had to show their newsfeed designs with real newsfeed data that was messy rather than anything artificial because I think it forced the process to be more realistic.

(00:35:10):
But I say that because I think that whether AI is writing code or doing the design or doing all these other things, you need to learn how to have a system in your head. You need to understand the basics of what's hard and what's easy and what's possible and what's impossible. And AI can help you do that too, by the way. But I do think that's a really useful skill. I think in general, with the advent of AI agents and AI approaching super intelligence in certain domains, I think the tools with which we do our job will change a lot. I think it's very important to have a very loose attachment to the way we do our jobs and that story that we won't talk about when I rewrote Google Maps, everyone talks about that story and I think it's because of Paul [inaudible 00:35:57] who told it on some podcasts and that's where it made the rounds.

(00:36:01):
I think that's going to end up this vestige of the past, almost like the human calculators at NASA before the computers were invented, like wow, a person was a calculator? Whoa, that's fun. Tell me that story. I think just what I was good at will no longer be useful in the future or certainly not valuable in the future and that's okay. So I think we need to have a really loose view of it, but the idea that you shouldn't study these disciplines, it's like people say, I don't want to study math because I'm not going to use it in my career for X. Well, studying maths is quite important. It teaches you how to think. It teaches you how the world works, physics, math, and I think computer science especially, at least the foundations of it, will continue to be the foundations of how we build software and understanding that when you're interacting particularly with something that's smarter than you, producing code you might not completely understand how you constrain it and how you get it to produce these outcomes. I think it will require a lot of sophistication actually.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:59):
That's such a great answer. There's this always sense of this binary, should I learn to code or not? And your point here is learn to understand how engineering works and how systems work and what your code does and how it all interconnects, but the way you actually do the coding at your desk will change significantly. This reminds me of something you mentioned on a podcast recently. This idea that you think there's going to, or there should be a new programming language that is more designed for LLMs versus humans. Can you just talk about that because I think a lot of people aren't thinking about that?

Bret Taylor (00:37:27):
I don't know if it's a language, I would call it a programming system because I think language might be too limited. My reductive version of the past, what 40 years of computers maybe more, is we created the hardware for computers, then we created punch cards, which is the way in the late '70s you would tell a computer what to do or maybe mid to late '70s. Then we invented early operating systems and time-sharing systems from the invention of things like Unix at Bell Labs and Berkeley, you ended up with the C programming language, Fortran and a lot of higher level programming languages. I think Fortran and then C.

(00:38:15):
And we moved up the layers of abstraction. No one does punch cards anymore, obviously. Few people write assembly language. Some people write C, some people write REST. But a lot of people write Python and TypeScript and things like that. And as we've invented more and more abstractions, we've made it easier to do high-leverage things. So, if you look at how remarkable Google was back in the day or Google Maps, you could probably give a lot of react programmers the task of make a draggable map now and I think a lot of people could do it. That was true RND back in the day.

(00:38:54):
When Salesforce was created in 1998, just putting a database in the cloud was hard and that alone was a technical moat that is now trivial with Amazon Web Services and that technical moat is comically narrow, but the product moat is quite large. I think that if the act of writing code is going from something that is very costly to the marginal cost of that going to zero, how many of the abstractions that we've built are based on human program or productivity? I think a ton. I always laugh that I assume Python is probably the most common generated code just because of how much it's in the training data and data scientists love Python and I love Python too. It's such a comically bad thing for AI to generate just because it's one of the most inefficient programming languages of all time. If you know the global interpreter lock and just slow. And I've written a lot of high-scale web services and it's just quite slow and it's very hard to verify.

(00:40:00):
It's not as bad as Perl, but if you have a big Python program, how many errors will you find at runtime versus before releasing it? So, Python was designed to be very ergonomic, almost looked like pseudo code for humans, for me to write code in a delightful way. That's why data scientists love it so much. So as we move to a world where let's just postulate, and I'm not sure this will be completely true, that we're not going to write a lot of code as people. We're going to be operating these code-generating machines. We probably don't care how ergonomic the programming language is. What we care about is when this machine generates code, do we know that it did what we wanted it to do? And if it doesn't do we want it to do, can we change it easily? I think there's a lot of insights in programming languages that could serve this.

(00:40:48):
So Rust I think, is interesting because if I asked you to look at a C program and say, "Does it leak memory?" You probably couldn't do it that well just because it's really hard and if it's a very, a million line C program, it's going to be very, very hard. If I asked you to verify that a Rust program doesn't leak memory, you would just have to compile it. And because it has compile time, memory safety, just the act of compiling successfully tells you that's true. I think we need more things like that because if an AI is generating this code, by definition, if you have to read every line that is going to be the limiting factor for producing the code or worse, you're just not going to read every line and you're going to emit a bunch of unsafe unverified code into the wild.

(00:41:36):
And so, the question is how do you enable humans to have as much leverage as possible? Which means using computers to do the work on your behalf. You could have obviously the simplest form of this, is AI supervising AI and doing code reviews and that's great. Certainly, self-reflection is a really effective way of improving the robustness of an AI system. But I do think if it doesn't matter how tedious it is to write the code, you could probably layer on some techniques that are out of fashion, like formal verification, unit testing, other things. And if you layer all these on, I'm thinking about it as, I as a... It's like the guy in the matrix with the green letters coming down, how can I make something so I as a operator of the code generating machine can produce incredibly complex scale software, incredibly quickly and know that it works?

(00:42:26):
If you start with that as your design center, I think you'd probably changed the languages, you'd probably changed the systems, you'd probably change all these things and you're probably going to bring to bear a lot of things. And what's really fun about it is you can loosen a lot of constraints, like coding is free. Okay, so that's neat. With that in mind, what do you want to do? What would be best suited for the language, the compiler for testing, for self-reflection, for supervisor models, all these things. I think that's more of a programming system than a language, but I think when we create something like that, it can really enable creators, builders to create incredibly robust, incredibly complex systems.

(00:43:04):
And I'm super excited about VibeCoding, but I don't know generating a prototype has been the limiting factor in software ever. It's actually building increasingly complex systems and actually changing them with agility. If you look at the famous Netscape one to Netscape two rewrite, somewhat, a lot of people attribute that to part of their failure against Internet Explorer. It's like making these things is not hard. Maintaining them is hard and ensuring they're robust is hard. And I think we're in the very early phases of defining what this new system for developing software looks like and I'm very excited to see what emerges.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:42):
I feel like we're definitely living in the future when someone like you is suggesting that we build a matrix like experience and that's going to be potentially the future of coding and building. I can't wait for that. It feels like a great opportunity and a fun project.

(00:43:57):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta and I'm very excited to have Christina Cacioppo CEO and co-founder Vanta joining me for this very short conversation.

Christina Cacioppo (00:44:06):
Great to be here. Big fan of the podcast and the newsletter.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:09):
Vanta is a long time sponsor of the show, but for some of our newer listeners, what does Vanta do and who is it for?

Christina Cacioppo (00:44:16):
Sure. So we started Vanta in 2018 focused on founders helping them start to build out their security programs and get credit for all of that hard security work with compliance certifications like SOC 2 or ISO 2701. Today, we currently help over 9,000 companies including some start-up household names like Atlassian Ramp and LangChain, start and scale their security programs and ultimately, build trust by automating compliance, centralizing GRC, and accelerating security reviews.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:46):
That is awesome. I know from experience that these things take a lot of time and a lot of resources and nobody wants to spend time doing this.

Christina Cacioppo (00:44:54):
That is very much our experience, but before the company and to some extent, during it. But the idea is with automation, with AI, with software, we are helping customers build trust with prospects and customers in an efficient way. And our joke, we started this compliance company so you don't have to.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:10):
We appreciate you for doing that. And you have a special discount for listeners. They can get $1,000 off Vanta at vanta.com/lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A .com/lenny for $1,000 off Vanta. Thanks for that, Christina.

Christina Cacioppo (00:45:25):
Thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:26):
Okay. One more question along these lines and then I want to zoom out on just where AI is heading and something I love to ask folks like you that are at the cutting edge of AI is what you're teaching your kids. I know you have kids, I feel like the world is going to be very different when they grow up. What are you encouraging them to learn that you think is different maybe from previous generations to help them be successful in a world of AI abundance?

Bret Taylor (00:45:53):
I don't know if I'm teaching them differently, but I'm really trying to encourage them to make AI a part of their lives. I was reflecting actually when I took the AP calculus exams in '97, '98 AB and BC, I could use a graphing calculator. And I haven't done this research I was meaning to plug this into ChatGPT before our conversation, but I'll do it after. Did the calculus exam change before and after they allowed the calculator in the exam? I assume it did. But essentially, to when you allow the calculator in the exam, you need to make sure that none of the questions benefit people for having a calculator or not, which actually forces you to rethink the problems to test calculus knowledge that don't benefit from like road arithmetic or the other things you can do on a graphing calculator.

(00:46:47):
I think that a lot of education doesn't presume you have a super intelligence in your pocket. And so, if you ask someone to write an essay on a book that they read, you could probably hallucinate one pretty easily from one of the big providers like ChatGPT. And maybe if you are skilled enough that prompting, maybe even your teacher won't know it's written by an AI. So what do you do? How do you teach kids differently? It's really hard for teachers right now because I think we haven't gone through the transition of adding calculators to the exams. So, I think a lot of the mechanisms we have to evaluate students are broken by the existence of ChatGPT and the like. So I think we're in a very awkward phase, but I think we can still both teach kids how to think and teach kids how to learn. And I think our education system can catch up and I actually think these models can be one of the most effective educational tools in history.

(00:47:46):
I don't know if you're a visual learner or reading learner. I like to read. I didn't love going to lectures. I don't learn that well from them. I like to read the book and if you have a teacher who doesn't teach in your style, you can now go home and ask ChatGPT to teach you in another mechanism. My kids use ChatGPT to quiz them before a test. You can use audio mode or chat mode. It's better than cue cards. My daughter took home a Shakespeare book, she took a picture of a page she didn't understand and ChatGPT explained it to her way better than I would've as well. I think every child in this world has a personalized tutor that can teach them in the way that they best learn, visually, over audio, reading. We have a platform that can test you, that can quiz you. I think it's really an amplifier of agency.

(00:48:39):
I think the kids who have agency, who have aspirations to learn something, I think you have what is the best combination of every teacher you've ever had and these models and you can use it. So with my kids, my oldest daughter learned how to code and she was making a website and every time she had a question for me, I would just make her use ChatGPT. Not because I was trying to be an obnoxious father, but I'm like she needs to learn to use this tool because it's amazing.

(00:49:13):
So, I really am trying to have them learn how to use it constructively in their lives. But all that said, I just feel a ton of empathy for public school teachers right now. It's very hard because the technology is moving faster than our educational system. And I think particularly as it relates to evaluation, it's just really challenging for teachers right now. And I worry because these technologies amplify agency, the opposite can also be true. If you are a student trying to not learn something, I think these tools probably provide a lot of mechanisms to avoid it as well. And so, I think there's a challenge for parents and teachers and I think we're going to end up with a handful of years here.

(00:49:53):
But I brought up the calculus AP exam because obviously, a graphing calculator is not ChatGPT, don't get me wrong. But I think we've been able to figure out a way to conform homework and in-class learning and tests around the technologies available to us fairly successfully to date. And I'm fairly confident we'll figure it out and I think it's going to... And on the much more positive side, I don't know, I went to public schools, I don't know if you did too. You end up with some pretty bad teachers at times and now, you have an outlet. You don't need to be the rich kid who can afford a tutor anymore to get tutoring. If you are a kid who excels in math and your school doesn't have advanced statistics classes, well, now you do.

(00:50:40):
So I think this is just an incredibly democratizing force with kids who have agency and I think that's very exciting. I'm hopeful that there's a 11-year-old right now who's going to start a really amazing company 10 years from now whose ChatGPT is going to be their primary tutor that led to that outcome. And I think that's pretty cool.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:02):
I have a two-year-old and it feels like there's a new milestone of, there's like when to give them a phone, when to give them, I don't know, Snapchat, whatever kids use these days and then it's like when to give them their first ChatGPT account. Well no, I wonder how soon that's supposed to happen.

Bret Taylor (00:51:16):
I think my personal take is, it's different than the former two. I don't think mobile phones are great in school or great for kids and I personally advocate for waiting a long time. But I think that ChatGPT is more like Google search and it's one thing to have a device in your pocket that's addictive and has push notifications, but it's another thing to use AI to learn. And so, I think the two are different. And I really think of AI fundamentally as a utility. I don't think a lot of parents before ChatGPT said, "When should I let my kid use Google search?" That's a different type of tool. I think thinking of it like that is the way I think about these technologies.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:55):
Is the form factor for your kids like an iPad or a laptop or something?

Bret Taylor (00:51:58):
Yeah. They use the computer on the desk.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:01):
Got it. All right. Good tips. This is good for me to learn all these things as my kid ages. Okay, I'm going to zoom out and let's talk about business strategy AI. One of the biggest questions a lot of founders think about these days is just where should I build? What will foundational model companies not squash and do themselves? Being someone building a very successful AI business and also being on the board of OpenAI, feel like you have a really unique perspective on what is probably a good idea and it's probably not a good idea. How do you think the AI market is going to play out and where do you think founders should focus and also just try to avoid?

Bret Taylor (00:52:36):
I think there's three segments of the AI market that will end up fairly meaningful markets and then I'll end with how I think it's going to play out. So first is the frontier model market or foundation model market. I think this will end up the small handful of hyperscalers and really big labs just like the cloud infrastructure as a service market. And the reason for that is that creating a frontier model is entirely a function of CapEx. And you need a company with huge amounts of CapEx capacity to build one of these models. All of the companies that were startups that tried to do this have already been consolidated or almost all of them, inflection, adapt, character and others. And I think there doesn't appear to be a viable business model for a startup because of the amount of CapEx required and there's just not enough fundraising runway to get to escape velocity. And also, the models deteriorate in value fairly quickly as an asset class.

(00:53:33):
And so, you need just a lot of scale to make a return on the investment for a model that deteriorates in value so quickly. So, I think that's going to end up probably no entrepreneur should build a frontier model. That's my take.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:47):
Unless you're Elon.

Bret Taylor (00:53:51):
Yeah. Oh, yeah. He's different. And he has the capacity to raise billions in capital and my guess is most of your other listeners don't, and then he is the greatest of all time for reason and he's different. You don't compare yourself to him. The other part of the market is the tooling, and I think there's a lot of folks selling pickaxes in the Gold Rush. This is data labeling, services. This is data platforms, it's eval tools. More specialized models like 11 Labs has a great set of voice models that a lot of companies use that are really high quality and it's like if you're trying to be successful in AI, what are the different tools and services that you need?

(00:54:31):
There is some risk to the tooling market because it's pretty close to the sun. So, if you look at the infrastructure as a service market and the cloud tooling market like the Confluent and Databricks and Snowflake, a lot of the Amazon and Azure and others have competing products in those areas because they're very adjacent to the infrastructure itself and every infrastructure provider is trying to differentiate by moving up the stack and you're right there.

(00:54:57):
So, there's some real meaningful companies as I mentioned, like Snowflake, Databricks, Confluent and others, but there's a lot of others that were obviated by technology from the infrastructure providers themselves. So those companies probably are the most at risk for a developer day from one of these big foundation model companies releasing exactly what they do. So there's probably a lot of people who need your tool, but the question will be if or when is probably the right way to think about it, one of these large infrastructure providers introduces a competitor, why will people continue to choose you? So it's a good market but it's a little bit close to the end as I said.

(00:55:38):
Then there's the applied AI market. I think this will play out for companies who build agents. I think agent is the new app. I think that's going to be the product form factor. There's companies like Sierra, we help companies build agents to answer the phone or answer the chat for customer experience and customer service. There's companies like Harvey that make agents for both a legal, paralegal profession, anti-trust reviews, reviewing contracts etc, etc. There's companies that do content marketing. There's companies that do supply chain analysis. I think this is like the software as a service market. They'll probably be higher margin companies because you're selling something that achieves a business outcome as opposed to being a byproduct of the models themselves. They will almost certainly pay taxes down to the model providers, which is why those model providers will end up extremely large scale but probably slightly lower margin and I think the market for them will be probably less technical.

(00:56:37):
If you think about the purest form of software as a service, it's not like you ask what database do you use? It's really about the feature and function. I think that's where agents will go. I think it's going to be more about product than it is about technology over time. Just going back to my metaphor, in 1998 when Mark and Parker started Salesforce, just getting that database running in the cloud was like a technical achievement. Nowadays, no one asks about that because you can just spin up a database in AWS or Azure and it's like no problem. I think today, orchestrating an agentic process on top of the models, sounds really fancy and it's really hard and all that stuff. I'm pretty sure that's going to be easy in three or four years. It's just like just as the technology improves. And so, over time you say, what is an agent company? Well, it looks a little bit like [inaudible 00:57:30] as a service.

(00:57:30):
You talk a little bit less about how you deal with the models in the same way modern SaaS, few people ask what database you use, but you'll probably ask a lot about the workflows and what business outcomes that you're driving. Are you generating leads for a sales team? Are you minimizing your procurement spend? Whatever value you're providing, it's going to slowly evolve towards that.

(00:57:53):
I'm very excited. I don't think startups should probably build foundation models. But you can shoot your shot if you have a vision for the future, go for it. But I think it's probably a challenging market that's already consolidated. I'm very excited about the other two markets. I'm particularly excited as building agents becomes easier, to see a lot of long tail agent companies come out. I was looking at a website for the top 50 software companies in the stock market and obviously, the top five are the big, big boom ones like Microsoft, Amazon, Google, all that, but the next 50 are all SaaS companies and some of them are very exciting, some of them are super boring, but this is how the software market has evolved and I think we're going to see something similar with agents.

(00:58:38):
It's not just going to be these huge markets like we're in customer service and software engineering. It's going to be a lot of things where people are spending a lot of time and resources that an agent can just solve, but it requires an entrepreneur who actually understands that business problem, and deeply, and I think that's where a lot of the value is going to be unlocked in the AI market.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:00):
That is incredibly helpful. This makes me think about, I had Marc Benioff on the podcast, you guys were co-CEOs and he was extremely agent-pilled. All he wanted to talk about was Agentforce. Clearly you're also very agent-pilled. What is it that-

Bret Taylor (00:59:14):
I've never heard the term agent-pilled [inaudible 00:59:18].

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:18):
Clearly you guys saw something that was just like, okay, we need to go all in on agents. This is the future. What is it you think people are missing about just why this is such a critical change in the way software is going to work? What are people not seeing?

Bret Taylor (00:59:31):
If you talk to an economist like Larry Summers who, on the OpenAI board with me, they'll talk about what is the value of technology? Will it help strive productivity in the economy. And if you look at one of the big jumps in productivity in the economy was in the '90s, and I think a lot of folks I talked to think it was actually that very first wave of computing where people made ERP systems and just put accounting into computers and databases, even mainframes, we're talking like the PC era. Because it was such a huge step-up, just imagine the ledgers of numbers that you'd have for a large multinational company before and it truly just transformed departments.

(01:00:14):
I'll give you a little toy example. My dad just retired. He was a mechanical engineer and he was talking about when he first started his career in the late '70s and he went into a mechanical engineering firm, the majority of the firm were drafts people. So basically, you take an engineering design but you needed to do all the different vantage points and for all the different floors and to give to the contractor to do the thing. Now, there are zero drafts people at his company. You just make the design in first AutoCAD and now Revit and it's a 3D model and the drafting has actually been eliminated. It's just not a thing one needs to do anymore. The actual design and drafting, drafting is not a thing that exists. It's just a design. That's true productivity gains, right? It's like the job of the mechanical engineering firm was to do a design. The drafting was this necessary output for the contractor, but it wasn't really adding value. It was just like the supply chain change.

(01:01:12):
If you look at the history of the software industry from the PC on, there's been meaningful productivity gains but just not nearly as meaningful as that first huge jump. And I'm not smart enough to know exactly why, but it is interesting, the promise of productivity gains from technology hasn't been as realized I think as some people thought. I think agents will truly start to bend the curve again like we did in the very early days of computing because software is going from helping an individual be slightly more productive to actually accomplishing a job autonomously. And as a consequence, just like you don't need drafts people in a mechanical engineering firm, you just won't need someone doing that thing anymore. It means they can do something else that's higher leverage and more productive and you can actually... A smaller group of people can accomplish more and truly drive productivity gains in the economy.

(01:02:15):
And I think if you've ever sold enterprise software, you end up in these discussions as a vendor with the customer where you'll have a value discussion and you'll do these somewhat convoluted things like okay, it's like you're selling a sales thing. Okay, well, if every salesperson sells 5% more... And you should pay us a million dollars. And it's roughly that conversation and it's so unattributable especially... And it's why it's so hard to sell productivity software, which I learned the hard way, it's just hard to know what's the value of making everyone 10% more productive? Did you actually make them 10% more productive or did something else change? You don't really know all these things. But now with an agent actually accomplishing a job, not only is it actually truly driving productivity in a very real way, but it's measurable as well.

(01:03:10):
So all those things combined means I think this is actually a step change in how we think about software because it does a job autonomously, which is more self-evident, a productivity driver. It's measurable so people value it differently as well, which is why I also believe in outcomes-based pricing for software.

(01:03:32):
And all of that combined to me, it feels like as significant as the cloud or I think more technologically, but just in terms of how it transforms the business model of the software industry where there's going to be a before and after. I don't know how many people still sell perpetually licensed on premises software, but it's de minimis at this point. I think we're going to go through a similar transition. The whole market is going to go towards agents. I think the whole market is going to go towards outcomes-based pricing, not because it's the only way, but the market is going to pull everyone there because it's just so obviously the correct way to build and sell software.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:08):
Let me pull on that last thread. So we had Madhavan on the podcast recently, pricing expert, legend, monetizing innovation author and he talked about pricing strategy for AI companies and he was very much in your camp of, if you can, you need to price your product as an outcome-based product and the access uses exactly what you shared, which is, you can do that if you can attribute the impact and it's autonomous, it's running on its own. And he actually used Sierra as one of the shining examples of this being successful. Can you just briefly just explain a little bit what is outcome-based pricing for people that haven't heard this term before and then just how does it work for Sierra to give an example?

Bret Taylor (01:04:45):
Yeah, I'll start with the example and then I'll broaden it. So at Sierra, we help companies make customer facing AI agents primarily for customer service, but more broadly, for customer experience. So if you have a problem with your [inaudible 01:04:58], you'll call or chat with Harmony, who's their AI agent. If you have ADT home security and your alarm doesn't work, you can chat with their AI agent. Sonos speakers, a lot of different consumer brands. And if you think about running a call center, there's a cost for every phone call that you take. Most of it is labor costs, but if you have, let's just say a typical phone call is anywhere between 10 and $20 USD. Some of it's software, some of it's telephony, but a lot of it is just like the hourly wage of the person answering the phone.

(01:05:32):
So if an AI agent can take that call and solve it, that is in the industry often called a call deflection or a containment. And that essentially means you saved, call it $15 because you didn't have to have someone pick up the phone. So in our industry, basically we say, "Hey, if the AI agent solves the customer's problem, they're happy with it and you didn't have to pick up the phone," there's a pre-negotiated rate for that and we call it resolution based. There are other outcomes as well. We have some sales agents being paid a sales commission, believe it or not. We do. We really think of our agents as truly customer experience like the concierge for your brand and we want to make sure that our business model is aligned with our customer's business model.

(01:06:22):
As you said, these agents need to be autonomous and the outcome has to be measurable. That's not always possible, but I think it's broadly possible. And what's really neat about it is if you talk to any CFO or head of procurement with their big vendors, they look at the bill of materials and it's overwhelming and it's impossible to know if you're getting the value that you hoped from that contract. I think consumption based, which was popular particularly in the infrastructure space is closer to it. But I'm not sure a token is actually a good measure of value from AI either. I always use the analogy, like right now, most of the coding agents are priced per token or per utilization, but there's this famous story of an Apple engineer who had a bad manager who's like had you report how many lines of code you wrote every day? Which every engineer in the world knows is an idiotic way to measure productivity.

(01:07:16):
He famously went in with a report that had a negative number because I think he did a big refactoring, deleted a bunch and it was his way of saying like, fuck you to the man. I think tokens are similar. Yeah, you used a lot of tokens, like good for you, did it produce a pull request that was good? And I think that's the whole point of all this. I think there's a huge difference between outcomes-based pricing and usage based pricing because especially in AI, they're not necessarily even correlated and you could have a long phone call and not solve the customer's problem and they give you a negative review online and call the call center again, all that effort was for nothing. In fact, you might've added negative value. And so, I am a huge believer in this.

(01:07:58):
And what's fun about it is it really just aligns... I think every technology company aspires to be a partner, not a vendor. And I think at Sierra, we are truly a partner to every single one of our customers because we're all aligned on what we want to achieve. And I think that is really where the software industry should go. It requires a lot of different shape of a company. You have to be able to help your customers achieve those outcomes. You can't just throw software at the wall because you'll never get paid if it doesn't. Your orientation becomes so extremely customer-centric when you do this the right way. I think it's just a better version of the software industry. So I think it's right from first principles, it's right for procurement partners and I think it's right for the world.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:43):
We've been chatting a little bit about productivity gains. There's a lot of skepticism in the headlines these days of just like what is AI actually doing? Is it actually helping people be more productive? There was a recent study actually, I don't know if you saw, where they showed engineers were less productive with AI because it was just putting them in different directions. They had to research all what's going wrong here? So I think CX is a really good example where you clearly are seeing gains. Are you seeing actual gains at your company or any other company you work with outside of CX in terms of productivity that is like clearly yes, this is working and a huge deal?

Bret Taylor (01:09:15):
I'm extremely bullish on the productivity gains from AI, but I do think the tools and products right now are somewhat immature and it's quite counterintuitive. So, for example, almost every software engineering firm I know uses something like Cursor to help their software engineers. Most people use Cursor right now as a coding autocomplete, though they have a lot of agentic solutions and there's a lot of... OpenAI has Codex and Cloud has... I can't remember the Anthropic products. So there's lots of agentic agents coming as well. One of the interesting things because the technology is immature, the code it produces often has problems. There's a lot of people approaching this to actually realize those productivity gains because as any engineer who's written a lot of code will tell you, it's pretty easy to look at and edit and fix code you wrote.

(01:10:10):
Reviewing other people's code or particularly finding a subtle logical error in someone else's code is actually really hard. It's actually much harder than editing code that you wrote yourself. So if the code produced by a coding agent is often incorrect, it actually can take a lot of cognitive load and time to fix it. And in fact, if you end up producing lots of issues with your customers, you could end up producing a lot of features, but actually, is like mucking up the machine a little bit and having something that's not ideal. There's a couple of techniques that I think are interesting. First, I think there's a lot of AI starts now working on things like code reviews. I think this idea of self-reflection in agents is really important. Having AI supervise the AI is actually very effective. Just think about it this way, if you produce an AI agent that's right 90% of the time, that's not that great, but how hard would it be to make another AI agent to find the errors the other 10% of the time? That might be a tractable problem.

(01:11:10):
And if that thing's right 90% of the time, just for argument's sake, you can wire those things together and have something that's right 99% of the time. So it's just a math problem and it turns out that you can make something to generate code, you can make something to review code and you're essentially using compute for cognitive capacity and you can layer on more layers of cognition and thinking and reasoning and produce things increasingly robust. So I'm very excited about that. The other thing though is root cause analysis. So we have an engineer at Sierra who exclusively focuses on the model context protocol server serving our cursor instance. And our whole philosophy is, if cursor generated something incorrect, rather than just fixing it, try to root cause it. Try to get it so the next time Cursor will produce the correct code and essentially, is context engineering.

(01:12:05):
What context did Cursor not have that would've been necessary to produce the right outcome? So I think people who are trying to get productivity gains in departments like software engineering need to stop waiting for the models to magically work if they want to see the gains now. And you really have to create root cause analysis and systems and say, how do we go root cause every bad line of code and actually give the right context and produce the right system so the models can do it today? Over time that'll probably be less necessary and you'll have less context engineering necessary to do it, but you really have to think of this as a system and I think people are waiting for the models to just magically get better. And I'm like, well that will happen eventually, but if you want the gains now you got to put in the work. That's essentially why applied AI companies exist.

(01:12:53):
And the work is non-trivial, but you can do it. And so, for customers using platforms like Sierra, yeah, AI agents aren't perfect, but we're creating a system that lets customers create a virtuous cycle of improvement. If you want to go from a 65% automated resolution rate to 75%, we have a billion tools to let AI help you do that, identify opportunities for improvement, figure out why people are frustrated, what new capabilities can we add to our agent to improve the resolution rate? And you let AI put the needles at the top of the haystack on your behalf and I think that's really the way to optimize these systems.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:28):
I've never heard of this technique of improving Cursor by adding additional context. What's the actual way of doing that? You build an MCP server that everything runs through or is it like you add Cursor rules? What's the actual approach there?

Bret Taylor (01:13:41):
I'm probably out of my depth here, but it's essentially MCP because that's how you provide context to Cursor. And I think that almost always when you have a model making a poor decision, if it's a good model, it's lack of context. And so, you really want to find the intersection of your particular product and code base with the context available to these coding agents and systems and fix it at the root is the principle here.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:06):
Got it. That is very cool. I hadn't heard of people doing that, model context protocol, makes sense. We've talked about productivity gains outside TX. Just to give you a chance to share how amazing what you've built is, what are some of the gains you see from people using Sierra?

Bret Taylor (01:14:18):
Yeah, our customers see anywhere between 50 and 90% of their customer service interactions completely automated, which I think is really exciting. And we serve just a really, really broad range of customers. We serve the health insurance industry, the healthcare provider space, banks. You can actually refinance your home using an agent. One of our customers built on our platform to the telecommunications industry, DIRECTV, SiriusXM to a lot of retailers as well, which is really fun. Everyone from Wayfair to clothing retailers like OluKai and Chubbies Shorts. What's really neat about it is it's a pretty diverse range of use cases and it's everything from helping you sign up for... We have an agent that helps with customer support in one of the big dating applications to helping you upgrade or downgrade your SiriusXM plan. Actually, it's really funny, we do technical support from everything from home alarm systems to sonar speakers to more recently, CAT scan machines, which I think is amazing.

(01:15:28):
So technicians going in and fixing the CAT scan machine can chat with an AI agent to help them guide them through that process. We're the leader in the space, we're trying to enable every company in the world to create their agent with their brand at the top that I think will become as meaningful of a digital touch point as their website or their mobile app. In the short term, it can really transform the costs of running a customer service team. And what's remarkable is do so with really high customer satisfaction scores. That Weight Watchers agent, I believe has a customer satisfaction score of 4.6 out of five, which is pretty amazing. And what's interesting about service too, it's often people having a problem. And so, when you have a clear, I don't know if you use them in the airport, I think that agent has a CSAT score of 4.7 out of five people are coming in with a problem and [inaudible 01:16:19] delighted. And I think that's really the opportunity here.

(01:16:22):
And our whole vision is that we're going to move towards a world where every single one of the interactions with your customers can be instant. It can be multilingual, it can be over audio, it can be over chat, it can be digital, it can be over the phone and it can be very personalized. And I think that's really, really exciting. And if you think about all the best moments you've had with a brand, it's like that store associate who you know, and it's like for me, it's like the butcher at the grocery store. I love to cook, he knows me. We talk. Can you actually produce that at scale for a company with 100 million customers and can you do it in a really personal way? And I think we're really on the cusp of enabling that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:03):
Let me ask you one more question before we get to a very exciting lighting round. There's a lot of founders struggling with go-to-market in AI with their AI apps. There's so many apps these days, so many products, so many things coming at buyers, at large B2B companies. Clearly you guys have figured something out. I imagine your name helps, investors help, but what have you learned about just how to successfully do go-to-market with an AI product, say an agent-specific product that you think would be helpful for folks trying to do this better?

Bret Taylor (01:17:35):
I think there's a small handful of go-to-market models that have been proven to work, and I think it's important to choose the right one for the product category you're going after. One category I would say is developer-led. This is somewhere famously Stripe and Twilio where probably two of the original that did this exceptionally. And essentially, the go-to-market motion there is to appeal to an individual engineer often within the department of the CTO who have accountability and a fair amount of latitude to choose a solution. This works if your product is a platform product. It doesn't work, for example, if your product is trying to help a line of business because lines of business typically don't have dedicated engineering teams or let alone, the latitude to just go download a new library or start using a web service like that. It particularly works well if you sell to startups just because startups tend to have engineering teams with quite a bit of latitude to choose services to help them solve the problem given by the founder.

(01:18:44):
Then there's product-led growth. It's a broad term, obviously every company's product matters, but product-led growth more specifically means users can sign up from the website, often get put on a trial. Often you can buy a couple of seats with a credit card and those work where your user and your buyer are the same person. So it works for small business software almost always because sole proprietors do everything. And so you're selling small business software like Shopify in the early days and there's a lot of other products like that where you're trying to sell to small merchants. That's great. It doesn't work well when your buyer and the user of the software are different. So I'll use the example of something like expense reporting software. The user of that software is an individual employee, but the buyer is often a finance department. And so having sign up and buy with your credit card doesn't make sense because the person using is not the person with the credit card and it just doesn't work.

(01:19:39):
And then there's direct sales. And direct sales had gone, I don't want to say out of fashion, but if I think of the best direct sales companies, probably there's a lot of lineage from Oracle, but you think SAP, Oracle, ServiceNow, Salesforce, Adobe perhaps, and there's others as well. And these were companies that sold into large lines of business in a relatively traditional sales motion. I think because product-led growth became very popular. I think a lot companies use that, which is great, that motion produces great products, but if PLG means that you aren't actually engaging with the buyer of your software, you're not going to grow. And so, I've actually seen more recently, with a lot of AI companies, direct sales come a little bit more back into fashion because I think so many of the opportunities in AI actually meet that qualification where the buyer and the user are not necessarily the same person and it really requires that go-to-market motion.

(01:20:40):
Where I see entrepreneurs stumble is they'll choose a go-to-market motion without thinking through what is the process of purchasing this software? What is the process of evaluating the value of this software? And I think people just need to be much more first principles about it and much more thoughtful about it. And candidly, I think a lot of companies should leverage direct sales more than they do. And even though because of the sometimes justified reputation of the quality of products of some of these direct sales companies, it had gotten a bad name. And I think I'm thankful to see it coming back in a lot of the AI market.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:20):
I feel like this message is something a lot of founders need to hear, especially founders that aren't from a business background that sales turns them off, they don't think they're going to be great at sales. Just this push of this might be what you have to get really good at and this is how you win and you can't just rely on product like growth.

Bret Taylor (01:21:36):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:38):
Bret, is there anything else that you wanted to share? Any last nugget of wisdom? Anything you want to double click on before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Bret Taylor (01:21:47):
No, go ahead.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:48):
Okay, let's do it. Here we go. Welcome to our very exciting lightning round. I've got five questions for you. Are you ready?

Bret Taylor (01:21:53):
Yeah, go ahead.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:54):
What are two or three books that you find yourself recommending most to other people?

Bret Taylor (01:21:59):
I don't read a lot of nonfiction, but probably if I had to pick one in the area of the topics we talked about, Competing Against Luck, which was the book that produced Jobs to be Done, which is a framework I really believe in. My only critique is I think most of these business books should be like an article. So maybe buy the book and punch it into ChatGPT and get the summary. But buy the book it's Clayton Christensen talked about it, but it's a really good framework for thinking about delivering value with your products. And I think it definitely influenced me.

(01:22:37):
Actually one book I do recommend is Endurance, which is the story of Shackleton's trip to go to the South Pole. Half the book is him starving to death and eating seal meat with his crew of people frozen in their boat. I've never seen a better story of grit in my entire life. It's remarkable that it's a true story and if you're an entrepreneur going through a hard time, read that, you'd be like, okay, it could be worse. It's a great book too. It's just remarkable that it's a true story.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:08):
And one thing he did a great job at is setting expectations for folks that joined that famous newspaper-

Bret Taylor (01:23:13):
That ad. That newspaper ad. I don't know if that's true. It's remarkable if that's true.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:17):
Oh, it might not be true.

Bret Taylor (01:23:17):
I don't know. The internet. Who knows?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:20):
Goddam. Deep fakes even back then. Okay. Do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Bret Taylor (01:23:27):
I haven't gone to any new TV shows recently? We just watched Inception with the kids and they loved it and made me appreciate Christopher Nolan and what a cool movie. It's the type of movie when you watch the film and you can a conversations for two days afterwards about it. So, just a great film.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:46):
I saw someone using I think VO 3 to create their own Inception videos where the worlds wrapping in on each other. Oh, man. Okay. Do you have a favorite product that you have recently discovered that you love or one you've loved for a long time?

Bret Taylor (01:23:59):
I'm really a big fan of Cursor. I think it's changed. I love creating software and I'm excited though for agents. I've been really excited. I was very excited to see Codex from OpenAI and others. So I think Cursor will be in its current form, is a transition product. And I know they're working on agents as well, but I really enjoyed taking something I love and it's been my life's passion and really diving into this AI tool and seeing how it transforms how I create software. So I've just been spending a lot of time with the product just because it's so core to what I love to do and it's a really well crafted product.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:39):
I think that's the first time someone's actually mentioned Cursor in this answer, so might be the beginning of a trend. Michael Trell was on the podcast and he actually had a very similar message as you had at the beginning of this chat about the future of code, what comes after code and this concept that there's going to be this additional pseudo code layer on top of code. Very aligned with your thinking. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to and find useful in work or in life?

Bret Taylor (01:25:05):
The best way to predict the future is to invent it, which I think I attribute to Alan Kay of Xerox PARC. He invented a lot of the core abstractions that we use in computing today. I'm an entrepreneur, it's why I love to build things and it's definitely a life motto for me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:29):
I feel like many people say this, I feel like you've actually done this so many times. You're really living this motto. Final question. We talked about you inventing the like button at FriendFeed. Were there other thoughts of what they would call it other than like? Was it just obviously like? Or was there other thinking there?

Bret Taylor (01:25:48):
This was before emoji. So, if you read the comments on FriendFeed posts, at least 70% of them are cool or wow or yeah or neat. And one of the principle uses of FriendFeed was to have discussions about things. So you'd have a post and then a pretty fulsome discussion underneath. And compared to Twitter and others, it was a great place to have those discussions. And so, the product problem we were trying to solve is get all the one word answers out so that the discussion was actually actual comments as opposed to acknowledgements that you read the thing.

(01:26:30):
So, the original framing was one click comment. That was how we thought about it. And so, the first version that I made had a heart, and she denies remembering this, but Anna Yang, now Anna Muller who has worked at the company, she hated it. She said, "If I look at hearts on every post, I'm going to vomit. It's too much." And it also was interesting, we were simulating, it was like an article about a tragedy or something. A heart was just not the right thing. Like which actually turned out to be really hard to translate was just a much more neutral sentiment, and that's why it was hard to translate because it was subtle. So that's how we ended up with this.

(01:27:17):
We started with a heart, and I don't know if we ever heard the word love, but we definitely started off with the iconography and then like, which just felt like this positive yet as neutral as possible within the realm of positive so that it could work for a more complex story. But it was all because we needed a one-click comment. That's where the concept came from.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:36):
Wow. I've never heard the story before. It makes me think about LinkedIn now. They're basically trying to solve that same problem. They have all these auto-reply pill tag things. I don't think people like those very much.

Bret Taylor (01:27:37):
Yeah. They have a lot of features.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:48):
So many AI features. Bret, this was incredible. This was an honor. I so appreciate you coming on this podcast. Two final questions, where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, maybe go see if they want to work at Sierra and how can listeners be useful to you?

Bret Taylor (01:28:00):
If you want an AI agent to help with customer service, go to sierra.ai. If you want to apply here, sierra.ai/careers where we have offices in San Francisco and New York, Atlanta and London and are hiring pretty aggressively in every department. So please reach out if you're interested.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:19):
And how can listeners be useful to you? Is it tryout Sierra, anything else there?

Bret Taylor (01:28:21):
Yeah, tryout Sierra. I'm a single issue voter.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:26):
[inaudible 01:28:26] message. I love it.

Bret Taylor (01:28:26):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:27):
Bret, thank you so much for being here.

Bret Taylor (01:28:29):
Yeah, thanks for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:30):
Bye, everyone.

(01:28:32):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at Lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Brian Chesky (00:00:00):
Way too many founders apologize for how they want to run the company. They find some midpoint between how they want to run a company and how the people they lead want to run the company. That's a good way to make everyone miserable. Because what everyone really wants is clarity. And what everyone really wants is to be able to row in the same direction really quickly. And so I basically got involved in every single detail and I basically told leaders that leaders are in the details. And there's this negative term called micromanagement. I think there's a difference between micromanagement, which is like telling people exactly what to do, and being in the details. Being in the details is what every responsible company's board does to the CEO. That doesn't mean the board is telling them what to do. But if you don't know the details, how do you know people are doing a good job? People think that great leader's job is to hire people and just empower them to do a good job. Well, how do you know they're doing a good job if you're not in the details? And so I made sure I was in the details and we really drove the product.

Lenny (00:01:01):
Today my guest is Brian Chesky. Brian is the CEO and co-founder of Airbnb, which he started in his apartment with his co-founders, Joe and Nate, and has turned into an $80 billion global business with travelers and homes in 220 countries. I was very lucky to get to work with Brian for many years, and my sense is if you ask people who they consider the most inspiring tech or business leaders today, Brian would be right near the top of that list.

(00:01:27):
In our conversation, Brian shares an in-depth explanation of what's happening with product management at Airbnb, which caused quite a stir in the product world when he talked about this previously. We also get deep into Brian's new approach of how he runs Airbnb, including shifting away from traditional growth channels like paid growth, and instead betting that if they just build the best possible product and tell people about it, growth will happen. Also, how the product team now operates including having just one single roadmap across the entire company and Brian staying very close to every design and every feature. We also get a bit into his personal life, including how he finds balance and avoids burnout, how he continues to learn himself so that he can stay ahead of the business and its growth. This is a very special episode for me and I'm thrilled to bring you Brian Chesky after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:17):
This episode is brought to you by Sidebar. Are you looking to land your next big career move or start your own thing? One of the most effective ways to create a big leap in your career and something that worked really well for me a few years ago is to create a personal board of directors. A trusted peer group where you can discuss challenges you're having, get career advice, and just gut check how you're thinking about your work, your career, and your life. This has been a big trajectory changer for me, but it's hard to build this trusted group. With Sidebar, senior leaders are matched with highly vetted, private, supportive peer groups to lean on for unbiased opinions, diverse perspectives, and raw feedback. Everyone has their own zone of genius, so together we're better prepared to navigate professional pitfalls leading to more responsibility, faster promotions, and bigger impact.

(00:03:06):
Guided by world-class programming and facilitation, Sidebar enables you to get focused, tactical feedback at every step of your journey. If you're a listener of this podcast, you're likely already driven and committed to growth. A Sidebar personal board of directors is the missing piece to catalyze that journey. Why spend a decade finding your people when you can meet them at Sidebar today. Jump the growing wait list of thousands of leaders from top tech companies by visiting sidebar.com/lenny to learn more. That's sidebar.com/lenny.

(00:03:38):
You fell in love with building products for a reason, but sometimes the day-to-day reality is a little different than you imagined. Instead of dreaming up big ideas, talking to customers and crafting a strategy, you're drowning in spreadsheets and roadmap updates and you're spending your days basically putting out fires. A better way is possible. Introducing Jira Product Discovery, the new prioritization and roadmapping tool built for product teams by Atlassian.

(00:04:04):
With Jira Product Discovery, you can gather all your product ideas and insights in one place and prioritize confidently finally, replacing those endless spreadsheets. Create and share custom product roadmaps with any stakeholder in seconds and it's all built on Jira where your engineering team's already working so true collaboration is finally possible. Great products are built by great teams, not just engineers. Sales, support, leadership, even Greg from finance. Anyone that you want can contribute ideas, feedback, and insights in Jira Product Discovery for free. No catch. And it's only $10 a month for you. Say goodbye to your spreadsheets and the never ending alignment efforts. The old way of doing product management is over. Rediscover what's possible with Jira Product Discovery. Try for free at atlassian.com/lenny. That's atlassian.com/lenny.

(00:05:00):
Brian, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Brian Chesky (00:05:04):
Well, thank you for having me.

Lenny (00:05:06):
Did you ever think when I left Airbnb, one, that I would have a podcast and two, that you would be on my podcast?

Brian Chesky (00:05:12):
I had no idea you would become a podcast host and that you would have such a successful podcast. But yeah, congrats on everything. This is awesome.

Lenny (00:05:18):
I appreciate it. Congrats to you too, Brian. Things seem to be going great. I'm excited that you're here. I want to start with the elephant in the room for a lot of listeners of this podcast. What is going on with product management at Airbnb? You made some comments at Figma Config and a lot of people got this impression that you eliminated product management at Airbnb, and I've heard from a lot of product execs having boardroom conversations as a result of that. And they were trying to decide should we remove product management from the company? Should we significantly cut product management? So I'm just curious to hear from you, what is the latest on your thinking on product management and what's happening with product management at Airbnb?

Brian Chesky (00:05:56):
I spoke at Figma four or five months ago. I spoke to a room of designers. I then got off-stage. I saw somebody tweet that said something to the nature of that I said I got rid of the product management function and all the designers in the room started cheering. So I want to talk about two things. What I actually meant, because I didn't actually get rid of the people. And also why did the people in the room cheer? Because that's also a thing we should ask ourselves. And I hope everyone listening to this podcast should understand where did that place come from, that 5,000 designers in a room cheered because they thought I eliminated the existence of a function? Because if I said I eliminated the engineering function, no one would've cheered. It was specifically that function. So I want to talk about what that might mean. It wasn't the people, it's the way they're working together.

(00:06:46):
So we don't have any longer the traditional product management function as it existed when you was here. But we didn't get rid of people helping drive the product. What we did is we combined what one might call the inbound product development responsibilities of product manager with the outbound or marketing responsibilities of product marketing. That's the first thing we did. The second thing we did is we off boarded much of the program management functions that product managers may do to actual program managers. A lot of people with the product management title are actually program managers. So we actually started off boarding some responsibilities to program management. The last thing we did is we made the group smaller and more senior. So we don't really have a lot of junior product marketers. So the most senior people are called product marketers, but everyone has to understand how to talk about the product.

(00:07:42):
So the basic idea is this. You can't build a product unless you know how to talk about the product. You can't be an expert in making the product unless you're also an expert in the market of it. And a lot of companies, what they do is they ship a product, it doesn't work, and they say, "We tried that. It didn't work." And if you say you tried and it didn't work, my question is, was it a bad product, a bad strategy or bad execution? Maybe it was a really well-made product, but you had no distribution plan. You had no way to talk about the product. If you build a great product and no one knows about it, did you even build a product? So that is essentially what we do. We have a much smaller function. The people are much more senior. They have much more responsibility. The other thing though is that they do not control or drive designing or engineering. We are a fairly purely functional model. They manage by influence. They do not have control.

(00:08:31):
Now you might ask, how does that work in a company where people can only manage by influence? Here's the amazing thing. We built and designed a company where you can manage by influence and no one has to like you. You don't actually have to win people over. Oh, and the last thing I want to say is, why did 5,000 designers cheer when the people thought I removed the product management function? Because I want to say ... I don't know if I can speak on behalf of all the designers, but having talked to a lot of designers, I think designers in the valley are very, very frustrated with the product development process. Not to say the product managers, but they're extremely frustrated.

(00:09:09):
I think a lot of designers feel like they're compromising. Many designers I know ... Heads of design. Well-known heads of design. I told them they're not designers, they're design administrators. They're running a design service organization. Because Silicon Valley often treats design as a service organization. Like design is catching things before it goes out the door. It's not actually typically part of the development process. And I think this is not just bad for design, it's bad for product managers and engineers because we all want to build the best products. And one day you wake up and a variety of phenomenon might have happened. And if people are watching this from a large company, here might be some of the characteristics.

(00:09:43):
The first thing you notice is that these different groups might be running on slightly different technical stacks. That's the first problem. And they may actually be accumulating technical debt. The next problem you'll see is that there's a lot of dependencies. So five teams are going different directions, but they all need a payment platform. And so what happens is that the teams that everyone's dependent on get this backup like a deli and people are going around the block. And then at some point they just give up. So then the teams that are dependent on other people say, "Give me the resources and I'll build this group myself." So instead of five teams going to marketing to get a campaign or to leverage some service, they start building their own marketing departments, their own groups. So now they're really becoming separate divisions. And this is where a division comes from.

(00:10:34):
Now, once you have a division, your division is as successful as you are a priority. So now you have to advocate for your division. So there's a lot of advocacy. If you have dependencies, you've got to persuade people by building relationships. And so the people that are liked that build the best relationships are the ones that get the most resources and that creates what we call politics. And so now politics that brood in the company. And suddenly people gets more subdivided, more subdivided, subdivided. And that creates another problem, which we call bureaucracy. And that bureaucracy means it's hard to know who's doing what. People are going in different directions and that creates a lack of accountability. When there's lack of accountability, then there's a sense that what I do doesn't matter and that creates complacency. And then suddenly a fast-growing company becomes a big slow moving bureaucracy. This is a general arc that winds up happening.

(00:11:30):
And then you end up having this situation where a company's done 10 marketing efforts, but no customer's heard anything. They have thousands of engineers, they shipped all these products, but a customer can't tell you a single thing you did. Marketing and engineering don't talk to each other. It's not even they hate each other, they're in different universes. I've always said that the health of an organization, one simple heuristic is how close is engineering and marketing? And marketing is at lot of companies are like the waiters, engineers are like the chefs and the chefs yell at the waiters and they go in the kitchen. In fact, the waiters are the ones talking to the customers all day and they also know how to sell things so you really want them being enjoined at the hip and you want engineers to be thinking about maybe how to talk about the products that they're building.

(00:12:17):
So this is the problem that we had. And also the other thing we were doing is, as you know Lenny, we were spending a lot of money in performance marketing. I don't think performance marketing is a bad thing. I think of performance marketing as a laser. Actually my co-founder who obviously you know well, Joe, used to have this metaphor of lasers, flash bulbs and chandeliers. If you want to light up a room, performance marking is a laser. It can light up a corner of a room. You don't want to use a bunch of lasers to light up an entire room. You should use a chandelier and that's what brand marketing is. But if you do need to laser in and balance supply and demand, then performance marketing is really good. It literally lasers in. Performance marketing though doesn't create very good accumulating advantages because it's not an investment. Now if you want to build it permanently, like booking.com, if you have a really high ROI, now you can have a performance marketing arbitrage business. But assuming you don't want an arbitrage business, you actually need to be investing. And so we think of marketing as education. That we're educating people on the unique benefits.

(00:13:23):
So a lot of companies don't do product marketing. They do brand marketing, which are ads about the app or they do performance marketing, but they're never really educating people about new things they're making and shipping. And because no one's marketing new things they're shipping, there's no purpose to ship new things. Because you ship new things and people don't know about them or use them or they're not educated. And so you try these big new things, people don't adopt them immediately, so then you get more and more incremental. Now what we do is we have a rolling two year roadmap. We don't even really do an annual plan. As you remember, Lenny, when you were at Airbnb, we would have three month planning cycles. Now planning cycle is just a budgeting cycle and most people only spend a week or two on it. Some don't spend any time on it. And we have a rolling two year product plan. Strategy. Product strategy roadmap that gets updated every six months with releases. We release products every May and every November or October. Obviously we did one today we can talk about.

(00:14:26):
The entire company works together. They row in the same direction. And the product management also does the product marketing. So they're figuring out how people are going to learn about it, they're doing the demos, they're understanding the story, the videos, they're figuring out all the customer touchpoints, making sure everyone understands it. Our product marketing works with communications. We work months ahead of time on all the different assets. And when we're working on a launch, one of the first things we'll do is start figuring out what the story is. And the story will often dictate the product. Because ultimately you have to tell the story to people. But a story also is a really helpful way to develop a cohesive product. We wanted a company where a thousand people could work, but it'll look like 10 people did it. Sorry, that was a bit of a brain dump, but that is a little bit of a universal theory for how we develop products now. And I could go into a lot more detail, but I probably will stop there.

Lenny (00:15:24):
That was amazing. You touched on all of the things I want to talk about. So I'm going to-

Brian Chesky (00:15:27):
Oh, gee. So we can go deeper and deeper because the rabbit hole goes deep.

Lenny (00:15:31):
Yeah, exactly. Exactly. So I'm going to pull on a couple threads. The first is this idea of a single roadmap you talked about. And what this reminds me of is I was talking to another very prominent CEO of a public company and he pointed out that there's this cycle that he sees a lot of founders go through where they initially run the show, they're in charge, they tell people what to build, and then over time they're encouraged to delegate and to empower and it leads to a bunch of optimization work and small thinking maybe. And you talked about bureaucracy and politics. And then eventually you realize I need to take the reins again and drive the ship and take back control of what's happening. And it feels like you went on that journey.

Brian Chesky (00:16:08):
That's exactly how it went, and that's how it goes almost at every company I've heard of. By the way, I think that many years ago, I remember I think reading a blog post by Ben Horowitz saying that a lot of people tell product led founders or engineering led founders to step away and delegate their product to other people, but suddenly they've delegated away the thing they're best at. The thing that is hardest for them to replace. So we don't have a chief product officer title, but if we had one, it would be me. I wouldn't have a chief product officer. I think the CEO should be basically the chief product officer of a product or tech company. If the CEO is not the chief product officer then I don't know if they're a product or tech led company. Maybe that's okay if they're an ops company or if they're a marketing company or if they're not a tech company at all. But ultimately I think the founder or CEO should be that person.

(00:16:59):
So when we were starting Airbnb, it was probably the three of us. As you know, I think Airbnb was a unique situation where it was three of us. I don't think any of us was that dominant. I probably played the closest thing to the role of the people listening, the closest thing to the role of the product manager. But again, I did marketing, I did design, I did ops, I did a little bit of everything. So I was basically everything but engineering. And then as we grew, I started getting more and more hands off in the product.

(00:17:27):
And I always remember Lenny there was this paradox where the less involved I was in a project ... Let me be clear. There were times I inserted myself and dysfunction occurred. That is absolutely true. And that was just a learning experience for me. But there was this other scenario where the less involved I was in the project, the more spin there was, the less clear the goals, the less advocacy the team had, the less resources, the fewer resources they had. And then therefore the slower they moved. And the slower they moved, the more they assumed it was because I was too involved. Because people assume that our natural equilibrium's to move fast so if we're moving slow, it's because of an over involvement in leadership and therefore I would get less involved. I would give teams more control. I would give them teams more empowerment. And the more I kept giving people what they asked for initially, they may have been happy, but the outcome of it was always, it seemed weirdly like they got less of what they wanted. They wanted to move faster so I'd empower them and move slower.

(00:18:26):
And again, how that happened is what I described. That you end up in a situation where you're delegating down. So I think that things were getting worse and slower and slower and slower. 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019. And by 2019 we were spending a billion dollars on AdWords. We weren't really investing in the brand. We were doing a huge amount of AB testing. I think AB testing is important in times. Actually, let me clarify AB testing. We don't test blue versus green. We have a control and a treatment like I think we did when you were here. So we have a design. We might do a holdback occasionally to see how the thing is working. But if we do an AB test, there has to be a hypothesis. If we don't have a hypothesis and A is better than B, then we're stuck with B. And that's a really, really big problem, but we can never change it.

(00:19:27):
And then imagine 10 teams doing AB testing. Imagine if you designed software the way you designed a house or design a house the way design software. And we AB test a sofa. And we said, well, how does this sofa work? And it seems like with this sofa that we've AB tested people spend more time in the living room, so therefore people are going to like this room better. But actually the sofa has a relationship to the end stands which have a relationship to the lamps which have a relationship to the carpet or the rug which have a relationship to the television which have a relationship to the house and everything else. So you have to think about the whole cohesive system. And I started realizing that. I asked one person on your team, somebody you know well, and I asked him, I said, "I feel like I open our app and the product hasn't changed and four years." I remember saying this, 2018, 2019. And this person described that you know well as just the way we were doing things. The initial way we were doing things to move fast had made us move slow.

(00:20:29):
So what we ended up doing is ... It was now late 2019. I don't know what to do. I'm like, the product is slow, the app seems to not change, costs are rising. I keep adding more people. There seems to be more politics. By politics I mean advocating for individual interests rather than the whole company. More bureaucracy meaning meetings about meetings about meetings and a lot of dependencies. People were describing working 80 hours and getting 20 hours of productive work done, which is just a crazy ratio a week. And I didn't really quite know what to do.

(00:21:03):
And then right before the pandemic, I meet two people that really affected how I thought about things. The first was Hiroki Asai. Hiroki now works at Airbnb. He's one of my executives and actually product design, product marketing design and marketing report into him. And he was a creative director for Apple. So he worked for Steve Jobs, was basically dotted line to Steve for many, many years. Came from graphic design. Eventually ran all of marketing communications. In Apple Marketing Communications, they actually designed the app. They made the app. They designed all the marketing touchpoints for the store. So it wasn't just ads, it was every brand touchpoint they were responsible. So everything flowed through marketing. And so marketing became the governing factor that made everything really organized.

(00:21:52):
I met another person or got reacquainted a person named Jony Ive. And Jony Ive was the head of industrial design and Chief Design Officer at Apple. And they described this way of running a company that was totally different than the way that I was running it. It was basically the way that Steve Jobs ran Apple from about 1998 until he died in 2011. Apple somewhat runs it this way today, but the services is turning into a division and they are just so big that I think it's not a one-to-one anymore, but they are still technically run this way. And I had this image of not being divisional because we were running ... We had 10 divisions. We had a flights division and we had a homes division which was divided to pro hosts and core hosts and lux and we had business travel and we had a magazine and we had experiences and we had .org and we had China. So we had these 10 different divisions all going in 10 different directions. And I created this culture where everyone would be a business manager or business leader, general manager, which made them want to create many general managers. And so the company kept getting subdivided, subdivided, subdivided and that made it very, very difficult to turn.

(00:22:57):
And this was all about me delegating responsibility. The problem is if you're running a divisional company, you're a product-led founder ... What are you doing? Strategy, capital allocation. My job went from proactive to very reactive. I was reacting to a lot of things. I was in a lot of meetings. Trying to adjudicate different issues between groups. So then the pandemic occurs and I had this image on mind. It's like I have this dream that I could run a company much more like a startup. I remember going on a walk with Joe and Nate in Bolinas. It was October 2019. And I told them I had this dream that I left the company 10 years ago and they just asked me to come back. And I said, "I was horrified at what I found." And they said, "Well, what'd you find?" I said, "I found a company that on the one hand had amazing culture and people with a great mission, with a brand people really loved, but we lost our design roots. We weren't investing in the longterm. We were obsessing over hitting metrics. We didn't actually have any cohesive understanding of what we were doing. It was really hard to get work done. A lot of the great people were leaving and cost was rising and growth was slowing." And that was exactly what was happening.

(00:24:20):
And then the pandemic occurred and we lost 80% of our business in eight weeks. And then suddenly we're like, oh my God. I remember basically staring into the abyss. And luckily I've never had a near-death experience, but the way it's been described to me is it's like your life flashes before your eyes and you have clarity. And that's what happened to our business. We had a near-death business experience and our business flashed before our eyes. And so suddenly I basically got into action and I said, I'm going to run it this other way where I'm going to get back involved in the details. And by the way, Lenny, here's the funny thing. Before the crisis, a lot of people felt like I was too involved in different areas. Once the crisis happened, guess what happened? People were like, what do we do? We need you more involved. And so I got more involved.

(00:25:05):
And when I got involved, I made the following changes. The first thing I did is I said, everything we're doing has to be written down and put into a Google sheet. It turns out people couldn't even write down everything they were doing. I remember one person told me, "We're doing too many things for me to ever be able to document." I'm like, "What?" But anyways, we eventually got everyone to write everything down. And I said, okay, we can do about 20% of these things. And so if everyone says, "Oh, Airbnb is simple. I'm only doing three things." Yes, but you're one of a thousand people. So actually we're doing 3000 things. So instead of one team doing three things, three teams should do one thing. So we totally cut down the number of projects. We removed layers of management. I wanted to be as few layers as possible from leaders of the team. We went to a functional model. We went back to a startup.

(00:25:54):
So we said, we're not going to have divisional leaders. We're going to have design, engineering, product which turned to product marketing and marketing and communications and sales and operations, all the functions of a startup. I said, we're going to have fewer employees. We're going to have fewer more senior people. There's a great saying that the best way to slow a project down is add more people to it. And so we felt like very few employees. We have fewer than 7,000 employees today. As a relative comparison, I think Uber has 30,000. And it's not to say they're big, it's just say that's how small we are and we've really benefited from having not a lot of employees.

(00:26:28):
So we made sure that every executive was an expert in their functional domain. So you know how there's a lot of engineering managers that aren't that technical or maybe not a lot, but they exist. Or there's designers, but there's design leaders who lead the people. A design leader's job should be managing the design first, the people second. That's what Jony did. They're interchangeable. I could never imagine Jony out at Apple just being a manager of people. He was looking and designing the work with the team. How do you manage the people without managing their work? How do you give them development if you're not in the details with them on the work? So the same thing is true. So people had to be experts. Everyone had to be an expert.

(00:27:11):
I stopped pushing decision-making down. I pulled it in. I created one shared consciousness and I said, the top 30, 40 people in the company are going to have one continuous conversation. Metrics are going to be subordinate to the calendar. So we're going to have a roadmap. It's going to be a two-year roadmap. We'll update the roadmap literally every month. People may wonder, well, what if the world changes? Yeah, it changes every day. So the roadmap's something where the next month doesn't change, but two years out it changes. It's a rolling roadmap. And by the way, if Ukraine gets invaded and you want to provide housing for refugees, you can still pivot people and adapt very quickly. We house 120,000 refugees. So you still keep a reserve of resources to be able to pivot and do things because there's always unexpected events.

(00:27:54):
I created this new function called product marketing. We basically described what that is. I made the group much smaller. I took a lot of product managers, I reassigned them as program managers. I had many of them trained in actual program management because their roles got much bigger. Program management at Airbnb is a high status job. A lot of companies, it's like a coordination job. At Airbnb we said because we're going to do launches, it's high status. We said we're going to do two launches a year and you can't ship something unless it's on the roadmap. So every single thing in the company, with the exception of some infrastructure projects have to be on the roadmap. And then I'm going to review all the work. And so we create the CEO review schedule where I said I'm getting back involved in the project and I'm going to review all the product and all the marketing. So every project I would review every week, every two weeks, every four weeks, every eight weeks or every 12 weeks. There'd be a cadence.

(00:28:46):
And then I had a head program manager that would score all the projects. Either they're green, yellow, or red. Meaning they're on track or not on track to ship. Whether we thought they were work, we don't know until after we ship it. But I use the reviews of the work every single week. And the reason there's not a lot of bureaucracy and the reason you don't need any influence at Airbnb is I'd review the work and if something wasn't happening, then I would stop the meeting and say, "Why isn't this happening?" And we would all get together. And so you couldn't have a situation where a team wouldn't collaborate. It would be like I could then feel the work of an individual engineer.

(00:29:25):
Because imagine if we're a car company and I see the car prototype every week and I notice there's something about the tires off. Now I can identify the individual person who was blocked. So every week I would try to see the equivalent of at least a semi assembly of the entire new product we were working on, which allowed me to identify with teams the different bottlenecks happening in the company. The reviews were the thing that allowed us to dictate the pace. And so because we had all these reviews, I didn't need to mandate people going back to an office. I didn't really care where they worked because I could track how well they were working because of the review cycle. So these were some of the changes that we made. We also started really building out much more of a marketing communications and creative function. We built our own in-house creative agency. So we use production partners, but we don't use Wieden+Kennedy or ChiatDay or any of those anymore. We actually built our own in-house agency, so to speak, which is a creative group.

(00:30:32):
The creative group does not just the ads but the creative on the product. So we got really, really functional. We got rid of a function called UX writing, and we combined it with marketing writing. We said, wait, why don't we just have the best writers do everything? Why is UX writing a separate function? Because actually the emails, the app, the ads should all be one voice. Now, there may be people that come from a different background, like there are people that come from UX, but they all roll up to one function of writing. And writing should not go to design. Writing should go to a function called writing. Unless you want your head of writing to report to design, then that doesn't make sense. So we really made a lot of those changes.

(00:31:16):
Just to round up the question that you asked, I think that way too many founders apologize for how they want to run the company. I don't know why they do, but I think they apologize for how they run the company. They basically find some midpoint between how they want to run a company and how the people they lead want to run the company. If you're a founder, what I would tell you is the problem with finding a negotiation between how you want to run a company, the people you want, is that's a good way to make everyone miserable. Because what everyone really wants is clarity and what everyone really wants is to be able to row in the same direction really quickly. And also if you try to appease employees, they may not even be there the whole time. So we have entire projects at the company where somebody advocated to do it, it was a big commitment and then they left and now we're still doing the project they advocated for. So it really has to be something that everyone wants to sign up for, not just the person who's there because they might not always be there.

(00:32:17):
I basically got involved in every single detail. And I basically told leaders that leaders are in the details. And there's this negative term called micromanagement, and I think there's a difference between micromanagement, which is telling people exactly what to do and being in the details. Being the details is what every responsible company's board does to the CEO. That doesn't mean the board is telling them what to do. But if you don't know the details, how do you know people are doing a good job? People think that great leader's job is to hire people and just empower them to do a good job. Well, how do you know they're doing a good job if you're not in the details? And so I made sure I was in the details and we really drove the product.

Lenny (00:32:57):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation AB testing and feature management platform built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams. Companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth and for understanding the performance of new features. And Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does.

(00:33:27):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most was our experimentation platform where could set up experiments easily, troubleshoot issues, and analyze performance all on my own. Eppo does all that and more with advanced statistical methods that can help you shave weeks off experiment time, an accessible UI for diving deeper into performance and out of the box reporting that helps you avoid annoying prolonged analytics cycles. Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insights with your team, sparking new ideas for the AB testing flywheel. Eppo powers experimentation across every use case, including product, growth, machine learning, monetization and email marketing. Check out Eppo at get eppo.com/lenny and 10x your experiment velocity. That's get E-P-P-O .com/lenny.

(00:34:15):
You guys found such a unique way of working. I've never heard of a company working in these ways, in so many contrarian ways. I think it's going to be a really interesting case study as things progress. Essentially what you've done is shut down traditional growth channels or at least limited them. Paid growth and maybe SEO, maybe referrals at least for a while. And you've shifted to let's just make an awesome product and tell people about it. And our bet is that's going to grow. Do you feel like this can work for most other products or is there a consumer specific opportunity? What advice would you give to founders that are thinking about, man, we should try something like this?

Brian Chesky (00:34:53):
I think that this methodology can work for everyone, but I don't think you have to be as ideological or have to go all the way to 100. I still think growth channels matter. To be clear, we still spend money on performance marketing. We still do measure conversion and we will do some experiments. Think of conversion and growth optimization as like running a football down a field and think of these big leaps as passes. You should probably be doing 80% passes, 20% running the ball down the field, and a lot of companies that do 80% running down the ball down the field and 20% passes. So I think that this methodology will work for everyone.

(00:35:33):
Here are the things I believe. I'll give you a checklist. Number one, I think that the CEO, unless they're not a product person, should think of themselves as this chief product officer and they should be involved in the product. Number two, if you're not functional, I would at least think about everyone being really close together. So here's another way of saying it, Lenny. Every product manager should be interconnected and know what everyone else is doing. They shouldn't be independently siloed unless they really are running separate companies or separate orgs and they have no dependencies. I think that every leader should be an expert in what they're leading. There should be no people managers in the entire company. And when I say people managers, meaning your only responsibility is people, not the work or not the domain. Because you can't manage people devoid of their work.

(00:36:18):
Imagine a fire chief and they don't know anything about putting out fires. That's crazy. You have to know the subject matter. People should aim to have as few people as possible on their team. I'm not saying eliminate people. I mean grow slowly and do not be reckless. Five teams should do one thing rather than one team do five things. So that's just a metaphor. But people should work together. I think that people should consider doing launches. You can by the way, ship every hour of every day, but then package it and tell a story if you want hold the product back. I think that teams should use data, but they should also use research and intuition. There's a designer called Charles Eames that said you can't delegate understanding. If you're going to do AB experiments or measure data, you have to understand what it means. I think that you have to have an intuition. Intuition comes not from arbitrariness, it comes from understanding. I would make sure that you have engineering and design ideally report to the founder, product led person. I would not have design under product unless you have an extremely good reason or the product person is a designer.

(00:37:25):
I would try to think about product management, expanding the responsibility and including distribution. Understanding the customer and teaching people how to tell a story. I would try to make sure that the product managers are a combination of art and science. I do not think you want purely technical product managers doing things if they're going to work with non-technical functions. If they're only work technical functions, that's fine, but they're going to work with non-technical functions, I think that's a problem. I should make sure that marketing and engineering are interconnected. I would make sure that you have as few layers between a CEO and other people. If you're a CEO, every direct to your direct should be a implicit dotted line to you. So I treat every direct to my direct as if they're a direct report. A dotted line. I don't try to conflict with the direction of my team, but I always want to know what another layer below me is doing.

(00:38:18):
I think you should think of each release as a chapter of a story or like an episode of a TV series. And you should think of your company in a five or 10 years story. You may not know where you are in 10 years, but you're telling this ongoing story. And most of all, I would say that everyone should row in the same direction. If there's only one thing I said in this interview today, actually I'm not sure what it would be, but I think a good candidate is try to get everyone to row together in the same direction. Otherwise, why the hell are you all in the same company?

Lenny (00:38:48):
Speaking of rowing in the same direction, you had a huge launch today. I know you wanted to talk about it. Your winter release. And it is the culmination of a lot of the things you're talking about. I'd love to hear just some of the stuff you're launching.

Brian Chesky (00:39:00):
Let me just back up Lenny. You know this problem really well. One of the best things of Airbnb is that we're this marketplace where guests and hosts come together and we have all this unique inventory and people list it on Airbnb. And every home is one of a kind and we have seven million homes and there's all this surprise and all this delight. The problem is that every home is one of a kind and you often don't know what you're going to get. And so a lot of guests have described checking into Airbnb as a moment of truth. Where when you open the door you find out if the home is exactly the home that you booked. And this turns out to be a big problem for people wanting to book an Airbnb. And when we survey guests or people who don't use Airbnb, the number one ... Hotels are not as special, they're not as unique, but the advantage they have is you know what you're going to get. You know exactly what you're going to get.

(00:39:56):
And so what we found is that reliability is Airbnb's achilles heel, or at least it has been. That with hotels you know what you're going to get an Airbnb you don't always know what you're going to get. And so we asked ourselves, what if we could combine the uniqueness of Airbnb with the reliability that you've come to expect in a hotel? And that's what we've done with Guest Favorites. Guest Favorites are homes that guests in our community love the most. We took 370 million reviews on Airbnb plus millions of customer service tickets, plus all the host cancellation data and we use all the signal to create the top two million homes. This collection of two million homes that we call Guest Favorites because the guests rate the highest. We think combine the uniqueness of Airbnb with a reliability you've come to expect in a hotel and I can't imagine there's a lot of use cases where you wouldn't want to book a Guest Favorite.

(00:40:50):
We think that's also part of this broader system of ratings and reviews. You see, as you know, Airbnb is built on a system of trust and we invented this new way for people to trust one another, at least at scale through living together certainly. And we felt like the rating and review system could use a little bit of an upgrade. So we obviously made some upgrades to ratings and reviews. The final thing, and this brings up another point I might bring up, is we've completely overhauled the host tab. One of the most important things when you get to an Airbnb is the listing is accurate. But the problem is that a lot of host listings don't have all the details up to date. So they might not describe perfectly their listing, they might not have filled up their amenities, they might not have a photo tour. And the reason why as we're doing research is because they found it was hard to manage their listing. And it was hard to manage their listing because it was designed as this hodgepodge thing by different teams over many years.

(00:41:47):
Oh, here's the other thing, Lenny, when you were at Airbnb, we had a guest team and a host team. We don't have a guest team and host team. We have a design team. We have a marketing team. We have an engineering team. The reason we don't break the app into guests and hosts anymore is because reviews affect guests and hosts. It turns out that almost everything involves connecting the guest and host. When you have separate teams, they tend to have separate roadmaps that go in separate directions that become incompatible. So we have product marketers that are responsible for guests and host things, but the designers and the engineers are fairly fungible and they can move from project to project.

(00:42:25):
And then we keep some people, especially the product marketing people on a domain area, but we really want to make sure that we have designers and engineers covering a much larger surface. And so that's what we did. We have this incredible new tab called the listing tab that we designed. It's quite possibly one of the nicest things we ever designed. If you go to my Twitter account, you'll see a little sizzle reel from some of the design we've done. By the way, the design is a whole new aesthetic. I'd like to make the announcement that I think flat design is over or ending. I think if you remember the 2000s was dominated by skeuomorphism. The 2010s have been dominated with the launch of iOS seven by flat design. And I think we're going to move back into a world with color, texture, dimensionality, more haptic feedback, but I don't think it's going to be skeuomorphism where it pretends to be a wood grain to reference a dashboard or leather, but I think it's going to have a sense of dimension.

(00:43:24):
I think the reason why is we're spending more and more time on screens and we want the screens to replicate some of what we see in the natural environment. Light, texture. I think it's more intuitive, it's more playful. I think AI allows the development of more sophisticated interfaces. People in AI are gravitating to image generating art that has got more dimension to it. And so I think that we've really started to push this more three-dimensional, colorful aesthetic that I think it's going to be where a lot of interface design is going. And we built this AI powered photo tour where we created our own AI computer visioning language that we trained on 100 million photos and it can basically scan all your photos and organize them by room. So that's what we did today. Maybe just to round it up, what I would say is that none of this would've been possible in the old way of working. We could have theoretically launched a lot of these features, but really getting them to work together has been key. And Guest Favorites has required the guests, people ... You have to work with guests, you have to work with hosts, you have to essentially ... You have to figure out how to communicate to the market. So it's a much more integrated approach.

Lenny (00:44:41):
The designs you talked about, they are incredibly cute. You tweeted a little video of a lot of them, like the couch with little textures on it. It is really cool. Also, the listing tab. I think people that aren't hosts don't understand how important the listing experience is to a host. How many hosts are there? Seven million? Something like that?

Brian Chesky (00:45:00):
There's seven million listings. Over seven million listings.

Lenny (00:45:04):
Yeah. And so that's the home base. That's like the small business platform for millions of people. And so I worked on the host sites. I have a special place in my heart for host features, and I feel like travelers don't really appreciate the value of that part of the product.

Brian Chesky (00:45:18):
Well, yeah, you did some amazing work there. Yeah. The big lesson, Lenny, the other thing we learned is to create a great guest experience, you need great hosts, and to have great hosts, they need great tools. And so if you want to create a great experience for guests, it often starts with building great tools for hosts to enable them to provide a great experience for guests. And so that was one of the theories behind the listing tab is we're going to build great tools for hosts. They're going to love it. And we also felt like if we put care in the design of our app, that hosts are going to see that and that they're going to actually put care into hosting. Even more than they already do. And they do put a lot of care in now.

Lenny (00:45:55):
Speaking of great products, a defining characteristic of Brian Chesky in my mind is how big you make people think. How you push people to think bigger. Memories I have of you is in meetings, we present our goal and you're always saying, "How do we 10X this? What would it take to 10X this idea?" And somehow we often hit these crazy goals after you 10X'd them or sometimes just double them. What have you learned about just the power of setting really ambitious goals, but also finding the balance with not demoralizing people if they don't hit these really ambitious goals?

Brian Chesky (00:46:32):
As you know, there was a saying inside of Airbnb, it was add a zero. Add a zero at the end, which is to imagine something you order, imagine it bigger. The exercise isn't necessarily to say if people say they want to hit a goal, I say, okay, I added a zero, you have to hit that goal. It's more the exercise of what would it take to be 10X bigger or do something 10 times better? Because what you find is when you push people, they will sometimes think about the problem differently. And one of the best ways to get unstuck from a problem is to imagine a 10X scale or 10X better or 10X faster where you can't do the current process to do it. You have to think differently about the problem. And to think differently about the problem means you have to deeply understand the problem. And to deeply understand the problem, you have to break it into its components.

(00:47:22):
And we might call this first principle thinking. What are the foundational elements that comprise this problem and how can we reconstruct them? So the first thing is I think by adding a zero, at least conceptually for teams, that helps them understand a problem. The second is, I think one of the most important things for a founder or leader to do is set the pace of the team. I think the pace of the team is one of the most important things you can do. And that pace is sometimes governed not by how hard people work, but how decisive they are. If you want to improve the speed of a company, then make faster decisions. And fast decisions come from a bias of action. If we're in a meeting, we don't just say, "Okay, let's circle back on this next week." No, we'll have it done by next week. Let's stay in this meeting until it's done. What are you doing? Have a bias for action. Who's responsible? Okay, what are you doing? Okay, let's check in an hour. I'll call you in the morning. Okay, how do we do this? And so you end up getting three months of work done over that period of time.

(00:48:18):
But the last thing I'll say about adding a zero, Lenny, is I remember there was a story about a great basketball coach named John Wooden. He was one of the winningest basketball coaches, I think, in college basketball history, perhaps the greatest. And someone asked him once ... I'm going to paraphrase what he said. What is your secret to success? And he said, "That I just asked my players to do their very best." And I remember thinking to myself, that doesn't sound like the secret to success, asking people to do their best. But there was an implicit thing that he didn't say, which is that he saw potential in people that they never saw in themselves. And so the role of a leader is to see potential in people that they may not even see themselves.

(00:49:04):
When I tell somebody it's not good enough, either I'm saying, you're not good enough, or I believe that you have more potential than you're showing me. So in other words, you can push a team and they could feel demoralized because they can feel like what they're doing is not good enough if they have a fixed mindset or you create a growth mindset organization where the more I'm involved, the more I say you can do better, it's because the more I believe in you, and I know that you have more in you. And the way to know if a team could do better is if they're life dependent on it, could they do it? And Andy Grove used to say that there's competency and motivation. And motivation is if they're life ... Not literally dependent on it, but if it was a crisis or if it was a defining moment in their lives. I think the job of a leader is not to make it life and death, that's too far, but to be able to motivate a team to see potential in them that they don't see in themselves, and to really push them. To set a tempo, to break something down to first principle thinking. And if you do that, then I think that's going to be the opposite of these slow moving, soul crushing bureaucracies.

Lenny (00:50:06):
I've definitely been through that where you set a crazy goal and then we ended up hitting it. And so I've seen that myself. With some of the things you've talked about of say, do it now, we're not going to wait another week to circle back and this stuff you talked about of taking on the CPO role, not having a CPO, and also all these launches, it sounds like a lot of work and a lot of hours. What have you learned about avoiding burnout and creating balance and also just helping people on your team avoid burnout and creating balance?

Brian Chesky (00:50:34):
First of all, I want to give you a very surprising learning. I weirdly now, the more I get involved ... This is so weird. The more in the details I am, the more time I have on my hands. That's a paradox. And I want to explain that paradox. It doesn't make any sense. But when I explain this process to people that I would be in the details, we'd have one shared consciousness, I would review everything, we would do endless edits of even the press release, it would seem like I would be working 80, 100 hours a week and that people will be disempowered and that no one would want to do anything. And I got just the opposite. Here's what I found. If you decide to be in the details and get very, very hands-on like I did, it might be a lot more work for about one to two years.

(00:51:20):
And so for one to two years it was way more work than the old way. But once we turned the corner, suddenly everyone started rowing the same direction. Suddenly I didn't have to be in meetings anymore and people would do what I wanted them to do if I wasn't there. And by the way, that's what the culture is. They say the culture is what happens when you're not in the room and the brand is what people say when you're not in the room. And so that became our culture. Suddenly there was fewer conflicts in the company. There was less turnover. People were rowing in the same direction. That I wasn't reacting. Before, I would get 10 surprises and nine were bad. Now I get 10 surprises and nine are good. And you don't really have to do anything about good surprises, only bad surprises. That I used to have to intervene in projects that I wasn't involved in because they were going off in the wrong direction and by the time I got involved, I was associated with dysfunction, but I only got involved because it was dysfunctional. It wasn't actually going well. And then it was three times as work to fix something because we weren't involved in the very early stages. So I was much more involved. I had a lot less time on my hands initially, and now I actually weirdly have a lot more time on my hands.

(00:52:33):
But to answer your question on burnout, I think is another very good question. I do not think I am the poster child, at least historically, of work-life balance. I'm 42 years old. I live with a golden retriever. I don't yet have a family. And if you asked me when I was in college how I thought my life would be right now, I probably would've thought the inverse. That I'd have a family and I'd one day run a company. And I did things in a slightly different order. But one of the things I've learned is that there's this temptation to work more and more and more hours. And sometimes you need ... Let's say an artist, you have to step away from the painting. And you actually start getting more derivatives, slower and slower.

(00:53:13):
And so I basically have tried to make it a practice to step away from the work. And so here's some of the things I do. Every other weekend I don't really work at all. And then every other weekend I work pretty intensely. If I had a family, it would probably be more like a day of the weekend I'd work more intensely. You wouldn't be a parent every other weekend, but I'm not so it's a little different. I usually make sure I exercise and I never miss a workout. So I usually wake up, I'll do 20 minutes of morning cardio on a Peloton. I'll go to the gym three or four times a week and do weights. I'll basically do cardio just about every day. I make sure that I eat really healthy. I have a classic bodybuilding diet of five to six meals a day. So I try to make sure I do that. I try to make sure I get a fairly good amount of sleep.

(00:54:01):
The other two things I try to do is have really healthy relationships. I think one of the most important things that will govern how happy you are in your life is your relationships. I think the three things are your health, your relationships, and your work. Those are probably the three most important things. So as long as you're healthy and you have meaningful work, the last is relationships. And there was this Harvard study. It's the longest study on human happiness. I think it's 85 years old. And the question was, what's the secret of happiness? And of course they weren't expecting to have a single answer, but they got one. And the answer was, the secret to happiness, if there is one, is healthy relationships. And I had found, Lenny, that over the time of being an entrepreneur, I had gotten totally isolated. It was almost as if I didn't have friends. I had friends, but I didn't keep in touch with them. And every time I reached out to a friend, I had to get them up to speed on my life. And if you have to get people up to speed, you're not really keeping as much in touch with them. And so I started making a practice a couple of years ago to make sure that I have a group of friends that I'm constantly in touch with, including old friends.

(00:55:03):
So I have a group of high school friends, we have a group chat and we take one to two trips together a year. I have a group of college friends, we have a group chat. We take probably a couple trips together a year. By the way, doing Airbnbs are great. We all get in a house together and it's like your opportunity to have a shared experience. And if you don't travel with your old friends, you'll have only old stories to talk about and then you say the same old stories over and over. So you want to be able to have new shared experiences. When I stay here in New York City ... I'm in New York right now. That's why you don't see my typical background. I stay in my sister's apartment. So she's got a two bedroom and I stay in her house because I like to see her. And I just make sure I spend a lot of time with friends. And of course we travel. Traveling is what I do with a lot of my friends. And then I like to draw and read. So I try to make sure it's health, work and relationships. And I try to make sure I have a balance of each. And you might call family relationships. I'm single, but that would be another version of it.

Lenny (00:56:02):
I heard you say along the same lines on a different podcast about how when you're really busy, you didn't have time to reach out to anyone and they never thought they could reach out to you because they thought you were so busy.

Brian Chesky (00:56:12):
In the old world, I was reacting, so everyone thought I was busy. So the people I really cared about, a lot of them said, "Well, he's busy so he'll reach out to me when he's not busy." But here's a problem. I was so busy that all I was doing all day was responding to people. And so if people I cared about didn't reach out to me, I was dealing with incoming. I could barely deal with the incoming. Now that was a mistake. But I was reacting. By the way, here's another lesson for founders. A lot of founders spend their time based on reacting. So people will email them and they'll wake up and they'll respond to emails, and suddenly their email sets the agenda. People ask for meetings, and suddenly the meetings they take are based on the people who email them. Versus here's my strategy and then over the next year, what are the relationships I need to have and the meetings I need to take to be able to execute this strategy?

(00:57:05):
If my life were to end in a year or in 10 years or some time horizon that's shorter than I expected, who are the people I would've wanted to make sure I spent time with? And if you imagine that your life is finite, because it is, and you imagine you're not going to be here as long as you thought you would be, because it's possible, it would completely change how you prioritize your time. I think suddenly you would start to say no to things and you'd say yes to other things. I now try to say no to what I call fake work, which is things that feel like work, but they don't actually move the ball down the field. And I really try to say yes to the work that's very meaningful and people that are very meaningful to me. So yeah, it's a really, really good insight. And by the way, that metaphor, Lenny, but it's true of companies too. You can sometimes be ... You don't want to only spend your time reacting or spending your time with the employees reaching out to you. You do want to do some of it, but then you're rewarding only one type of behavior and the introverts or the people that aren't reaching out to you aren't going to get any attention.

Lenny (00:58:14):
Just one more question and then I have a quick fun question at the end. I know you have to run. If I were to ask people who are the most inspiring leaders in tech and in business in general, I think you'd be right near the top of that list. You've been through a lot of ups and downs, you've learned a lot of lessons along the way. What have you found has been most helpful to helping you continue to grow and keep up with the business, the way the business has grown, the scale and just to take on this leadership role? Is it coaching? Is it reading? Is it other mentors? Something along those lines.

Brian Chesky (00:58:46):
You ask really good questions. And by the way, thank you. I'll share a few thoughts. I was with Sam Altman probably a few weeks ago at dinner, and I told him, "I still feel like I have a lot to prove. I haven't made it yet." And he was really surprised. He's like, "What are you talking about?" And I didn't even realize that he thought that was an absurd notion, but I said, no, I haven't made it yet. It's not to say I'm not grateful or I feel like I need to get somewhere so that therefore I'll feel worthy. But I have this beginner's mindset that the bigger I get, the more a beginner I tend to feel. It's a weird feeling. I think when I first took off, I think I thought I knew everything or I knew more than I certainly did. But then you get past some peak or you go into this trough where you realize, oh my God, the moment you get to some frontier of knowledge, you start to become a beginner again and everything is new.

(00:59:49):
And so I think the first thing I try to do is to be a beginner. Pablo Picasso had a saying. He said, "It took me four years to learn to paint like Raphael, but a lifetime to learn to paint like a child." And so I've tried to always see the world through the eyes of a child. And I think one of the key characteristics of a child is curiosity. To see everything with fresh eyes. To not have too many judgments. When I was trying to figure how to run the company, I studied the history of divisional organizations and I studied Steve Jobs, but also studied what Bill Gates did. And I studied Alfred Sloan at General Motors that MIT Sloan is named after. And actually the founding of divisional companies, which I believe was DuPont. They were making powder for gunpowder. The war ends. What do we do with powder? Turns out powder can be used for paint, but the way you sell gunpowder and paint are different sales channels so they created what we now know as the divisional structure.

(01:00:46):
So I try to understand the sources of things. I try to learn. I try to be shameless about reaching out to help. I think that a lot of people are afraid to reach out to help because they think other people are busy. The biggest honor most people get in their lives, or one of the biggest honor is when other people ask them for help. Because we all just want to feel useful. So don't feel ashamed to reach out to something for help. It gives a lot of them great honor. And I think you don't need to reach out to people 10 years ahead of you. They can just be people a year ahead of you. In fact, an entrepreneur getting started, I might be less youthful than somebody two years ahead of them that knows the latest distribution channels that I have forgotten. So I think that that is the key. It's learning, it's growing, it's curiosity. It's constantly having that hunger and that fire to always want to be better. To feel like I haven't made it yet. Because the reason I say I haven't made it yet is because if I've made it, then I'm done. And I want to feel like an artist. Bob Dylan used to say, "An artist has to be in a constant place of becoming and so long as they don't become something, then they're going to be okay."

(01:02:05):
And so you have to always be evolving, learning, growing, and the canvas keeps getting bigger. The mountaintop keeps getting higher. And I feel like I'm just getting started and I hope that ... I don't know how long you intend to do the podcast, but I intend to do this for a long time and if you do or whatever, we'll definitely want to have talks. And I hope years from now, Lenny, I hope 70% of what I said I still believe, but if 100% of what I say, I still believe then I probably haven't learned very much. And so if 90% I say I don't believe anymore than I'm delusional and wrong. But I sincerely hope that I retract it or change or modify a few things I said today in a few years, because that will mean that I've gained more wisdom. And so how do I do that? By being curious.

Lenny (01:02:59):
That is beautiful. It reminds me, you mentioned Sam Altman. There's a tweet that he put out a couple of weeks ago that I'll read real quick. "Many people have reached out to offer help and advice over the past year. No one has gotten close to Brian Chesky in terms of delivering. He will take a midnight call at any time, put in hours of work on any topic, answer difficult questions correctly with clarity, make any intro, et cetera." How does that feel to have seen that?

Brian Chesky (01:03:23):
I had no idea he was going to do that. And I just want to say I think Sam is obviously a once in a generation founder. I think what he's done with OpenAI is extraordinary. And when he launched ChatGPT I had known him for a real long period of time, and I knew a sense of the journey he was about to go on. And I think that he was very deep into the technical part and then research part of OpenAI. But it turned out there was a product, a design, a marketing, a leadership, a sales. So there were all these other functional responsibilities. And so being able to just play a small part in giving some advice when necessary ... And he would take what he wanted and discard others. But I think, Lenny, maybe this goes to another thing, which is all I tried to do with Sam was what other people did for me.

(01:04:13):
Before Y Combinator, there was a person named Michael Seibel. He's in Y Combinator. And he used to meet with me and give me advice. And he wasn't an official advisor, he wasn't an investor. I didn't hire him or anything like that. He wasn't on my board. And I asked him, I said, "How do I repay you?" And he said, "Well, I want you to pass this on to other founders." And I would meet with a lot of people in the valley, and there was just this incredible culture of generosity that we all were going to win if the ecosystem was healthy. And the ecosystem would be healthy if we all helped one another. And you pay it forward. I think that it's just one continuation of the valley of people helping one another, learning from one another. And I also feel like I learned by teaching as well.

Lenny (01:05:03):
Final question. When someone joins Airbnb, there's a very longstanding tradition of sharing a fun fact about yourself. It might be the longest standing tradition. It's always tough on the spot, but I'm curious, Brian, if there's a fun fact that you want to share about yourself that maybe people don't already know.

Brian Chesky (01:05:18):
Yeah. A fun fact about me is that I actually spent most of my life as an artist. When I was five years old I remember my parents take me to the Norman Rockwell museum and I would sit in front of his beautiful illustrations. They're really paintings I should say. I shouldn't even call them illustrations. And I would try to reproduce them. And I got obsessive with art. I remember when I was maybe in elementary school, I asked Santa for poorly designed Christmas toys so I could redesign them. When I got older, one of my friends, I went to his house ... I'm going to say I was eight or nine years old. And his dad was basically redoing his deck, but his dad decided to design it himself. I think maybe he was an architect. So he had this giant dining room table, and he had this vellum paper and he had a T-square and a drawing triangle and a protractor. They were really cool looking tools, and they were basically floor plans and architectural drawings.

(01:06:15):
So I got into architectural and landscape design when I was like eight or nine, and that led to my interest in architecture. I went to RPI when I was in freshman year of high school to do a pre-college program. Then I got into more and more drawing and figure drawing. Then I got into a film and animation. Then I got involved in environmental design. I realized that if you buy stock in a company, you could get these cool glossy annual reports. This is when the internet was nascent and people still mailed the annual reports. As so I got my dad to buy a few shares at some Disney stock. And I got these renderings and he had a report of theme parks. And I started drawing and designing theme parks in communities.

(01:07:00):
And I was at this private school actually for hockey. Because I had this life where I was playing ice hockey and I thought I was going to play college hockey. My dad was really into it. I was really into it. And I had an art teacher in high school at this military school. That's another fun fact. I basically went to a military high school.

Lenny (01:07:21):
Wow. I did not know that.

Brian Chesky (01:07:22):
And at this military sports academy oriented high school, I had the same art teacher from eighth grade to 11th grade. And that's not a good thing, by the way. I don't say it as a good thing because I was not diversifying my skills. And so I leave this high school because I wanted to pursue different interests than hockey. And I transferred to my public high school late my junior year. And imagine transferring to a new public high school late junior year. And I meet my art teacher who changes my life. Her name is Ms. Williams, and she sees my artwork. And by the way, my mom was nervous about me becoming an artist. She used to tell me, "I chose a job for the love, and I got paid no money. So you should choose a job that pays you a lot of money." And I said to my mom, "One day, I'm going to be an artist." She said, "Oh my God, you chose the only job where you're going to paid less than a social worker." So I think my parents, they were supportive of me going to art, but they were very nervous. And then Ms. Williams told my mom, she said, "Don't worry. He's going to be a famous artist one day." I wasn't going to become a famous artist. But what that did is I think it gave everyone the confidence for me to pursue art.

(01:08:31):
I ended up being a winner, there were multiple winners, of a national art competition, and I had my artwork displayed in the Rotunda Gallery. That then led to me getting a scholarship at the Rhode Island School of Design where I ended up going to RISD. It's like MIT for design or whatever. It's a prestigious art and design school. But I got to RISD and I realized I was born 100 years too late for what I wanted to do, which is draw and paint. And I felt like at that point, photography and now AI generated art, but certainly even back then, photography was replacing a lot of the skills that I had. And that's when I was in my freshman year of college and I learned about a field called industrial design. They said industrial design is the design of everything from a toothbrush to a spaceship and everything in between.

(01:09:26):
And really, Lenny, maybe just to round out the story, because that was a fun fact, but I'm just ... And this is the pre founding story that I never tell. I don't think I could have ever done what I did if I wasn't an industrial designer. I think industrial designer is different than a graphic designer. Because an industrial designer, you have to work with engineering in your training. I worked with mechanical engineers, electric engineers. You have to understand manufacturing. Industrial design's very accountable to sales. If you design a building, an architect, and you design an office building and the office building doesn't get leased, the architect's usually not on the hook for it. But if you're an industrial designer and you design a product, it doesn't sell, you're on the hook for it. At least people assume you didn't design a good product. So you had to understand marketing and strategy.

(01:10:11):
And so that became this gateway. But I didn't really want to make items and objects my whole life. At RISD, the biggest value I got in addition to learning industrial design was I met my co-founder, Joe Gebbia. And the day of graduation Joe looks to me, he says, "Brian, I think we're going to start a company together one day." And I had no idea what he was referring to. So I moved to Los Angeles where I work as an industrial designer for two years when one day I got a package in the mail that changed my life. I opened this package and it's a seat cushion with a handle on it. And it's a letter from Joe, my friend from RISD. He said, "I started a company and everyone in San Francisco ... I live in San Francisco and all these people are starting companies. You should come here." And this is in 2007. YouTube had just come out. I had seen all these Steve Jobs keynotes finally on YouTube. I didn't know who he was. I'd never heard his voice before YouTube. And Apple had this renaissance and Google was on fire and Facebook was taking off. And it felt like the gears of the world that were turning were in San Francisco.

(01:11:18):
And so one day I go into work and I quit my job. My boss is dumbfounded. And I pack everything in the backseat of old Honda Civic. I get to San Francisco and Joe tells me the rent is $1,150. I don't have enough money to pay our rent. This design conference is coming to San Francisco. All the hotels are sold out. We said, what if we turned our house into a bed and breakfast for the design conference? I didn't have any beds, but Joe had beds and we called it Air Bed and Breakfast.

(01:11:45):
So my fun fact was I was an artist and designer before Airbnb. Really an artist, at least how I thought about it. And I think that's maybe one of the things that makes Airbnb different. Because there's not a lot of designers or artists running Fortune 500 or S&P 500 companies. And I think that intuition, imagination, design, curiosity, I think we need more of that. By the way, I think the people listening, I think everyone on this, listen, you have these qualities. But I think that a lot of companies, it's like we're a body and the companies are cut off at the head and they're disembodied from their heart, and they're often really biased towards one side of their head. And I think that some of the greatest scientists played musical instruments like Einstein. I think that being a whole, well-rounded way of thinking about the world is good. So anyways, that's my final thought.

Lenny (01:12:37):
I love that fun fact because it almost explains everything you've been talking about, which is rethinking the way companies can run, doing things super differently. So I really appreciate you sharing that. I also love that it transitioned into the creation story of Airbnb, which happens a lot at Airbnb. People hear that story over and over because it's so interesting and so important. Brian, I know you have to run. Thank you so much for being here and being generous with your time.

Brian Chesky (01:12:58):
Thank you, Lenny, and congratulations on everything you're doing.

Lenny (01:13:01):
Thanks Brian. Bye everyone.

(01:13:04):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
Let's paint a picture of just what it was like to join Airbnb in your fifties.

Chip Conley (00:00:04):
I was mentoring Brian, but he was also my boss. I was 52, the average age was 26. I had to be both wise and curious, and often the dumbest person in the room.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:14):
It's great to be in founder mode. It's not as great to be working for someone in founder mode.

Chip Conley (00:00:18):
Brian assumed everybody else was going to work at the same pace and duration. His point of view is like, "Hey, we're having a meeting in the office tonight at 10 o'clock. Be there."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:28):
Everyone's talking about, "We got to make the product better. We got to optimize this button, and improve conversion."

Chip Conley (00:00:32):
Isn't the product the homes and the apartments? Jobot said, "Nope. Product in the tech industry is something different." I just said, "Listen, let's get some older people who are hosts in here."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:41):
This whole story is a really good example of the value of having folks that are older.

Chip Conley (00:00:45):
When you have older brains connecting the dots, younger team members being really fast and focused, it's brilliant, and people won't notice your wrinkles as much as they'll notice your energy.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:55):
The Airbnb experienced led you to starting something called the Modern Elder Academy.

Chip Conley (00:00:59):
If you think about the caterpillar to butterfly journey, midlife is the chrysalis. Midlife is not crisis. I'm happier today at 64 than I was at 47 when I was going through my flatline experience.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:09):
Well, let's back up a little bit, this near death experience. Today, my guest is Chip Conley. Chip is one of the most extraordinary and interesting people that you'll ever meet. He was a founding member of the board of Burning Nan. He was on the board of the Esalen Institute in Big Sur. At 26, he started a hotel chain called Joie de Vivre, which went on to become the second-largest boutique hotel chain in the US.

(00:01:32):
After selling it, Brian Chesky personally recruited Chip to join Airbnb to help Brian and the company transform from a fast-growing startup to the world's most valuable hospitality brand. After leaving Airbnb where he was known as the Modern Elder, chip started the Modern Elder Academy, now known as MEA, the world's first midlife wisdom school, with large sprawling, beautiful campuses in Baja and Santa Fe. He's also written seven books, given a TED Talk, and is just a genuinely interesting and amazing human and friend.

(00:02:01):
In our conversation, we explore how to be successful in tech as you age, what he's learned working with and for Brian Chesky, including a lot of real talk, how to build a great culture at your company, his near-death experience, and how it changed the trajectory of his life, and so much more. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube.

(00:02:22):
Also, if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of a bunch of incredible products, including Replit, Lovable, Bolt, NNN, Linear Superhuman, Descript, Wispr Flow, Gamma Perplexity, Warp Granola, Magic Patterns, Raycast, JetPRD, Mobbin and more. Check it out at LennysNewsletter.com and click bundle. With that, I bring you Chip Conley. This episode is brought to you by Great Question: the all-in-one UX research platform loved by teams at Brex, Canva, Intuit, and more.

(00:02:51):
One of the most common things I hear from PMs and founders that I talk to is, "I know I should be speaking to customers more, but I just don't have the time or the tools." That's exactly the gap Great Question fills. Great Question makes it easy for anyone on your team, not just researchers, to recruit participants, run interviews, send surveys, test prototypes, and then share it all with powerful video clips. It's everything you need to put your customers at the center of your product decisions.

(00:03:15):
With a prompt as simple as, "Why did users choose us over competitors?" Great Question not only reveals what your customers have already shared, but it also makes it incredibly easy to ask them in the moment for fresh insights from the right segment. Picture this: your roadmaps clear, your team's aligned, you're shipping with confidence, and you're building exactly what your customers need. Head to greatquestion.com/Lenny to get started. This episode is brought to you by Vanta. When it comes to ensuring your company has top-notch security practices, things get complicated fast.

(00:03:48):
Now, you can assess risk, secure the trust of your customers, and automate compliance for SOC 2, ISO 27,001, HIPAA, and more with a single platform, Vanta. Vanta's market leading trust management platform helps you continuously monitor compliance, alongside reporting and tracking risks. Plus, you can save hours by completing security questionnaires with Vanta AI. Join thousands of global companies that use Vanta to automate evidence collection, unify risk management, and streamline security reviews.

(00:04:22):
Get $1,000 off Vanta when you go to Vanta.com/Lenny. That's Vanta.com/Lenny. Chip, thank you so much for being here, and welcome to the podcast.

Chip Conley (00:04:38):
Oh, my god, Lenny, I sort of feel like I'm your father who's so proud of his son. My son has done so well, and I like to talk about, tell all my friends about you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:49):
Wow, I am honored. I'm happy that I'm making you proud, Chip, and I feel the same in reverse. We got to work together for many years at Airbnb. I got to learn a ton from you. I'm really excited that more people are going to get to learn from you from this conversation. I'm thinking that the way that we break up this conversation is kind of break it up into three parts, which are kind of the three arcs of your career. The three parts are your early career, building Joie de Vivre, your time at Airbnb, where we got to work together, and then talking through what you're working on now, the Modern Elder Academy.

(00:05:22):
I actually want to start with the middle chapter. I'm going to talk about Airbnb where we got to work together. Let's paint a picture of just what it was like for you to join Airbnb in your fifties surrounded by a bunch of 20 something, 30 somethings reporting to Brian Chesky, who is, I don't know, in his thirties. What was that like?

Chip Conley (00:05:41):
Yeah, I wasn't planning on doing this. I got a call from a woman named Natalie Tucci who worked at Airbnb, and said, "Brian Chesky and I've been talking about having you come in and give a talk. Are you open to that?" I was like, "Well, what is Airbnb?" This was 13 years ago, I think it was the end of 2012. Then Brian called me and said, "Listen, we really want you to come in." I came in and gave a talk about innovation and hospitality.

(00:06:14):
I think I didn't realize it was sort of a dress rehearsal for Brian to see whether the younger crowd there, I was 52, the average age was 26, would feel good about an old geezer like me with a bricks and mortar boutique hotel background, talking about the industry that Airbnb was disrupting. As it turns out, people liked me. Brian said, "I want you to come in and work 15 hours a week as a consultant. I want you to be my in-house mentor for both me, and Joe and Nate." I said, "Okay, 15 hours a week is great," and then within three weeks, it was 15 hours a day.

(00:07:00):
I was saying to Brian, "You're actually not paying me anything." He gave me a little bit of stock that would vest in six months and I said, "I don't know that this deal's working for me. It seems like the company needs to be a little more than you said." He said, "Yeah, I got you. I just wanted you to get in here and see what you could do." Long story short is I ended up going full-time. It was hard at first, Lenny, because I didn't understand the tech lingo. I didn't have any background. I was 52. I'd never worked in a tech company before.

(00:07:42):
I was mentoring Brian on leadership, but he was also my boss. I was the head of global hospitality and strategy, which meant initially, I was in charge of all the hosts in the world. Over time, that meant a lot more things too. I was involved in many parts of the business, definitely not the technical parts, but I think the hardest thing for me was just that initially, when people were talking about product, and Jobot said, "I'm the chief product officer," and I'm like, "Well, isn't the product the homes and the apartments?" Jobot said, "No, product in the tech industry is something different."

(00:08:23):
I had to be both wise and curious, and often the dumbest person in the room. It required me to have a certain amount of humility as well as to be reporting to a guy 21 years younger than me, Brian.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:36):
That actually, the point you're making there about what is the product I asked Laura Hughes, formerly Laura Modi, what to talk to you about, who we got to work together. She's the CEO of Bobbie now. You worked closely with her at Airbnb. She said this was the thing that stuck with her most about working with you is coming in and everyone's talking about, "We got to make the product better. We got to optimize this button and improve conversion, and product, product, product."

(00:08:59):
You're just like, "What is the product? I thought the product of Airbnb was the hosts, and the experiences, and the trips." I think that shows the value of someone like you coming in with different experience, and also older, and helping us communicate differently to hosts who also don't understand.

Chip Conley (00:09:15):
Well, there's an interesting thing also, Lenny, and you notice the difference in age between our hosts and our guests was probably about 10 years maybe. Over time, it actually got higher, because we started actually reaching out more aggressively to boomers and Gen Xers to be hosts. You had, I remember at one point, and again, let's get into a product talk here, I remember at one point, there was a conversation that was going on about taking Airbnb so it was mobile only.

(00:09:47):
Partly because back in the day, the two sharing economy darlings were Uber and Airbnb. Of course, Uber was pretty much a mobile only app. Airbnb started as non-mobile and then went mobile. Then it was like, "Oh, wouldn't it be interesting if everything was mobile?" At some point, I just said, "Listen, let's get some older people who are hosts in here to see how well they will be versed in managing their listing purely on mobile."

(00:10:18):
There were times where I was a voice for older users, in this case, hosts, that was helpful to guys and women in their twenties who were the engineers and designers and product managers. I always liked working with you. I want to just compliment Lenny for a minute.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:40):
Oh, how sweet is that?

Chip Conley (00:10:41):
We did a lot of different things together, and what I appreciated was you had a humility to you that was different than a lot of the other product managers. There's other product managers, I'm not going to mention their names, and some of these product managers were very good. There were other product managers though who I found it sometimes hard to work with, because they expected me to know as much as they did.

(00:11:07):
I guess it would be, if the opposite side of that would be an older manager expecting a younger manager to have as much emotional intelligence, because emotional intelligence on average is something we get better at as we get older. I think the key for me to work in that environment and make it work was to not pretend to know things I didn't know, it was to have a sense of humor and humility in how I operated, and it was to show respect and hope that I got it in return. I don't know if you felt that way, Lenny. That's the kind of environment I tried to embody there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:45):
Absolutely. There's a couple of threads there I want to follow. One is just working for Brian. A lot of people talk about founder mode, and the power of founder mode, it's so great. That's how we-

Chip Conley (00:11:55):
Guess who-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:57):
Exactly.

Chip Conley (00:11:57):
... populated that recently, that was Brian.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:01):
Exactly. It's great to be in founder mode. It's not as great to be working for someone in founder mode. Often a very challenging place to be.

Chip Conley (00:12:07):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:07):
You reported to Brian. Also, you were just your own boss basically your entire career. You never really had to report to someone before. Also, he was in his thirties, you're in your fifties. What was it like working for Brian? The more real you can be, the better, because a lot of people always talk about here, it's like, "It was wonderful, I learned so much." Just like what was that experience? What did you learn from working for someone like Brian?

Chip Conley (00:12:30):
Well, let's start with the fact that I would never have gone to work for Airbnb if I didn't believe in Brian, because quite frankly, when Brian approached me and we started talking about it, I was like, I wasn't sure I liked the business model all that well as a hotelier. I had to believe in something beyond the business model, because I wasn't sure that the business model would work. Although soon after joining, I saw the numbers. I was like, "Wow, this is working pretty well."

(00:12:56):
I believed in Brian because the thing that Brian showed up with initially was just a curiosity and an appetite for learning. I remember back in 2011, when the big debacle happened with the apartment getting trashed by a guest. Brian decided he was going to go to find George Tenet, the former head of the CIA. Brian would go to experts and say to the expert, "I don't know what the hell I'm doing." He did that with me when it came to hospitality. I appreciated that a guy who had a lot of hubris, and Brian definitely has a lot of hubris, could also have the humility to say, "I want to learn more about this."

(00:13:42):
It's sort of a growth mindset. What was hard with Brian is, I'd say, three things. Number one is Brian assumed everybody else was going to work at the same pace and duration, and he still has this issue. The beautiful thing about Brian is he's been very honest in the last couple of years on podcasts about his workaholism, and about the fact that the way he lives his life is not like other people. Back when I joined, his point of view is like, "Hey, we're having a meeting in the office tonight at 10 o'clock, be there."

(00:14:20):
It's like, "Really? No, I don't think so." I think the fact that Brian assumed everybody else was as one-dimensional in their focus as him was at times a problem, especially for a guy like me who was, I was in a stage in my career where I have a lot of interests. That was one. Number two is Brian admires and admired back then, Steve Jobs so much that there was a sense that as a guy who came from the product world, from the Rhode Island School of Design, he knew better than anybody else.

(00:15:05):
There was this, one of the challenges for a CEO sometimes, and this was my experience in my 24 years of running Joie de Vivre, my boutique hotel company, is it feels good when you feel needed. To come into a room and sort of see something, and then point out the things that are wrong makes you feel good. If you don't have emotional intelligence, that process can really piss people off or demotivate people. In Brian's case, I didn't have to deal with that too much, because he didn't understand, when I was starting, it was really, I was in charge of the hosts around the world.

(00:15:45):
Quite frankly, the idea of what's the psychology of the host? What's a host entrepreneur like? I went on a world tour to 20 different cities, and went and talked to hosts. I think I came back from that with a little bit of credibility with Brian to say like, "Hey, yes, our data science team and the quality folks who are doing qualitative interviews, they're getting something out of this." I actually went into the homes of these hosts all around the world, and I think I was lucky because Brian did less of that than he did with other people.

(00:16:19):
For the product team, my God, a product meeting with Brian would keep people up the night before, not just because they were actually working all night long to get prepared, but also they knew they would work all night long, because they probably wouldn't sleep in anticipation for this. That was another issue, I'd say. I'd say the other thing that, and in each of these cases, I think Brian's getting better. Just like Steve Jobs got better over time when he left and then he came back, he was much better when he came back, from all the people I've talked with who worked with him.

(00:16:53):
I'd say the third thing for Brian was the sense that adding a zero to something in terms of expectations, or thinking you're going to set a deadline that is unreasonable is necessary. If you don't do that, there's almost an underlying message that people won't kick ass on their own. There was a sense that Brian had that he had to maybe create ridiculous goals, because even if we hit half of that goal, it was very encouraging. What he missed in that was the fact that when you miss a goal, and when you have someone who has power over you setting the goal, or encouraging a particular goal, you're setting people up for a lot of stress.

(00:17:51):
At the end of the day, I think Brian is a generational leader as a millennial, and I think he deserves a lot of credit. Airbnb is as successful as it is, partly because of Brian's leadership. I would not have been there without him. Having said that, I had to hold my tongue in meetings sometimes when I saw how he was operating, because I wouldn't have done it that way. I think over time, I hope I had a little bit of influence on him in terms of how to apply some emotional intelligence to leading people.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:28):
For people in this position, a lot of people work for founders, especially now that founder mode is a thing. Every founder is just like, "I'm the founder, you got to do what I tell you. It's founder mode. Again, this is how we win. We're in founder mode." You shared really good insight of building credibility as a really good lever to work better with someone like that. Is there anything else you just think as tactics to be effective with founders in founder mode?

Chip Conley (00:18:53):
Knowing what I know now, I would say, "Lenny, let's do a little pep talk, you and me before the meeting." I want you to start the meeting with the following as you present and Brian's in the room. "Brian, let's talk about what we're trying to accomplish here. Let's get really clear," and you probably did this, but, "let's get really clear on what both, what's the intention of this iteration that we're doing on the product? What defines success, and what do I want to get accomplished in this meeting?"

(00:19:25):
You start with that, because that actually helps to make sure there's alignment. Frankly, if there's not alignment, you might as well not have the meeting. Let's spend the rest of this meeting talking about alignment. That's what I would do, because that's something you can come back to over and over again during the rest of the meeting when Brian or the founder, whomever it is, is beating you up on something, saying like, "Well, let me tell you why it looks like that or why we're doing that." It goes back to that, the three principles or the three key goals we're trying to do with this product update. Yeah, so try to set alignment on the front end.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:06):
That's an important tip for anyone working with anyone, even. I love just that that works especially well here. Then just going back to the credibility piece, what you shared there is you went on this world tour, not something everyone can do, but just getting really close to your customers, and using that as a, "Hey, I actually know what I'm talking about. You actually should listen to me even though you're the founder."

Chip Conley (00:20:27):
Yeah, I think the other thing is PowerPoint or whatever tool you're using, just be careful about being overly reliant upon it, especially when you have a combustible founder who may take you off path, such that your deck in its current order makes no sense at all. I always wanted to really limit the deck as much as possible, because I didn't know where the meeting was going to go. I wanted the decks helpful at the start, at the very start, to just set principles, set goals. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:09):
This whole story of you joining Airbnb in your fifties is a really good example of intergenerational collaboration, something that you're big on, just the value of having folks that are older working at tech companies. Maybe just talk about that broadly, and then we segue into other elements of your career.

Chip Conley (00:21:28):
I wrote a book called Wisdom at Work: the Making of a Modern Elder after my Airbnb experience. I did a lot of research. I was like, "Wow, so why do we have less intergenerational collaboration in the workplace, especially in Silicon Valley than we could use?" I started interviewing people, then I started talking to brain scientists, neuroscientists, and realized that a younger brain has fluid intelligence, tends to be fast and focused, really good at problem solving, very good at linearity in terms of looking at things.

(00:21:59):
As you get older, the brain shrinks a little bit and you have crystallized intelligence. In crystallized intelligence, what's going on is you're going from left brain to right brain more adeptly. There's a little bit less focus, a little more holistic thinking, systemic thinking, connecting the dots. You can imagine that on a team when you have older brains connecting the dots, thinking broadly, peripherally, younger team members being really fast and focused, and being able to think linearly how to get things done, that combination can either be successful or not.

(00:22:36):
When it's successful. It's brilliant. I think Laura, Laura Modi, Laura Hughes Modi, who was my director of hospitality, but also we worked in so many different capacities with her in the company, I loved working with her because her brain worked different than my brain. That's the opportunity is when you realize that diversity on a team, there's lots of kinds of diversity, but when it comes to brain diversity, not just with neuro diverse people but age diverse people, you get a benefit, an effective benefit that is not as noticeable, quite frankly, in some other diversities.

(00:23:16):
I found that over and over was really helpful. Part of my job sometimes was to find the blind spot. Again, if you are very focused, one of the things I said to Brian early on was, "I've seen the business plan. Now, I know the goals of how big we want to be in three years." This was very early in my tenure. I said, "But what we really have done, everything we're trying to do is to have no regulations and pay no occupancy tax." Now, hotels pay a bed tax, occupancy tax, we're not paying it, and we're trying to do everything we can not to pay it.

(00:23:51):
Knowing that, so for our listeners and viewers to know this, this is something that a guest pays. It's not the host who pays it, the guest pays it. It's part of the bill. If you go and stay in a hotel, there's a big, big tax part of the bill, but it made us more affordable by not having to have our guests pay taxes. Long story short is I said to Brian, "If we're as big as we're going to be three years from now, I promise you we're going to be regulated. I promise you we're going to be paying occupancy taxes. Let's take some proactive steps toward building a strategy for how we're going to be regulated."

(00:24:28):
That has consistently been Airbnb's biggest challenge is regulation in municipal markets all around the world. If we'd started a little earlier, maybe in New York, maybe in New York, it wouldn't have gotten to the point where it has been toxic in New York for the last dozen years ever since I was there. There's a few other markets in the world where it was like that. I would just say the value in having some age diversity, even when you have an older person reporting to a younger person, is it can be collaborative.

(00:25:02):
There was a guy named John Q. Smith, an engineer who I think you probably remember him at Airbnb. This is a guy who looked younger than he was, and he was a little bit nervous about telling people his age. The thing that was great about John is over time, he was not necessarily going to be the best coder at Airbnb. There was a whole new collection of coders coming in every month, but he became a great manager.

(00:25:32):
The beautiful thing about moving from the individual contributor to the manager, the person who can actually bring out the best in a bunch of younger people, who may be better technically than he or she is, but they know how to elevate talent. I call this invisible productivity. It's productivity in which you make everybody else around you better. That's something I tried to do with my teams at Airbnb. Ultimately, I had six different teams, five hospitality and five other teams reporting to me. I did my best to just be the kind of person who wasn't solving all the problems, but I was trying to elevate.

(00:26:11):
There's a woman named Lisa Dubost who is at Airbnb, and she, one day, the HR department was reporting to me at one point, and she was running HR. She was 25 and had no background in HR at all. One day she came in to me and she just said, "Chip, you are my confidant." Lisa has a French accent and fluent in French. She said confidant in just the right way. I said, "Oh, well thank you, Lisa." I said to her, "You haven't given me any juicy details yet. A confidant is someone who has the secrets."

(00:26:42):
She said to me, "No, in my part of France, a confidant is somebody who gives you confidence." It was like, "Oh, well, maybe that's what a mentor can be is a confidant, someone who gives you confidence and helps by asking questions, helps you as the younger mentee find your roadmap to success."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:05):
You're sharing a lot of really good examples of the value of older folks being within tech companies. Let me just ask you this, how real is ageism in tech? I ask because a lot of people that are hiring are probably thinking, no, no, I'm not biased. I'm going to hire the best person. If they're someone in their fifties, I'll hire them. No problem. It doesn't feel like it actually works out that way often. Just how real of a problem is this? What do you see?

Chip Conley (00:27:27):
Yeah, it's clearly a problem. I'd say it's maybe a little bit less of a problem than it was a dozen years ago, because I think a dozen years ago, it was almost a blind spot. In Airbnb, we had a group called Wisdom at Airbnb. It was an employee resource group for people 40 and older. There are lots of these kinds of groups that didn't exist a dozen years ago in all kinds of tech companies, which is good, because it means that there's a voice and a way to congregate with a bunch of people who are older.

(00:28:00):
Ultimately, we had these senior nomads come in and be like the voice of the customer for 10 weeks at Airbnb. It was the Wisdom at Airbnb older employee group that really actually pushed for this with Brian. The challenge is, in a world in which the smartest new people, especially when it comes to technical skills and engineering, are coming in with a whole new set of skills that an older person doesn't have, the older person is both expensive and may be perceived as slow. In the era of AI, it's a whole new ballgame.

(00:28:42):
The question, I think, will be if what AI cannot do is the human wisdom piece, artificial intelligence and human wisdom might be the balance beams here. Is it possible that older managers who have a little more emotional intelligence, a little more pattern recognition, a little bit more wisdom, can be a value to a company? The jury's still out. There's a New York Times article that just came out about the question of is AI going to wipe out older people's jobs or younger people's jobs? I think the answer is both, but the question is how bad is it for both of them?

(00:29:29):
I think what I would say to an older person, and when I say older, I mean like 45 or older, if you've done well financially and you're doing okay, the question you might ask yourself is, are you open, as I ultimately was with Brian in my fourth year at Airbnb? I took a substantial pay cut. I think it went down to 40% or 50% time, and my stock, my options were dropped to that level, my salaries dropped to that level, because I didn't want to work full time anymore. There are a lot of people who can be valuable in a company who have some institutional wisdom, some process knowledge of how to get things done in this organization.

(00:30:08):
In tech companies, that's really important. Airbnb, one of the biggest challenges that Airbnb has always been, how do I get shit done around here? Process knowledge allows you to understand, how do you deal with an org chart and get things done partly because you understand the motivations of different groups? That is something you build over time. Long story short is I just think that older people might look at their workload and say, "I'm willing to take a 20% or a 40% pay cut to go to 80% or 60% time," and the company is going to get their money's worth in that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:49):
That's a really interesting point, that if you're older and you're maybe less connected to the most cutting edge ways of building and coding, AI makes that a lot easier in many ways where you start to just talk to it. You don't even need to understand what's happening underneath.

Chip Conley (00:31:03):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:05):
There's a lot of listeners who are older in tech, there's a lot of listeners who are approaching midlife, let's say, worried about what happens to their career. When you look at people you've worked with and had at your academy, which we'll talk about, who continue to thrive and continue to have a really healthy career in tech, what do they do differently? What do they have in common that other folks you think should work on and focus on?

Chip Conley (00:31:28):
I think this idea being a mentor and a mentor and an intern, there's just the voracious appetite for curiosity. When I talk to someone who's a midlife and wants to be in the tech world or already is, the thing I say is, "Show up with curiosity and a passionate engagement for what you do, and people won't necessarily notice your wrinkles as much as they'll notice your energy." Energy has two parts to it. Energy is, they notice that you are not just sort of resting on your laurels, you have physical energy in how you do your job.

(00:32:04):
When people are like that, they're sort of timeless. They're age fluid, as I say. We talk about gender fluidity. Well, there could be age fluidity. They're not defined by their age. The other part of energy that's important is being positive. That's sort of more energetic, a little bit more California energetic. There's a sense of when someone's got good energy, you're drawn to them. It's about showing up with the kind of energy of someone 10 or 20 years younger than you, and then showing up with positive energy.

(00:32:38):
I think one of the things that would say I did well at, there's lots of things I didn't do well at Airbnb, but in terms of what I did well is I was very approachable. Over the course of time, the number of mentees I had, the number of people who just wanted to have coffee with me or tea, the number of people who just said, "Thank you for being in that meeting, you just sort of gave it a positive feeling," was really important.

(00:33:04):
My energy, both the positive energy part, and then also the fact that yeah, I could work 60 and 70 hours a week, and I could travel around the world as the Secretary of State of the company, which is what Brian called me a couple times on stage. The fact that I could do that meant that no one was looking at me and saying, "Let's get rid of the old fogey." Well, maybe some people the board, but I wasn't aware of them. I just think show up with that passionate engagement, that curiosity, that energy, the ability to be both the learner and the teacher, with respect for people that are younger than you, and you're going to probably do pretty well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:44):
That is really great advice. Today's episode is brought to you by Coda. I personally use Coda every single day to manage my podcast and also to manage my community. It's where I put the questions that I plan to ask every guest that's coming on the podcast. It's where I put my community resources, it's how I manage my workflows. Here's how Coda can help you. Imagine starting a project at work, and your vision is clear, you know exactly who's doing what and where to find the data that you need to do your part.

(00:34:11):
In fact, you don't have to waste time searching for anything because everything your team needs from project trackers and OKRs, to documents and spreadsheets, lives in one tab all in Coda. With Coda's collaborative all in one workspace, you get the flexibility of docs, the structure of spreadsheets, the power of applications, and the intelligence of AI, all in one easy to organize tab. Like I mentioned earlier, I use Coda every single day. More than 50,000 teams trust Coda to keep them more aligned and focused.

(00:34:40):
If you're a startup team looking to increase alignment and agility, Coda can help you move from planning to execution in record time to try for yourself, go to coda.io/Lenny today, and get six months free of the team plan for startups. That's C-O-D-A dot I-O slash Lenny to get started for free, and get six months of the team plan. Coda.io/Lenny.

(00:35:03):
Interestingly, curiosity comes up a lot when I ask AI-forward people, what are they focusing on helping their kids learn most? Curiosity is the most common way to describe. At every stage of life, curiosity is something to cultivate. I want to go to the flip side of companies looking to hire. It feels like there's this untapped supply of awesome people that companies with ageism and tech aren't finding and hiring. To help hiring managers and companies take advantage of this, what's something you suggest they do? How do they shift their mindset or maybe shift the way they hire that might help them find these people?

Chip Conley (00:35:39):
I think we're moving into, there's a book that David Epstein wrote called Range, and the whole premise of range is that we are moving out of the era of the specialists and into the era of the generalists. I think AI is just accelerating this. As we are more reliant upon AI, and AI can be exceptional at technical skills and solutions really expeditiously, I think generalists, people who can think broadly, become all the more important. I think that what I would say to someone in HR or recruiting is beyond what I already said before, is the person passionate?

(00:36:23):
Are they curious? Are they a learner? Do they have good energy? I would also say, are they a generalist when they're a problem solver? I actually think that's going to be an increasingly important part of how effective companies think broadly. I think that's a key one. I think also, this idea of how do you create intergenerational collaboration in the form of mutual mentorships? One of the things I loved at Airbnb, there were a few people I did this with, where I had something to teach them and they had something to teach me.

(00:37:02):
A good example, my iPhone, so there's 97% of the utility of my iPhone that I probably don't use and don't know how to use. This was back in, let's say, 2013, 2014. There were people who knew iPhone or Google Suites back then. I'd never used a Google Doc back then when I joined Airbnb. There were people who could teach me something technical, and then they wanted to learn something from me, which would be like, "How do you want a great meeting," or, "How do you give a great employee review?" There are a lot of managers who've never been a manager before.

(00:37:45):
How do you disperse people like me in the organization so that there's usually not enough time for these young managers to come to some training session on how to do a good employee review. You sort of have to do it out there in the field. It's like apprenticeship back in the trades. You're an electrician apprentice, not because you're watching some video on it, you're out there in the field, doing it. That's a huge value in a younger company when you have some older people who have not been vested with the responsibility of managing those younger people.

(00:38:23):
They may actually be reporting to someone younger than them, but they're there to actually be support. In some ways, I think that was part of the unexpected value that I was able to offer to Airbnb and to Brian specifically, because there are a ton of people in Airbnb who were not even in my departments who would come to me and say, "I'm having a problem. How do I solve this? Can we spend lunch together?" I almost always said yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:53):
I think the reason people did that in many ways is you just have a very unique aura of wisdom, and it's hard to replicate that, Chip.

Chip Conley (00:39:04):
Yes, and it all comes back to the curiosity. If I was just the older elder, dispensing wisdom, people would've gotten bored very quickly. I think the fact, yeah, I was on the board of Burning Man, that's cool. I show up as someone who feels younger than I am. I'm turning 65 this year. The bottom line is I think people lost track of my age, partly because I lost track of my age.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:38):
That's such good advice on the front end to be successful as a person kind of getting older in tech is curiosity, positive energy, the way you talked about it, passionate, engagement, is that the term?

Chip Conley (00:39:52):
Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:53):
Then on the other side is hire generalists. This actually comes up a lot in the AI conversations, just exactly as you said, the power of generalists reminds me, I'm going to this gym now, and the lady there is just like, "I love AI so much, because I'm just such a big picture person, and I am so bad at just getting, thinking about the details, and AI solves all that for me." It's like, "Here, here's what I want to do. I'll do this, move my house to here, here." It's like, "Here's what you need to do, step one, two, three, four, five."

Chip Conley (00:40:18):
It is remarkable. Since the time I've known you, how fast it has become dominant in our lives. Yeah, I think one of the last thing I'd say is, look, I'm privileged. For those of you who are listening or watching this and you're saying, "Well, Chip, you were 52 years old and they came to you. That doesn't happen to me. I'm not in that position." The thing I would say is, you're right, but I could have been plucked and brought in and partly as Brian's boy, people would've rejected me, because if I didn't show up the right way, it wouldn't have worked well.

(00:41:00):
There are lots of people who Brian brought into the company who didn't work well. I think the key is how do you get the foot in the door? At the end of the day, those second and third order of degrees of separation in terms of networking are still essential. The most important thing is to be able to articulate what you have accomplished in a new way that a recruiter says, "Wow." I really tell people I would love to see a resume.

(00:41:41):
First of all, the question that I think it was, who was it? Someone asked it, I don't remember if it was Cheryl Stamberg or someone else asked her, who said, "What's the biggest problem you're dealing with here, and how can I help you?" That's a great line. Number two is what I love to see is not so much what roles you've had, what bullet points do you have of your things you've learned? Give me, in a paragraph, a thorny problem you faced. What was the problem, and what skills you used to actually accomplish it, and what was the result of that?

(00:42:22):
I would love to see a resume like that. The older you are, the more you can actually have a resume like that. Then you can use that as the conversation piece when you're doing interviews.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:34):
I love that. I love that we're getting into interview advice and resume advice.

Chip Conley (00:42:37):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:38):
Speaking of thorny problems, and also why Brian decided to reach out to you, I want to go back to the beginning of your career.

Chip Conley (00:42:45):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:46):
Right out of business-

Chip Conley (00:42:47):
You're good at this, by the way. You're good at this.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:49):
I was thinking ahead. Okay, so you're in business school, you left business school, you're like, "Maybe I should start a hotel." Something that rarely works out usually probably leads to a lot of money lost and a lot of frustration and just like, "Okay, what have I done with my life?" Worked out for you.

(00:43:07):
Ended up building the second largest boutique hotel chain in the world, Joie de Vivre, beloved. I loved every single experience I've had as Joie de Vivre. When you sold it, I was like, "That is so sad." Talk about just that story. I know this could go on for hours, but what's the-

Chip Conley (00:43:21):
Yeah, I'll be brief.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:22):
Yeah.

Chip Conley (00:43:23):
26 years old, couple of years out of Stanford Business School, working for a commercial real estate developer. I was bored silly. I wanted to do something more creative. Bill Graham, famous concert promoter, said to me, because I had gotten to know him, "What San Francisco really needs is a rock and roll hotel." I decided to start looking to find a broken down motel hotel that I could turn into a rock and roll hotel.

(00:43:46):
I found something in the Tenderloin, and turned it into the Phoenix, which became a famous rock and roll hotel that I have owned for 39 years now. Long story short is that was how I started Joie de Vivre, the company. We grew to 52 hotels around California, became the second largest, as you said, in the world in terms of the number of hotels, boutique hotels that we operated. I loved it till I hated it. In my late forties, I hated it, didn't want to do it anymore. The great recession came along and it was just kicking my ass.

(00:44:23):
I really went through a bit of what I now call a midlife chrysalis, but a midlife crisis, where I just wanted to change everything. I got through it. I had an NDE, I had a near-death experience where I had an allergic reaction to an antibiotic and I died. From that point forward, I realized every day is a gift and a bonus, and I decided to sell my company at the bottom of the great recession. That's really how I created this space in my life to be able to join Airbnb.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:58):
Well, let's back up a little bit. This near-death experience, share more there. What happened there?

Chip Conley (00:45:04):
Yeah, so I write books. I've written seven or eight books, and I had written a book called Peak: How Great Companies Get Their Mojo from Maslow. It was a book that Brian really liked, and part of the reason he wanted to reach out to me. I was on a book tour, I had a broken ankle. I broke my ankle at a bachelor party playing baseball. I ended up with a cut on my leg and the cut on my leg had fertilizer in it and went septic. I was on a very strong antibiotic and I died.

(00:45:39):
I went flatlined from the allergic reaction to the antibiotic. I saw, it happened nine times over 90 minutes, I kept dying, kept flatlining, yeah. Ended up in the hospital for three days. They finally said, "Listen, it's an allergic reaction, we believe." They thought it was a heart attack, a bunch of stuff, stroke, et cetera. No, it was the allergic reaction. I saw birds. I saw all this beautiful stuff. We don't have time to go into it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:10):
You did? What?

Chip Conley (00:46:11):
I did. You want to hear this? Yeah, I saw this beautiful stuff.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:13):
Let's do it.

Chip Conley (00:46:15):
I think there's a hotel in San Francisco called the Vitale that I built across the street from the ferry building, and it's still there, but it's no longer called the Vitale. In that hotel, there were these slippers in every guest room. One slipper said slow, the other slipper said down. I was wearing these slippers in my flatline thing, flying in the air in a 40-foot tall living room in the Alps, surrounded by birds that were tweeting and chirping at me.

(00:46:50):
I understood bird talk. I understand exactly what they were saying. They kept telling me, "If you slow down, you will see beauty and you will see awe." There was a bunch of other things, but let me just limit it to that and just say, and then the birds would say, "It's time to go." The birds would go out the big window into the mountains, and I would try to follow them. Right as I would get to the window, all of a sudden, I'd come back to life.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:20):
Holy shit. I love that there was a message inside of this experience. I don't know how many people experienced that. Clearly, this led to a big life change. It's interesting that a lot of times, you need something like that. You've been doing this for how many years at that point? Running Joie de Vivre?

Chip Conley (00:47:38):
At that point, I'd been running Joie de Vivre for 22 years.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:39):
22 years. It's interesting that you need something like that a lot of times. Otherwise, it just momentum just keeps carrying you forward.

Chip Conley (00:47:46):
Within two years, I'd sold it, and I had the chance to move on.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:52):
With building Joie de Vivre, something you've written about a number of times is just the way you built it is a really unique approach to building a business. Specifically, there's a huge focus on culture, which also came out at Airbnb. Talk about just why you see culture as such an important part of how you build a business like tangibly. A lot of people talk about culture, warm, fuzzy stuff, but you think about it very tangibly.

Chip Conley (00:48:15):
Culture is what happens around here when the boss is not around. The more distributed a company, the more culture is important. The boss is around in a traditional bricks and mortar workplace where everybody shows up at eight and leaves at six, and we all see each other. In my company, in Joie de Vivre, we had 52 hotels, and 25 restaurants, and four spas, and it was distributed. I couldn't be in all those places all the time.

(00:48:52):
Similarly, with Airbnb, Airbnb had offices around the world and it was a global company. The more distributed you are, of course, in the remote work world we live in, the more culture is important, and more difficult. When you're remote, there's these few cues you have about how we do things around here. They're usually in a digital, virtual format, which is why it's all the more important for you to have in-person gatherings of a team more often if you are virtual.

(00:49:27):
At the end of the day, the reason the culture is important is because it actually helps, it helps guide people in terms of making decisions, but it's also a magnet for the right kind of people. Oracle has a different culture than Apple, which has a different culture than Facebook. You can choose the place you're going to work based upon the culture. There are people who can be very good at what they do, but if they're in the wrong culture, they're in the wrong kind of environment, and they're not willing to shift to fit that culture.

(00:50:01):
We saw it at Airbnb all over and over again. In fact, Airbnb saw it, I think when with Amazon people. Apple people have resonated pretty well at Airbnb, Amazon people, less so. Those are two different cultures, Amazon and Apple. Therefore, understanding a culture before you even actually take the job is one of the more important decisions you need to make is like, "Is this culture a culture that I can live with and maybe influence?" There's language about culture fit.

(00:50:37):
I like to say culture add, because culture fit to me can actually be quite negative toward somebody who is the aberration. You have to fit in. Especially if this is a demographic thing, a person of color, a gay person, a person in a wheelchair, so you have to fit in. A culture add suggests that actually having some diversity on the team is helpful, because it actually adds to the culture. You still have to be able to get along in that culture. Culture is an intangible. That's the problem with it is it's hard to measure, but you see its value and you understand whether it's working based upon employee pulse reports and things like that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:24):
You talk about having to understand the culture is such a key part of having success at a company. Do you have any advice for just how to understand the culture for someone interviewing? I don't know. You came in, you work part-time, it's easier to experience it all. Any tips there for, "Okay, this is for me, it's not for me?"

Chip Conley (00:51:39):
When you're interviewing, you're also interviewing them. When you're interviewing, it's not about you having to prove yourself. It's also for them to actually prove themselves as a company, and also try to understand if there is some alignment in the company. The kind of questions I would ask as someone who's being interviewed would be, what are three to five adjectives that define this culture? What's the biggest problem in this culture, in terms of something that's just endemic or baked in across the organization?

(00:52:14):
Is it ever going to get fixed? How could I come in and maybe help that? Which frankly, at a very junior level, you're not going to be able to help it except for in very minor ways. If you're a senior person, you might be able to help it. Those are the kind of questions I'd want to know. Frankly, if I'm asking that same question about what are the adjectives to multiple people, am I hearing the same thing over and over again? If I'm not, is that because there's not alignment? Is that because different departments have different flavors?

(00:52:48):
You could have a culture within a department that's very different than the overall corporate culture. The corporate culture certainly has an enormous oppressive influence, but you can be in a culture, a really great culture of a team or a department, in an overall company culture that's not good. In the long run, that oppressive company culture is either going to have to evolv,e or your department, you may lose people.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:23):
When I reflect back on the impact you had at Airbnb, one of the funny things I think about is triangles showing up a lot on decks, and specifically rooted in Maslow's hierarchy, just like everything's this Maslow hierarchy metaphor.

Chip Conley (00:53:41):
True.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:43):
This one, I don't know, specific piece of this is you have this kind of model you think about for how to help employees be successful at a company. It's kind of rooted in your Peak book philosophy. Maybe just talk about that, and then if there's anything else you want to expand on with this power of thinking through the Maslow hierarchy.

Chip Conley (00:54:01):
Maslow's hierarchy, basically five levels. Later in life, he had a seven and an eight level model, but at the base is the kind of physical, water, food, air, and you move up to self-actualization at the top. To use this model as a hierarchy of needs for employees, customers, and investors is what the Peak model is about. The Peak, my book. The employee model is really simple. It's money or compensation at the base, recognition in the middle, and meaning at the top.

(00:54:39):
Now, there are some industries and some kinds of jobs in which money is 90% of the pyramid. Just because of the base doesn't mean it's not the dominant part of the pyramid, but the differentiation often is in recognition and meaning. In nonprofits, usually the money piece of it's rather thin. The recognition's this, and meaning's huge. Understanding how do you create an organization, and I gave a TED Talk in 2010 about this topic as well, how do you measure the intangibles of meaning and how do you create an environment where people feel a sense of meaning?

(00:55:18):
The customer pyramid, briefly, I'll just say that one, is meeting expectations is the base, meeting desires is in the middle, and then meeting unrecognized needs. I think one of the things that we did at Airbnb about a year after I joined, and when Jonathan Goldenhall was joining, is we really tried to ask ourselves, "Are we in the home sharing business, or are we in some kind of business that is even bigger and broader than that?" Ultimately, we came up with the idea that we were in the belong anywhere business.

(00:55:49):
Airbnb was not in home sharing, we were in belonging anywhere. Once you have that down, that was sort of the unrecognized need at the top of the pyramid. Then that becomes an organizing principle for how do you teach your hosts to create a sense of belonging? How does our marketing and advertising play up the belonging piece, especially and the everywhere piece, because hotels are not everywhere, but homes are? I would just say that this model, the idea of hierarchies is, I think, very helpful. Yeah, my book Peak has been around for 18 years, but I still am asked to give 20 or 30 speeches a year on it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:30):
Oh, man. This pyramid of comp, recognition, meaning is really interesting, especially these days, because with all this AI researcher poaching, there's all this talk of just like, "Will people just go work wherever they get the most money, or is there a mission and meaning to the work they're doing that will keep them not taking a hundred million dollars offer?" Seems to be happening in a lot of cases, which shows you the power of meaning.

Chip Conley (00:56:55):
Yeah. If you know you're working for a toxic company, at some point, your conscience kicks in. Whether it's toxic in terms of the purpose of the company, toxic in terms of the leadership or the culture, life is too short.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:10):
Okay. You've had two major shifts in your career. You started the hotel chain, then you went to Airbnb. Most recently, the Airbnb experience, I imagine, led you to starting something called the Modern Elder Academy. Talk about what is the Modern Elder Academy?

Chip Conley (00:57:28):
Yeah, what is going on with that Modern Elder Academy? The Modern Elder Academy. There was a couple times where I was called the Modern Elder at Airbnb, and then I was told that a Modern Elder is someone who's as curious as they are wise. Jonathan Mildenhall, who is the chief marketing officer at Airbnb, used to call me the Modern Elder as well, and he said, "If you ever create a school, Modern Elder would be a good name."

(00:57:56):
We talked about it, and next thing I knew, I was saying, "Okay, this is called the Modern Elder Academy." We now call it MEA because elder is a fraught word on some level, it makes you sound elderly. What I really wanted to create was a place where people could come and do a workshop, they're five day workshops in Baja on the beach, or in Santa Fe on a big four square mile horse ranch, and reimagine and repurpose yourself, and navigate transitions.

(00:58:27):
We go through so many transitions in the middle of our life, let's say between, I define midlife as 35 to 75, guys. It's a very long life stage. We go through a lot of transitions. We are constantly evolving our purpose. We're building our wisdom. We have knowledge management tools out there, but we're the wisdom management tools. We're the tools that help us to get wiser over time, and then we need to reframe our relationship with getting older. Becca Levy has shown at Yale that when you shift your mindset on aging from a negative to a positive, you get seven and a half years of additional life, which is more life than any other biohack that's being done right now.

(00:59:08):
That's what we do, and we have 7,000 grads from 60 countries, and 56 regional chapters around the world. It's a bit of a movement, and I teach. I teach some of the workshops, and we have all kinds of famous people who come and teach. For me, creating the world's first midlife wisdom school just feels like the natural next thing for me to do. I love hospitality, so it's a very upscale kind of experience, but we have scholarships. I love retreat centers. I was on the board of the Esalen Institute in Big Sur for 10 years. I love wellness.

(00:59:45):
I've owned the Kabuki Springs and Spa for 28 years, which is the largest spa in San Francisco, and I love education. My book, Wisdom at Work: The Making of a Modern Elder, gave me a curriculum in which we've expanded quite a bit with Harvard, Yale, Stanford, and UC, Berkeley professors helping us create a curriculum around midlife. That's how MEA came about.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:14):
To your point, I forget who said, I think you said Jonathan has said this was a natural next step for you, I completely agree. It's like, looking back, this is the obvious thing you should be doing right now.

Chip Conley (01:00:22):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:23):
Also, I'm learning more things about you. I didn't know you were involved with the Kabuki Spa. I think Esalen and I knew, you just keep getting more interested.

Chip Conley (01:00:31):
Thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:32):
There's a couple threads here I want to actually follow. This point you made about shifting your mindset to aging as a positive thing helps you live longer. That's such a powerful point. Can you just speak more to that, just what does that look like?

Chip Conley (01:00:43):
Yeah, there's lots of data points. I'll talk about two. One is this Becca Levy study, which has been going on for 15 to 20 years. If you sort of buy into the ageism of American society or Hallmark cards, when you get a card at age 40, 50, or beyond, there's a belief that life gets worse as you get older. If you can survive your midlife crisis, all you have to look forward to is disease, decrepitude, and death. The bottom line is there's a lot of things that get better with age. I wrote a book called Learning to Love Midlife.

(01:01:20):
The subtitle says it all: 12 Reasons Why Life Gets Better with Age. What I really wanted to do with that book, which is really, it summarizes the MEA curriculum, I wanted to write a book that sort of helped people to see the upside of aging, the unexpected pleasures of aging. They had a pro-aging, not just an anti-aging point of view. When you actually have a pro-aging point of view and you see the upside of aging, you take better care of yourself, both your mind and your body. You actually are willing to learn and try new things.

(01:01:51):
One of my favorite MEA questions is, 10 years from now, what will you regret if you don't learn it or do it now? It's a powerful question, really important question as we get older. When you're young, you've got all of your life left ahead of you. When I moved to Baja part-time in Mexico at age 56, I had a mindset which was, "I'm too old to learn Spanish. I'm too old to learn to surf," but when I said, "10 years from now, what will I regret if I don't learn it or it now?" I said, "Well, 10 years from now, I might still be living in Baja. I should learn Spanish, I should learn how to surf because we're right next to a surf break."

(01:02:29):
I did. What I believe is that anticipated regret is a form of wisdom, and it's a catalyst for taking action. That's one data point. The other data point is something called the U-curve of happiness, and it's been around for 20 years, and it shows the following. It has changed in the last couple of years because young adults are unhappy like never before. A 20 or a 22-year-old, really unhappy, 24-year-old, really unhappy.

(01:02:58):
Historically, the way it was is you were happy from 18 to 23 or 24, and then around 23 or 24, you start to see a long, slow decline in life satisfaction that actually bottoms out between 45 and 50. I'm sorry to tell you that, Lenny, since you're 44, but your mileage may vary.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:17):
You're saying I'm the least happy I'll ever be. That's only upside. That's great. Yeah.

Chip Conley (01:03:21):
Well, here's the part that's weird is that before this research was done, and it's global research across all demographics, what they found was starting around age 50 or 52, you get happier, so that you're happier in your fifties than your forties, sixties, fifties, seventies, happier than sixties, and the women in their eighties, happier than seventies. Wow. It's partly because we are in around 45 to 50, doing this thing called the midlife unraveling, what Brené Brown calls the midlife unraveling.

(01:03:55):
You're unraveling your expectations, what you define as success, your definition of what a beautiful body looks like, and you're liberated into freedom in your fifties and beyond. I can say that, yeah, I'm happier today at 64 than I was at 47 when I was going through my flatline experience, and not wanting to run my company anymore.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:19):
You used this term earlier, the midlife chrysalis, was that what it was?

Chip Conley (01:04:22):
Chrysalis. Chrysalis, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:23):
Chrysalis. What is that? Is that kind of along the same lines?

Chip Conley (01:04:27):
If you think about the caterpillar to butterfly journey, midlife is the chrysalis. It's that cocoon in which all of the change is happening. At the time, when you're going through it, it's like, "Oh, shit. My life is liquefying in front of myself." On the other side of it, there's a metamorphosis that happens.

(01:04:48):
I like to use the language, in fact, I have a podcast called The Midlife Chrysalis, because I want to help change the dialogue around midlife, so that the number one word attached to midlife is not crisis, but in fact, it's maybe chrysalis, and the idea that life is meant to be transformative during that era.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:09):
That is actually very empowering. I am sort of going through that, not necessarily in this intense way yet, but that might be coming. You said there's a bunch of upsides to getting older. It might be helpful just to share a couple of those things for folks that are like, "Oh, wow, I didn't realize that."

Chip Conley (01:05:23):
Emotional intelligence grows with age. Our wisdom can grow with age, although we know 70-year-olds who are not as wise as 30-year-olds, so it's a matter of what you do with your life experience. I define wisdom as metabolized experience, mindfully shared for the common good. What else gets better with age? You learn how to edit. You have no more Fs left to give, no more fucks left to give. That is absolutely true, especially for women as they age. You are more spiritually curious. The list is long, and so there are a lot of things that, actually, another one that I love is you're not compartmentalized.

(01:06:01):
When you're younger, you're compartmentalized. As you grow older, you are growing whole, and that means you're alchemizing curiosity and wisdom, introvert, extrovert, masculine, feminine, gravitas, depth, and levity, lightness. The people who I really admire who are 85 years old, they're so present and they're so whole. They are just who they are.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:25):
There's a quote I found from you along these lines, the societal narrative on aging is just don't do it.

Chip Conley (01:06:31):
Fantastic. Yeah. We sort of say we don't want to age, but we do want to live. Quite frankly, aging and living are the same thing, as are aging and growing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:44):
Coming back to MEA, just for folks that are interested, curious about this, who's this for, would you say? Who should seriously look into this program?

Chip Conley (01:06:52):
MEA is really, the people who tend to come to MEA are in the midst of a transition. It could be selling their company, leaving a job, getting divorced, having kids, becoming an empty nester, taking care of parents till they're passing away, having a health diagnosis that's scary. Average age is 54, and it's people of all walks of life. It's not just the tech industry, but it's very popular in the tech industry. It's people who are looking to maybe do a reframe of their purpose, and maybe even a reinvention of their career.

(01:07:29):
Yeah, the two campuses are just gorgeous. It's been called the Four Seasons meets Blue Zones meets the Esalen Institute, which I like. We have online programs too, and so you don't have to come to either of our campuses in Mexico, or on the beach, or in New Mexico. You can actually do it online.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:54):
Those three, yeah, that's the tagline. That's your tagline right there. Esalen meets Blue Zones, meets what was the first one?

Chip Conley (01:08:00):
The Four Seasons.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:01):
The Four Seasons.

Chip Conley (01:08:02):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:03):
Nailed it. Okay. I'm going to zoom out and take us to a recurring segment on this podcast. I want to see if this goes anywhere, AI Corner, and with AI Corner, ask guests, what's a way that you've found AI useful in your work or in your life, any kind of trick you've learned, any workflow, anything you've found useful?

Chip Conley (01:08:23):
Yeah, I have a daily blog. It's called Wisdom Well, and it's on the MEA website. When I'm looking for inspiration, AI does it for me, and ultimately, it gives me a first draft. That's good enough for me then to say, "Okay." There's times when I'm missing the inspiration. I tend to write really well in the morning.

(01:08:47):
If it's any other time of the day, I do not like writing creatively. If I have a deadline for tomorrow and it's five o'clock in the afternoon, it's like, "Okay, ChatGPT. I'm on my way to you." I tend to use ChatGPT the most because I don't know, I like Claude as well, but yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:03):
Okay, awesome. I was going to ask which tool you use. What's your workflow there? Is it you use voice mode? Do you just type out, "Here's what I'm thinking about, write me a little drop blog post?"

Chip Conley (01:09:12):
The good news is that at this point, it knows me well enough and my blogs, and I've actually, it knows my weird sense of humor, so it's able to ape me pretty well. I'll just say, "I need a 250 word post on," like today, today's post was a post that ChatGPT helped me with it. I said, "I believe that there's a refrain that needs to happen with the soul. We tend to say, 'I have a soul, or I don't have a soul,' but what if my soul has me? What if in fact, my job is just to be this vehicle for my soul to go to the next lifetime?"

(01:09:56):
My job is to be this steward of the soul. I said, "Write me something around that." It was just a weird idea. Of course, not all my blog posts are so new age, and I like that. I write a lot on leadership, but that was one that within 30 seconds, I had a 250 word blog post that I then adapted, and there you go.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:19):
Amazing. Chip, we've covered a lot of ground. We've gone through your entire life. Maybe actually just the tip of the iceberg. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got five questions for you. Are you ready?

Chip Conley (01:10:31):
Yes. Let's do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:32):
First question, what are two or three books that you find yourself recommending most to other people?

Chip Conley (01:10:38):
My favorite book of all time, Man's Search for Meaning, Viktor Frankl in a concentration camp in World War II. When someone's going through a hard time in their life, I say, "Read that book. You'll realize it's not so bad, what you're going through." It also really speaks to this idea of despair equals suffering, minus meaning. I wrote a book called Emotional Equations that was a New York Times bestseller that spoke to this idea that what if you could take all of your emotions and turn them into equations?

(01:11:04):
Very engineering-minded of me. That's one. I love any book by Liz Gilbert, sort of the opposite. Elizabeth Gilbert wrote Eat, Pray, Love. Her book, she's on faculty at MEA. She teaches here. Big Magic is just a beautiful book about sort of how do you get in the flow to allow the genie to come through you. Her Ted Talk in 2009 was about the fact that genius is not about being the genius yourself. It's about being the receptacle for the genie to come through you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:44):
I want to come back to this equation you shared. I was going to get to it, but I didn't, so this is a good opportunity to. There's a couple that are really interesting to me. This is, you wrote about these in a book. You have a bunch of these equations about living a happier life. The one you shared is despair equals suffering, minus meaning.

Chip Conley (01:12:00):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:01):
The implication there is if you want less despair, increase the meaning.

Chip Conley (01:12:05):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:05):
Or reduce the suffering.

Chip Conley (01:12:06):
Suffering, Buddhist philosophy, the first noble truth of Buddhism is that suffering is ever-present. If suffering's a constant and you have two variables, using some algebra, I guess, you know that if you have more meaning, you have less suffering. That's that one.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:25):
The other one that I love is anxiety equals uncertainty times powerlessness. Maybe talk about that one briefly.

Chip Conley (01:12:32):
98% of anxiety comes from two sources. One is what you don't know, and number two is what you can't control or influence, and based upon social science. You can create an anxiety balance sheet and create four columns. First column is what is it you do know about the thing that's making you anxious? The second column is, what is it you don't know? The third column is what is it you can control or influence? The fourth column is what is it you can't control or influence?

(01:13:01):
When you take free-floating anxiety and put it into an equation, it actually makes it more tangible, and you often are less anxious as a result.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:11):
Boom. Okay, so if you're feeling anxious right now, this is an exercise you can do and you'll feel less anxious in like five minutes is what I'm hearing.

Chip Conley (01:13:19):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:19):
Okay, excellent. Very, very good nugget of advice. Okay, let's keep going with the lightning round. Come back from our tangent. Do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Chip Conley (01:13:29):
Ted Lasso is, I'm a sucker for that show. When it comes to movies, I'm a total movie buff. We have an annual MEA Film Festival at our Santa Fe campus. I would say that the film that I'm most excited about that is coming out that most people have never heard of, it's called I'll Push You. It's the story of two guys, one of whom is in a degenerative health condition and in a wheelchair, and his best friend pushes him the 500 miles of the Camino de Santiago, and it's the relationship they build along that way.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:08):
Amazing. Very deep cut. Do you have a favorite product that you recently discovered that you really love?

Chip Conley (01:14:17):
Yes. Hair growing material. No. Do you know Viori shorts? I sound like Scott Galloway because he advertises this, but Viori shorts are like, I just love them. They're just breathe and they're comfortable.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:33):
I'm wearing Viori joggers right now. The one downside of Viori, not to make anyone mad, is they're kind of plasticky if you look at the material. I'm trying to like, I don't know, but I do love, there's nothing better. That's the problem. Anything else like this that is all cotton.

Chip Conley (01:14:50):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:51):
I'm a fan. I have many Viori, I don't know if they're called joggers, just, I don't know, weekenders or something. Anyway, love you, Viori. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to and find really useful in work or in life? I imagine you have many, but is there one that comes to mind?

Chip Conley (01:15:07):
My favorite one right now is your painful life lessons are the raw material for your future wisdom. The premise of that is that wisdom often comes through the school of hard knocks. When you're in the midst of a really challenging time, you are developing your future wisdom that's going to be valuable to you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:28):
Okay, final question. You were on the board of Burning Man, or you still are?

Chip Conley (01:15:28):
I was.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:28):
Was.

Chip Conley (01:15:34):
I helped found the board of Burning Man. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:36):
Okay. No big deal. I don't know if you know this, I got married at Burning Man. We had an unofficial wedding there on bicycles, so it's really meaningful to us. I've been there four or five times. What's something about Burning Man that maybe people don't know, some inside story or a really unexpected piece of the journey? I may imagine there's a lot, but what comes to mind?

Chip Conley (01:15:55):
I would say the best not well-known thing about Burning Man is that Burning Man own owns a place called Fly Ranch. Fly Ranch is about 10 miles from Burning Man. Now, when you go to the Burn, the event around Labor Day, you cannot go over there. It's locked off. It's 3,400 acres. If you look at Fly Ranch, FlyRanch.org, I think it might even be, or it's on the Burning Man site, Fly Ranch is the opposite of Burning Man. Burning Man is this alkaline desert.

(01:16:29):
There's no living life there at all. It's very masculine. Fly Ranch is porous, and lots of desert grasses, and hot springs, and hot pools, and birds, and wild horses, and it's one of my favorite hot springs places in the world. Just check it out, and you can go there when it's not during the event. It's quite beautiful.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:57):
It feels like it might've inspired MEA in many ways.

Chip Conley (01:17:00):
It did, yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:03):
Chip, two final questions. Where can folks find you online, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Chip Conley (01:17:08):
Online, MEAWisdom.com is the website for MEA. My website is ChipConley.com, C-O-N-L-E-Y, and I'm on LinkedIn. That's really, from a social media perspective, the thing that I do the most. I actually take my daily blogs and put them on LinkedIn. Then what your community can do, just come say hi, come check me out. If wisdom's interesting to you, and I think wisdom should be interesting to everybody here, on the MEA website, at the very bottom footer, you'll see a bunch of free resources.

(01:17:43):
One of them is called Why Successful Leaders Value Wisdom. It is a free resource, and there's also a free resource down there called The Anatomy of a Transition. Those two free resources, understanding how to build your TQ, your transitional intelligence, and understanding how to develop wisdom are two, to my mind, two of the most important modern skills that we can have.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:05):
It's funny when you say you're on LinkedIn. It doesn't resonate with me. Chip Conley on LinkedIn, posting on LinkedIn, something about...

Chip Conley (01:18:13):
I don't know. Why? Because I'm a little too Burning Man?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:15):
You're just, yeah, exactly. It feels like that's not your vibe, but I love that you do it, because that's where the people are.

Chip Conley (01:18:21):
Oh, I put wild, weird stuff up on LinkedIn, and thank God somebody's doing that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:28):
For some reason, I don't see it. I need to fix that. Chip, this was incredible. Everything I was hoping it'd be, thank you so much for being here and for sharing-

Chip Conley (01:18:34):
Thank you, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:34):
... your wisdom.

Chip Conley (01:18:35):
I am so proud as I go back, like have your proud Papa who just loves to see you in your element, and I just want to make sure everybody knows the following. Lenny was so good to work with. Whenever you were assigned to a project as a PM, I appreciated it because I just knew that we were going to have great conversations. You're just an interesting dude.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:00):
Well, I appreciate that, Chip. That's going to be the beginning of this whole episode. We're just going to put that up front. Just kidding. That was awesome, Chip. Really appreciate it.

Chip Conley (01:19:01):
Thanks.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:08):
Thanks everyone for listening. Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at LennysPodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Claire Butler (00:00:00):
We had Coda. They were our first user, and they were based in Palo Alto. Dylan and I drove down and demoed the product to them, and they were the first ones. Their designer, Jeremy was like, "Yes, we'll take this on full time." And I remember we were both like, "What? Really? You will?" That was the first person who said yes to us. And so, we were so excited. This was a huge milestone. We were just so stoked. And then we got back to the office, and I think Dylan gets a text from Jeremy being like, "Oh yeah, I tried to share this with Philippe, my engineer, and he can't get the file to open, so I guess we can't use it." And we're like, "What is it? What happened?" Finally got someone. And I remember Dylan was like, "Everybody drop everything. We have to fix this."
(00:00:37):
And after some looking at the servers and things, they were like, "Nothing's wrong." And then they realized there's a problem with Philippe's MacBook. And Evan down only had a car, so Dylan had to drive Evan down to Palo Alto to fix the MacBook of Philippe just to get them to use the product.
Lenny (00:00:55):
Welcome to Lenny's podcast, where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard one experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Claire Butler. Claire started at Figma while they were still in stealth as their 10th employee and their first ever marketing hire. She led their original launch and go-to-market and also their branding and positioning and messaging work. And eight years in, she continues to lead their go-to-market and bottom-up growth motion along with community events, social advocacy, and Figma for education teams.
(00:01:26):
In our conversation, we get the first ever in-depth glimpse into how Figma grew and continues to grow. Claire shares her two-part go-to-market strategy, which involves getting ICs at a company to love you and then enabling them to spread the product within the organization. She shares tons of amazing stories and examples and lessons from how the Figma team executed the strategy and how you can apply it to your own product. This is an incredible episode with so many gold nuggets of wisdom. You'll probably want to listen to it more than once. With that, I bring you Claire Butler after a short word from our sponsors. This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate your growth. Thousands of fast-growing companies like Gusto, Calm, Quora, and Modern Treasury trust Vanta to help build, scale, manage, and demonstrate their security and compliance programs and get ready for audits in weeks, not months. By offering the most in-demand security and privacy frameworks such as SOC 2, ISO 27001, GDPR, HIPAA, and many more, Vanta helps companies obtain the reports they need to accelerate growth, build efficient compliance processes, mitigate risks to their businesses, and build trust with external stakeholders. Over 5,000 best growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2 and these other frameworks. For a limited time, Lenny's podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Go to vanta.com/lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discounts. Get started today. This episode is brought to you by Mixpanel. Get deep insights into what your users are doing at every stage of the funnel at a fair price that scales as you grow. Mixpanel gives you quick answers about your users from awareness to acquisition through retention, and by capturing website activity, ad data and multitouch attribution right in Mixpanel, you can improve every aspect of the full user funnel. Powered by first party behavioral data instead of third-party cookies, Mixpanel is built to be more powerful and easier to use than Google Analytics. Explore plans for teams of every size and see what Mixpanel can do for you at mixpanel.com/friends/lenny. And while you're at it, they're also hiring. So check it out at mixpanel.com/friends/lenny.
(00:03:50):
Claire, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.
Claire Butler (00:03:54):
Thanks, Lenny. I'm excited to be here.
Lenny (00:03:56):
You've been on my wishlist of guests for a long time, and so I'm really excited to be finally chatting. You were the 10th employee at Figma, which is now worth tens of billions of dollars depending on which valuation you look at, and probably thousands of employees. I don't even know, but many, many. And you joined before the product even launched. And so, I have a million questions I want to ask about how Figma grew and all the things that went into it. I'm curious what it was like to be early days at Figma. Is there a memory that comes to mind that's zany, funny, fun, tangible of just what it was like to work at Figma in the early days?
Claire Butler (00:04:33):
Yeah, totally. No, that's a good question. We were right downtown on New Montgomery and Minna, and I think the thing that sticks out to me is actually two competing stories that talk about just how much at that time you'd oscillate between these really high-level strategic decisions and then total current work.
(00:04:50):
So my first day at Figma, I come into the office and we're going through some stuff. There's like 10 of us in the office, we're chatting, and I look at some of the plans, some of the things they're working on, and I see that they were actually had some branding and positioning and things that the products, Figma, was going to be named Summit, that was the name. So the company was going to be Figma, and then the product suite, the product design tool was going to be Summit with the idea that eventually we'll have other tools and that could be like mountaintop or I don't know what the rule, they had a whole thing around the different things that could be for the future product set.
(00:05:27):
And I remember my first day, I had an immediate reaction of like, " We cannot make this thing Summit. That's not going to work. We can't have two brands. Summit's not ownable, we can't build equity and multiple things. That's just never going to work. We kind of have to just stick with one." And I think Figma is ownable and makes sense and we should just go with Figma. So we kind of should probably kill the Summit thing. And Dylan said to me, he was like, "Oh, that's interesting. How about you make a presentation and present it to everyone tomorrow?" And so I did that. I was like, "Oh, okay, I guess this is what I'm doing the rest of the day." So I went and made a little presentation about how we couldn't build all this equity in two places and all of the things, and then the next day we decided to kill that name.
(00:06:05):
And so we went with Figma for the name of the product instead of Summit. And that's how fast things moved, right? And how much you just ran with it and how to ownership. I compare that to the first meetup we had, which was probably just 10 people in the office, honestly. But I remember I was in charge of that, so I had to get all the food and everything there, and I just Instacarted some things and ordered some pizza, but I'd forgotten ice. And so I had to go walk down to the nearest corner store, which was three blocks away or something, and get ice. And I got four bags. And I remember I was walking down the street down probably third street with three bags of ice and it was really heavy. And I remember thinking, "This is so hard. This is so heavy. I can't carry all this ice." And it's just like that's... I did that too probably the next week.
(00:06:50):
And so, I think it was just this oscillation between like, "Oh, we're making these high level strategic decisions and someone else has to go by the ice." So that's what it was like at Figma in the early days.
Lenny (00:06:59):
That's incredible. That's almost a metaphor. Someone's got to go carry the ice.
Claire Butler (00:07:04):
Almost got to the ice for the meetup. Yep.
Lenny (00:07:06):
That's so interesting about Summit, I had no idea that was [inaudible 00:07:09]-
Claire Butler (00:07:09):
That wasn't a good name. So if you liked that better, I'm sorry because I killed that.
Lenny (00:07:13):
Who could like it better now that everyone loves Figma and that's just what it is? Do you think Figma would've been as successful with that name, looking back?
Claire Butler (00:07:21):
I think we probably would've changed it later. I think we just saved ourselves some time and without having to change it.
Lenny (00:07:27):
And then how many days or weeks into your tenure was that happening?
Claire Butler (00:07:32):
The name change or...
Lenny (00:07:32):
Yeah.
Claire Butler (00:07:34):
The first day. No, that was literally my first day.
Lenny (00:07:36):
The first day.
Claire Butler (00:07:36):
No, no, no. That was my first day and my second day. Not even kidding. My first day, I made the recommendation, the second day, give the presentation and the decision was made.
Lenny (00:07:45):
Wow. I was going to ask you what the most stressful memory of early days Figma was. I'm guessing it's the same story.
Claire Butler (00:07:50):
It's not actually. So I think the most stressful thing, I was thinking about this, was when we launched out of stealth. So I come into Figma, I had lots of experience. I'd been in another startup before that, I launched stuff, but I was still kind of junior. I had done these things, but I didn't have a ton of cycles, and I never ran the whole thing from like, okay, messaging and positioning. This was a forcing function for us to do our messaging and positioning. And I remember there was more than one day where we locked ourselves in a conference room and I made Dylan and show at the time have this positioning up on the big screen and made them agree on it word for word. We'd just never done that before. But then I'd also never run PR press and all of a sudden, I had to run press and PR.
(00:08:36):
And I think the hardest part there and the most stressful part was I didn't have anyone to talk to. It was just me. And I didn't at the time have enough cycles to have the confidence that the decisions I was making were the right ones. And so it was hard not to second guess myself sometimes in that position. And I think that's some of the hardest times of being at a startup, especially when you're the only marketer, the only go-to-market person is, you don't have anyone to talk to, to like got check stuff with. And so it does take this immense confidence in yourself, but that's stressful when you don't have the cycles. And so that was very stressful for me for sure.
Lenny (00:09:12):
How did you overcome that? Did you find people to work with and run ideas by? Did you just do it and figure it out?
Claire Butler (00:09:19):
I mean, I had Dylan, but we just did it, right? Especially in those early days. I remember there were a couple of freak out moments where I would try to get our VCs to help us. I remember Greylock was helpful at least over there, but ultimately, they help a lot, but they don't know your business as intimately as you do. So at the end of the day, that's something Dylan's really good at is trusting his intuition and gut. And so, he was helpful on the decision making, but then also you just got to go for it. And I think that that's something that I learned at that time that's helped me throughout the rest of my career is building that confidence or that trust in yourself because it wasn't something that I necessarily immediately had.
Lenny (00:09:55):
Next question I wanted to get into briefly is, you joined Figma really early, became one of the most successful, loved companies in history. What did you see early on that convinced you that Figma was the company to join and ask? Because a lot of people today are looking for places to join and trying to decide what to do. Clearly, you made a good choice. What did you see?
Claire Butler (00:10:14):
So I had been another startup before Figma, a little bit bigger. I think I joined at Series B and then got through on acquisition. And I had a sense that I wanted to do something early. And I'd already made that decision that I wanted to go early stage. So I'll take that decision making part out. But then from there, I was talking to a couple different companies, and when I went to Figma, there were three areas that stood out the most to me.
(00:10:36):
The first was, it logically made sense. And I know maybe that sounds basic, but I was talking to just a drone company or a SaaS tech, like ad tech company, and I just didn't get it, honestly, it didn't intuitively make sense to me or I didn't understand the technology or something. But at Figma, the basic premise immediately logically clicked for me like, "Oh yeah, I use Google Docs, I use Asana, I use all these online tools. That's so weird. That design's not online. Why isn't it?"
(00:11:06):
And as a marketer, I'd worked with designers and sent feedback and emails, and that's really inefficient. And it made a ton of sense to me that yes, that should be online and collaborative. So that was the first thing that I was like check the box. And the next one was, I knew people who believed in it. So I got introduced to Dylan via Index. They were an investor at the last company I was at, and Danny Rimer specifically. And my old boss, Greg Smearon, who was an EIR there. And I trusted them a lot and they invested in it. I also met John Lilly. I didn't know who he was. I had to Google him, but he seemed really smart. And when they Googled in, he was very impressive, and he believed in it. So that was great.
(00:11:43):
And then I think the third thing was, I remember when I was trying to decide, Dylan really didn't take no for answer. He's very persuasive. And I remember he'd calling me and text me and then I'd have all these concerns or things and he would just pick them apart one by one of reasons why they weren't real concerns or things to get over them. And so I think that that was the third thing is, that's just who he was and that's how he is with everything. And so, if that's how with me, that's how he is with any obstacle that he has. And so, when I looked at that, I was just like, "All right, let's give this a go." And I didn't know. I didn't know. I had no idea it would be as big as it is today. So some of it was luck too, for sure. But those are the three things of how I made my decision.
Lenny (00:12:24):
So what I took away there is, one, you just believe in idea, obviously. Make sure you actually think this could be really big, two is some social proof people you trust really believe in it. In this case, it was really smart investors, they knew. And then the third is, it sounds like you were also just impressed with Dylan.
Claire Butler (00:12:40):
Yeah, totally. I believed in him.
Lenny (00:12:42):
So you joined Figma before it even launched, it was still in stealth. You joined as the first go-to-market hire. You helped launch Figma, you continue to lead go-to market at Figma. And so this is a good segue to where I want to spend most of our conversation. I essentially want to try to unpack what worked to build Figma into the business that it is today from beginning to even now. You're also there for eight years. So you saw a lot of what worked and didn't work. And so let's start with the beginnings of Figma and the go-to-market motion that you developed and how you actually implemented it. So maybe to start, if you could just talk about just what is a bottom up go-to-market motion? And then you also shared somewhere that Figma has a very unique bottom-up go-to-market motion. So maybe just those two areas, just broadly, what is bottom-up go- to-market motion, and then two, what is unique about Figma's approach?
Claire Butler (00:13:33):
I've reflected back to get to some of these answers. I think in the moment, so much of what we were doing was influenced by gut, by trying to connect with people, listening to them. But when I look back is when I'm like, "Oh, this is a repeatable motion." So when I look back at it, I would say that if I were to define and think about how I define our go-to-market motion, and we've said it, we've called it a lot of things over time. We called it product-led, we called it community-led. The way I think about it now is this bottoms-up motion, that really is focused on ICs. So it's all focused on like, "Okay, so you have this core audience." For us it was designers and they're largely individual contributors, so they're people who are practitioners who are using your tool. For us, it's like eight hours a day.
(00:14:17):
If you're a designer, you're in it all the time. And they love you, and you build this relationship with them within the product, but it's beyond the product, right? It's also believing what the product can be in the company and the brand. And they love you so much that they're willing to put their social capital and themselves in the line and spread the product throughout whatever their communities are. And the one that's connected the most to revenue is companies.
(00:14:45):
And so that's where the revenue model really clicks in is you have all these individual contributors who love you, but then they also work at these big companies and these big orgs, and they become these internal champions who spearhead adoption within their organizations and eventually turn into large amounts of revenue. And I think of that as our bottoms-up motion. And that's different from tops-down. And a lot of SaaS is tops-down where you go straight to a VP or an executive buyer, they then agree to buying a tool and then that goes down to their organization. I think with technical tools especially, this becomes really important. The practitioners have to love it. And also, sometimes I wondered as an executive care, you know what I mean, what tools people are using?
(00:15:27):
And so for Figma, what that looks like and why this is so efficient of a go-to-market motion for us is, we actually didn't have a sales team for the first three years. So all of our revenue, it was paid, but it was all self-serve. And so we'd work with these. We weren't worried about things. I mean, you cared about security, but all of the org features that people need and want when you're working with procurement, we were just focused on technical features for users mostly. And then the individual contributor or maybe the manager would just put them on their credit card. That was the way that things grew. And so there was no sales team for a long time. We did have one eventually, and I'll talk about what that looked like.
(00:16:04):
But then the second thing was, once we did have a sales team, and even up until now, so much of our revenue and our sales and our MQLs, our marketing qualified leads come from our free tier. So it's people, they're using it, maybe they use it for free. We have a very robust free tier. Maybe they use it for pro, which is on your credit card. And then once it's widespread and they've gained the confidence, then they're ready to bring in sales work with procurement. And they actually come to us and they're like, "Hey, I work at this company. I really want to get my whole company to use it, but security's not letting me. Can you help me unblock it with them?"
(00:16:39):
We didn't spend that much money, any money really programmatically on paid or programmatic marketing because all of our leads for sales would come in through a form on our website, which was current users either free or pro wanting to upgrade. And at that point, it's a very different sales conversation to unblock someone or to just help them implement Figma when they've already have an internal champion who's bought in, and they're really the one leading and driving the sale within their organization. So I think that that's made us really efficient as like this is a really efficient model and has really powered so much of our growth over time.
Lenny (00:17:14):
Somebody listening to this that has a saying, B2B SaaS companies like, "Oh, okay, I just need to get people to love my product and it's going to be great." And so I want to unpack that just like what you did because it wasn't obviously an accident that people loved Figma. But before we get there, you talked about that there's a unique approach to the way you did bottom up. What do you see as what the typical bottom-up go-to-market motion is that other companies try to play that you think Figma did differently? Is it this obsession with ICs on teams or is there some other element of it?
Claire Butler (00:17:43):
I think there are other people who do bottoms-up and who do it well. I think for us it's unique because the individual contributor spends so much time in the tool, and it's so important to them. I think about things that we focus on where it might take one click off of someone's workflow, and that seems like a really small update. You have to click one time instead of twice to do something.
(00:18:06):
When you're a designer and you're in a tool eight hours a day, saving that one click is huge. And so I think the obsession with quality and with craft within the editor for us, for Figma, is maybe the difference. And I think about other go-to-market tools that maybe focus so much on the collaboration side or the product-led of the expansion. And that is a huge part segue, don't get me wrong, but the tool itself, the editor, that's where it all starts and that's what these people love. And then the collaboration is like, yes, it's the thing that's like our differentiator, but it's actually like you stay for the collaboration. You don't want to talk about it or learn about it. Nobody wants talk about collaboration. You just want it to work, right? You care about the tool and that the tool's working well. And so I think that maybe that's the difference is the obsession with the tool itself.
Lenny (00:18:52):
Awesome. Yeah, something I learned recently is that multiplayer wasn't even a part of Figma at launch, [inaudible 00:18:56] a year later.
Claire Butler (00:18:58):
I know. We can talk about that, and we want to know making a decision of when to go to self because we almost didn't because it didn't have multiplayer.
Lenny (00:19:04):
Oh yeah, let's talk about that.
Claire Butler (00:19:05):
Yeah, that was a poor differentiator and we can't not have it, but then we did anyway.
Lenny (00:19:10):
Yeah, let's take a tangent there actually. Just that decision to go from stealth. So Figma was in stealth three years or four years before [inaudible 00:19:17] idea.
Claire Butler (00:19:17):
Gosh, three, I guess. I think is 2012 that they started, and then we launched in at the end of 2015. So between around there, yeah, around three or four.
Lenny (00:19:27):
Cool. And then you joined right before they launched. We're going to come back to what we were talking about, but just what did you see about that decision of now's the time to launch?
Claire Butler (00:19:34):
Yeah, I think it was a couple things. So I think the first thing is that the team had been building quietly by themselves in isolation for three years. And that's hard. I think that that was a very real part of the decision to get out of stealth was that people had been building for such a long time. We needed momentum. We needed to have a milestone that we were working towards. We could have just kept building it quiet for a long time more, but it was very demotivating. So that was a very big part of this. So there was a desire holistically to get out of stealth. But we didn't want to do it until we knew it'd at least be successful. But that was a key thing for me. I was working on that messaging, positioning that I was telling you, like we would have this.
[NEW_PARAGRAPH]I still have the doc actually where I was like, projected on the screen and Dylan and Sean and I picked apart every word of it and sharing with a link and multiplayer is the biggest thing. That's the core differentiator. It's really funny. I remember Ivan from Notion's early days, he stopped by and was chatting, and he's like, "Wait, you can't launch with that multiplayer." And I was like, "I know." So I was like, everybody was like, that was the core thing.
(00:20:36):
But the idea was that we wanted to get out of stealth. We talked to Evan, our CTO, and knew it would take about another year for him to build it. And for me it was like, "Well, is there enough here to get people excited to start and to get users, get more feedback?" Because Evan was kind of building multiplayer. I don't know enough about the engineering if he was doing it on his own or not, but he was the key person doing it. But there are a lot of other things too that were being built or could be built through that year. And we wanted to get more feedback from people and to start really get started.
(00:21:05):
And so to me, the things that I wanted to see before just deciding like, "Okay, so we don't have our key feature. Can we still launch, or is there enough fear for people to get excited?" At least my first three months, especially before we get going for the launch with the product, and probably even after that, I would just go around with Dylan and pilot or demo Figma to companies. That was a lot of what we did. So we'd go to these companies and we'd show them Figma and we'd get their feedback, and I would be driving around in Palo Alto, around the city doing that with Dylan. And sometimes people didn't care. They were just like, "What is this? I don't want to design online," things like that.
(00:21:47):
But what we wanted to see, what I wanted to see was that designers were excited when they saw the tool. And once we got enough features, and I saw this pretty quickly actually when I joined Figma, is that the people that we showed it to were really interested in it and cared about it. And I remember after Vector Networks came out, after some of our other core features, there were enough things where people, I remember, they would take the laptop out of Dylan's hands when he would start showing it because they wanted to play with it. And to me, when I started seeing designers do that, even if I wasn't sure if they'd use it as a team, even if I wasn't sure if they'd buy it, we weren't selling it yet. They wanted to try it and they were excited about it.
(00:22:28):
And that kind of emotion, no reaction of wanting to play with it in these demos was really what gave me confidence that we were ready to launch. And we had a couple teams, small numbers, and happened to talk about metrics and how hard it is to deal with metrics of this size, but very small numbers. But we had teams who were using it full-time. So we knew that some people were using it full-time and people who weren't were really excited to try and were very impressed with the technical feat of it all and interested. And to me that was enough confidence that like, "Okay, it's worth it. Let's get out of stealth."
Lenny (00:23:02):
That story of the-
PART 1 OF 4 ENDS [00:23:04]
Claire Butler (00:23:00):
... let's get out of stealth.
Lenny (00:23:02):
That story of the potential customer pulling the laptop from Dylan is such a good metaphor for product market fit, which people describe as you feel pull. Someone's literally pulling it from your hands. You talked about metrics that you maybe could share. What could you share there?
Claire Butler (00:23:19):
At these early days, especially with bottoms-up and with all these things... And people ask me all the time, "How do you measure things in an early stage situation?" And I maybe have a controversial point of view here. I don't think you can, from a metrics side. Your numbers are so small. One of the quotes I always like to say, and I say this now too, when we're doing stuff, because we're launching new products [inaudible 00:23:40] and it comes up a lot, is you can't optimize your way to product market fit. I don't care at the early stages if something's optimized by 5% from an email.
(00:23:50):
That doesn't fundamentally tell me if something's working or not, so I think metrics are really hard and signal is actually way more important. Can you get a couple people who love it, not a slight improvement of a conversion of a landing page. And so I think that metrics are really hard in that way. They can help you, but when the numbers are so small, you have to, again, trust yourself a lot more and have more intuition, but then also find more signal of the things that are working, whether it's anecdotal, talking to people, examples, and that becomes much more useful than hard metrics are sometimes.
Lenny (00:24:26):
I'm working on a post around product market fit and a step-by-step somewhat of our guide to help people down this path. The way you described it is the way I'm thinking about it, is step one, get one company to use your product.
Claire Butler (00:24:37):
Yes.
Lenny (00:24:38):
Step two-
Claire Butler (00:24:38):
What do they want? That was step one, and then that's not easy. That's not easy.
Lenny (00:24:42):
Right. And then it's like, get them to continue using your product.
Claire Butler (00:24:42):
Yes.
Lenny (00:24:46):
And then it's get two companies to use your product.
Claire Butler (00:24:46):
Yes, exactly.
Lenny (00:24:49):
And then get someone to pay for your product. Yeah, so there's all these major milestones. Along those same lines, I saw an interview with Dylan talking about product market fit, and he had this interesting quote about how he realized first that they had product market fit a year later, which is when Microsoft, I think, was like, "Take our money. We want to pay for Figma." And he's like, "Okay, maybe this is going to work." Does that sound about right?
Claire Butler (00:25:11):
Well, it's interesting, and that goes up to the bottoms-up model that we could talk about. I think the difference, if you think about a company like Microsoft and what this looks like, this is just a really good example of this bottoms-up motion in market. Here's a funny story that I want to add. Our first meeting with Microsoft actually came, and this is the scrappiness of working in an early stage startup, because I slid into the DMs of my friend's ex-boyfriend. That's how we got our first meeting with Microsoft.
Lenny (00:25:41):
Well done.
Claire Butler (00:25:41):
I know, I know. I saw that they had signed up for Figma, and I was like, "Wait a minute. I think I know this person." And that's how we chatted with them and first got feedback from them, so that's just a funny anecdote.
Lenny (00:25:53):
This could be a new strategy if everyone's going to try to-
Claire Butler (00:25:55):
You literally do whatever. Uber driver, shared Lyfts, we can talk more about that. But yeah, you got to do whatever you can to get early people to try your product out and get really scrappy. But for Microsoft, over time, we would have, I think it was... What was the team that got acquired that we went into Microsoft? I'll have to remember the name, but it was a small team within Microsoft and they were... Xamarin, it was Xamarin. They were to ones who were using Figma first, and we saw that, so they were that patient zero at Microsoft. And then we had, slowly over time, more pockets within Microsoft using the tool.
(00:26:28):
But again, we've never gone through Microsoft procurement, Microsoft security. It just started popping up throughout the organization. And we have these really cool Node graphs that show this too, where you'd have these little pockets of people and then it would jump to another, like they'd have one more collaborator and then jump from another pocket. There were these really cool maps of how that spread within the organization. And eventually, we got to the point where that was a very comprehensive Node graph that had this massive thing of all of these people from Microsoft using the product.
(00:26:55):
But still, it was only on credit cards. I don't think we even had an enterprise product at this point, and so there was no salesperson for them to talk to. And Microsoft was like, "Wait a minute. We need to organize this. We need security. We need account management. We need procurement involved." And I think that that's what it was. They wanted to pay for it and they wanted us to have this enterprise product, because they had these requirements and they wanted to have a better control over it, because it was just popping up within the organization without their control. And so that's probably a good example of what that looked like as this bottoms in motion just spread to a really large organization.
Lenny (00:27:34):
This Node graph thing, is that a tool you built that's showing, helping you visualize within a company how it's all clustering? Or what is that?
Claire Butler (00:27:41):
Well, our data science team built it. I don't know if it's like... Yes, I'm sure it's an internal tool. I just remember there was a website in Node or something that we would use, and you could type it in an organization's name. You still could do this. It's within our data analytics system. You type in the name of an organization and it just pulls up everybody. And it shows, because Figma spreads through new users, but also gen one, gen two, these people invite people. And you can see these Node graphs of how somebody started Figma, maybe at the center, and then they invited someone else, and then it shows how that spread.
(00:28:16):
And so you get these clusters, and you can see the clusters are teams, but then you can see someone invited someone in a different org to a file and then that started a new center of a cluster. They're really interesting. And you can pull up, you can type in any org, any org at Figma and see what that Node graph looks like. But they're super interesting to see how those spread.
Lenny (00:28:37):
That is super cool. And I imagine that also informs how you go to market by figuring out who spreads to who and who's often [inaudible 00:28:45].
Claire Butler (00:28:44):
Totally, and that's when these internal champions, that's what the key is. And that's maybe the takeaway of how important these internal champions are, because you just need someone to land there and then them maybe passing it up. You could hover over and see this person's at the center of this Node graph and all of these people that spread from this one person at the company. And that, I think, was the unlock to be like, "Oh yeah, these internal champions, they're really the key to all of this."
Lenny (00:29:12):
I remember it spreading at Airbnb early on. I think Airbnb was one of the early customers and it was just one designer, a few designers starting to spread to the product managers. I was just a member on the team being like, "Goddamn it, we just switched to Sketch. Are we going to switch again to a new product?"
Claire Butler (00:29:25):
That was the hardest thing to feel like I don't want to switch twice. That was definitely something we had to get over.
Lenny (00:29:29):
But it happened for good reasons. Okay, one last thing that you mentioned that I wanted to follow up on. You said something about shared Lyfts, and maybe that's a funny story of some sort.
Claire Butler (00:29:38):
Oh, I don't know specifically. Actually, Dylan specifically is such a hustler, especially in those early days. And he would just, really anyone that he would meet, he would talk about Figma with them. I don't remember who it was, but there was definitely a situation where he met someone in a Lyft and then they became one of our users. He used every angle he could to try to get introduced to new designers, especially in his pre-launch days where we didn't have as many connections to just get people to try it out and get more feedback.
Lenny (00:30:06):
Okay, cool. Let's get back on track. We were talking about the go-to-market motion that you executed and modeled at Figma. There's two steps, right? Step one is get ICs to love you, and then step two is help it spread from that person, right?
Claire Butler (00:30:21):
Yep, yep.
Lenny (00:30:23):
Okay, cool. So, let's start with step one.
Claire Butler (00:30:25):
Okay, cool.
Lenny (00:30:25):
Like I said, obviously, it'd be awesome if somebody loved your product at a company. What did you actually do to make that happen in the early days?
Claire Butler (00:30:31):
Yeah. It's really interesting when you think about the early days too, because you're like, "All right. We don't exist." How do you get them to love you when literally, they've never heard of you before? Also, like you were saying, in your situation, "Oh, I used Sketch. I was maybe in Photoshop before that, something else. I just made the switch over to this new tool. We finally got it working. I really don't want to move tools again." You have that inherent thing against it there. Especially I thought about this, and I think there are four main areas that we focused on to make this start, to get it going, and then we kind of still do this stuff today.
(00:31:05):
The first thing is all about credibility. I think in the early days especially, credibility is so important in establishing that initial credibility, again, especially with a technical audience like designers. The second is actually building the product with your users. And I know you had Sho on your podcast and he talked a lot about this too, just the customer obsession that we have the care of, especially that editor tool.
(00:31:28):
The third is finding a place where you can, in a way, that you can build this relationship over time. Maybe that's specifically through a channel where they don't have to come to you, because they don't really care about you yet and they're probably not going to convert right away or start using you right away, so how do you get them to stick with you over time? So, find out the channel where you can do that and then continue to build that relationship with them. And then the four is just being extremely transparent and honest to build that relationship with people. I know those all sound really fuzzy, so maybe we can go into them specifically.
Lenny (00:31:28):
Absolutely. I was going to ask.
Claire Butler (00:32:04):
Because they sound really fuzzy when you talk about them. A lot of this stuff is hard like that, where you're like, "Oh, that just sounds like buzzwords." I can give you some examples of these four things, so maybe it helps to give some color to it.
Lenny (00:32:13):
Great.
Claire Butler (00:32:14):
Let's start with the first one, credibility. Okay. I was the first marketer at Figma. I think one of the things I learned right away, very quickly was that designers don't want to hear from marketers. They don't want to be marketed to and they have an extremely high bullshit meter. You use a word like efficiency, collaboration, all of those buzzwords, and they're just like, "I don't want to hear this." Traditional product marketing kind of stuff just doesn't work. They wanted to hear technical features. They wanted to understand how technical features work. They want to hear, "How am I going to use this?" And then they'll see the benefits, but they don't want to hear from marketers and they don't want to be marketed to.
(00:32:55):
And so I think especially with our audience in the early days, one of the things that I did was really try to not market. And that's so funny as a marketer to say that, but that was really core to build authenticity with people. And so the way that we did that in the early days was what we had was the tool, and that's pretty much what we had, and we had a design team and we had an engineering team. We did some cool stuff in the tool. First of all, the tool itself was a technical feat. It was the first time it used video game technology, WebGL. Evan's a prodigy. The fact that he got a design tool to work on the internet was just amazing, and so there was a lot of engineering interest there, credibility building of, "How did you get this to work?"
[NEW_PARAGRAPH]I got him to make technical content and that, I think, went to number one on Hacker News, that people were just interested in him. And then we had a design team, and our design team was our target audience. And so we talked a lot about how we chose to build features, all the things that went into it. And so many of the primitives of design tools have been like that forever, and so we changed the stuff. One of them would be how we did grids or how we did vector networks, and we'd go into these really deep details of how we chose to make those product decisions, all the craft decisions that went into it.
(00:34:08):
I remember one of my bars were deciding if something would hit this or not, if they would be interested was, "Did I understand it?" You know what I mean? And if I understood it, it was probably too basic, or if I could have written it myself, it was probably too basic. I remember we did one on grids in the early days, and we went really deep on Joseph Muller Brockmann and his influence on grids. And now, I very much know who Joseph Muller Brockmann is because I work with designers, but at the time, I had to Google it. I was like, "Who is this?" But that was one of my bars for if something would be good enough for our technical content, was if I could have written it, it's not good enough. And so that was key for us in building credibility, because we had this design team.
(00:34:47):
And then when six months after we launched, I actually got to hire someone to do marketing with me, the first person I hired was actually a designer advocate. So it was not a marketer, it was someone who was a designer. The designers and the engineers that I was trying to get to help me with stuff also had to design and build the product, so they didn't have a ton of time. But this designer advocate was working full-time with me on this stuff, and he came from our user base. He was one of the very few people in the early days who just loved the product and was very passionate about it. And that became his full-time job was to represent, to meet with users, talk to them, to write content and create content, and to bring that back to the product, and that was what he did.
(00:35:32):
And that designer advocacy positions actually scaled with Figma, and we still have it today. It's extreme. I think it's the magic dust, we call it, that we sprinkle on go-to-market to make a lot of our go-to-market function work. But yeah, we didn't focus on marketing, or traditional marketing. We're very focused on the technical aspects.
Lenny (00:35:50):
There's so many little lessons there. The designer advocate hire reminds me of something that Datadog did, where they hired engineers to write their blog posts.
Claire Butler (00:35:59):
That's a great idea. Yes, exactly what we did. Yes.
Lenny (00:36:03):
So, ways you build credibility, just kind of mirroring back what you just shared, one is writing content. Basically, putting out blog posts that designers would be like, "Oh, wow. This is really interesting," and start to feel like, "Oh, Figma keeps coming up in these really interesting pieces of content."
Claire Butler (00:36:15):
Yeah, even if they were using it, and I think that that was important. When we launched, people wanted to test it because it was cool and see what it is, but then they bounced. They're like, "All right. This isn't advanced enough. I'll come back later." Which is why we're give them reasons to come back, being like, "Oh, yeah, but the pen tools always worked like this, but we did it like that. You should test that out." And so we kept giving them these nuggets of reasons to come back in. Remember, this was also before multiplayer, and so we couldn't collaborate, so it was use the tools to do these things. That really helps people come back into the tool and spend a little bit more time in it.
Lenny (00:36:49):
How many posts would you say you put out in that first six months, just to give people a sense of here's how much? It's probably not a ton, right? It's probably some few really good ones.
Claire Butler (00:36:57):
They took a long time. Also, I had to work with an engineer or a designer to do every single one. Maybe 10 at most. But those ones that went out, we tried to get on Hacker News. We tried to get on Designer News at the time. Twitter, we can jump into that, but it was also extremely big for us. And so it was more about quality than it was about quantity.
Lenny (00:37:19):
Awesome. Okay, so one is put out great content. People are like, "Oh, wow. Figma's got some new ideas and maybe I should pay attention." The other is having someone that's that function actually talk to them.
Claire Butler (00:37:28):
Yes. That was when we started accelerating this much, much more is when we brought in that designer advocate to help us with this full-time.
Lenny (00:37:35):
Cool. Okay. Let's move to the next one, which I think is building with your customers.
Claire Butler (00:37:39):
That one, I know you talked to Show, he talked a lot about this, this idea of customer obsession and of building with your customers. And it also goes back to that whole decision that we talked about earlier, about when to come out of stealth. You can only build so much with your customers when you're in stealth, because you don't have that many that know about you. But especially, even in the early days when we only had a couple people, we really did listen. And back to also what you were saying earlier about those steps to product market fit, get one person to use it. That's really what we were focused on, especially in the very, very early days.
(00:38:10):
I remember the first one, I think I've told this story before, but was that we had Coda. They were our first user and they were based in Palo Alto. Dylan and I drove down and demoed the product to them, and they were the first ones. Their designer, Jeremy, was like, "Yes, we'll take this on full-time." And I remember, we were both like, "What? Really? You will?" That was the first person who said yes to us, and so we were so excited. This was a huge milestone. We went to Oren's Hummus in Palo Alto on the way back to the office to bring some back for the team to celebrate. We were just so stoked.
(00:38:41):
And then we got back to the office, and I think Dylan gets a text from Jeremy being like, "Oh, yeah. I tried to share this with Philippe, my engineer, and he can't get the file to open, so I guess he can't use it." And we're like, "What is it? What happened? We finally got someone." And I remember Dylan was like, "Everybody drop everything. We have to fix this." And after some looking at the servers and things, they were like, "Nothing's wrong," and then they realized it was a problem with Philippe's MacBook. Evan [inaudible 00:39:08] had a car, so Dylan had to drive Evan down to Palo Alto to fix the MacBook of Philippe just to get them to use the product. So anyway, get them to stick around. That's the first one.
(00:39:17):
But the building with people, the way that we did that was largely through just each person. We really cared and listened to their feedback, especially when there were only a few people. One way we did that was, I remember we implemented Intercom back in the early days, and there were so few users and so few of us that everybody was on Intercom all day too. And so we'd get a chat and I would jump in sometimes. Dylan would jump in, an engineer would jump in. And he'd open up a chat with people and they'd actually debug the product with us live. They'd be like, "I have this bug," and this engineer would be like, "Let me QA it right now." And so that was one example. We all did support back in that day, and the engineers would talk to users directly, get their feedback, and then go immediately fix things like bugs.
(00:40:02):
And so those are just examples of in the early days, what that looks like, and that just scales a lot over time as you're growing and you're talking to more people. That advocate ended up helping us a ton when they came on board, because some of this stuff, I mean, none of this stuff scales. Your engineers can't do support forever. In the early days, that becomes really important. But when we brought that advocate in, their whole job was talking to users, getting them to try to use the product, but then taking their feedback back when it wasn't something that wasn't working.
(00:40:34):
That helped us scale a lot, so that became really essential, and then telling people, "Oh, we fixed this." It made them feel more ownership of the tool too, being like, "Oh, yeah. I asked them to do this. They did it." That's just another way where you just build a strong relationship with people, because they feel very invested in your journey with you.
Lenny (00:40:54):
Which goes back to building credibility.
Claire Butler (00:40:55):
Absolutely, absolutely.
Lenny (00:40:57):
There's so many important lessons there. You talked about scaling this, but interestingly, this is very much doing things that don't scale; driving to their office, fixing their wifi on their laptop.
Claire Butler (00:41:08):
Early days, nothing scales in the early days. You just have to do it anyway.
Lenny (00:41:10):
Just as a tangent, we're talking about getting people to love your product initially. Why is love so important? That's a really high bar, and I imagine you have an interesting insight on just why it needs to be that level of appreciation.
Claire Butler (00:41:23):
Yeah, and it doesn't have to be over time. These are all things that maybe they just use it first or they're interested, but by the time you're getting to the organization level, or I'm spreading this to my other spheres of influence, like my community, people I know, you're kind of putting yourself on the line. You're taking a risk when you're doing that, especially if it's your job. You're bringing other people in, and you're not going to do that unless you really believe in something. And so just using it isn't enough to get someone over that stage of going from just a user to a champion. And so I think it is this love thing becomes important, because you just don't get the scalability and spread of someone doing this for you unless they have that level of passion.
Lenny (00:42:09):
That's an awesome lesson. I hope people are taking that in. You shared this story of Coda and Sho. Actually, he wasn't on a podcast. He wrote a newsletter and he shared all this stuff.
Claire Butler (00:42:18):
I read it. Yes, yes, yes.
Lenny (00:42:19):
Yeah. People often confuse the two. They assume it's kind of the same thing. But he talked about how when he joined Figma, this happened. Dylan's like, "We need to fix this problem." He's like, "They're not even paying us. Who is this? We have real things to build. Why do we have to hop on this bug?" And then later, he realized why that was so important, and that was a big lesson he learned from Dylan of just this needs to be taken really seriously. If someone's trying to use your product, help them actually be successful.
Claire Butler (00:42:45):
And we didn't have very many of them, but it's like, yeah, back to what you were saying earlier, how do you get one person to actually use it? And so we very much cared that that one person stuck with it and didn't bounce.
Lenny (00:42:55):
Today's episode is brought to you by AssemblyAI. If you're looking to build AI-powered features in your audio and video products, then you need to know about AssemblyAI, which makes it easy to transcribe and understand speech at scale. What I love about AssemblyAI is you can use their simple API to access the latest AI breakthroughs from top-tier research labs. Product teams at startups and enterprises are using AssemblyAI to automatically transcribe and summarize phone calls and virtual meetings, detect topics in podcasts, pinpoint when sensitive content is spoken, and lots more.
(00:43:27):
All of AssemblyAI's models which are accessed through their API are production-ready. So many PMs I know are considering or already building with AI, and AssemblyAI is the fastest way to build with AI for audio use cases. Now's the time to check out AssemblyAI, which makes it easy to bring the highest accuracy transcription plus valuable insights to your customers, just like Spotify, CallRail, and Writer do for theirs. Visit assemblyai.com/lenny to try their API for free and start testing their models with their no-code playground. That's assemblyai. com/lenny.
(00:44:02):
So, coming back to this go-to-market model that we're talking about, we're still talking about get ICs at a company to love you. Step one was build credibility. Step two, I don't know if these are steps or just things you do in some sequence or not, step two is build with your users. What come next?
Claire Butler (00:44:20):
Oh, the next one is, this can take time. I think that's a big one. And also in the early days, they're not going to necessarily use you right away, and so it might take time. And then also, when you do get a couple of people who start to use your product, they're going to also start wondering what other people think about your product. And when you're the only marketing hire, and this is something marketers ask me a lot when they're the only marketer in an organization is, "How do you focus and prioritize, because there's so many things you could do? How do you decide what to do?" And so the thing that I think about a lot in this early phase, in thinking about ICs is, "How do you get to them, and where can you go where they already are as opposed to making them come to you?"
(00:45:00):
Because I'm a firm believer, I think now, we have spaces where people can come to us, but in the early days especially, they're not going to come to your space. They don't know you. They don't care about you. They don't want to go to your Slack channel or something. You have to go to them. And so for us, Dylan really identified immediately that Twitter was the place where that existed, and that had nothing to do with us specifically. The design community existed on Twitter way before we did, and that's something that they just did on their own and that grew over time. They had this large network on Twitter of influencers, and that's also how people learned about things.
(00:45:38):
Also, design's changing all the time, and so people would share best practices, things that they were doing, resources, and that just became kind of a home for designers. So, we really went all in on Twitter. That really became a key, our channel that we focused on, and really only focused on one. That was it, and we got pretty advanced on how we did this. Dylan is also a great engineer, if you don't know that about him, or a scrappy engineer who-
PART 2 OF 4 ENDS [00:46:04]
Claire Butler (00:46:00):
A great engineer if you don't know that about him, or a scrappy engineer who could figure things out. And he had this idea and he built this tool or this scraper where he identified a couple influencers in the design community. People he thought were people he wanted to learn from and to talk to. And he inputted them into this scraper thing that he made. And then back to this, another node graph, he figured out who followed them and who followed those people and also the influence that these people had over other people, and made this massive node graph of these pockets of different topics of design. And when he looked at it, you'd see a cluster. So you'd have the cluster of iconographers, graphic designers, product managers, and you'd see them all there and you'd see who the influencers were in those areas. And what we did is we found who were most influential to start.
(00:46:51):
And that was another source, back to using whatever you can to get people to try your products. That's who we asked for feedback in the early days too. Just DMed them. We were like, hey, Raji, we'd love feedback, your feedback on Figma. And that was one of the ways we got to people, but that's also people who we followed, people who we tried to build this connection with on Twitter in the early days. And that's also where we pushed out that technical content that I was talking about. And then we tried to just drive and spur a conversation about these things. First it was our launches, but then later it was this technical content or whatever it was that we were producing so that we could go to people instead of making them come to us just in their feed. And that became super important to us. We'd also interact with people. So Dylan has a huge presence, and especially in the early days and now even has a huge presence talking to users, we all did show too our engineering team. And so it wasn't just the brand handle, it was the people. And I think that that's really important to put a personal face behind things, connect with people, answer questions for people, live there. And over time, we just built this very engaged group of people on Twitter with Figma. And that's still a huge place for us where the design community lives and where we get a lot from our users too. And I think the focus on that, and I think why it's so important is it allows people to passively follow you over time without having to invest in you, within the tool. So it was our way, especially because we knew it would take a while to build a product and get to a place for people to switch full time for them to follow along with us and build that confidence with us over time and keep coming back to the tool.
Lenny (00:48:24):
That Twitter graph story is so legendary. I think Dylan even shared the code online. I'm going to try to find that tweet.
Claire Butler (00:48:30):
Yeah, it's so good. We still use it. We used it again when we were launching another product, we were like, oh, can we go pull that Twitter graph for another audience? I don't know if we ended up using, how much we ended up using it, but I definitely looked at it and I was like, oh, this is so interesting to see for developers or whatever it was that we were looking at.
Lenny (00:48:46):
And also what you just mentioned is really interesting that he wasn't using it to go sell people on the product. It was first get feedback on the product, which ends up selling them.
Claire Butler (00:48:54):
Oh no, we never heard sold the product. It was always about feedback. And I think that that's so key to all of this is all about feedback.
Lenny (00:49:02):
Awesome. There's so many lessons here. There's a fourth bullet I think, around building relationships with users.
Claire Butler (00:49:08):
Oh, just transparency and authenticity. So I think that that really comes into when you get to the scale part, I'm talking about early days, being transparent with your users, and a lot of that does come down to the stuff we talked about too, about downtime, about what that looks like. And we just did that naturally with people one-on-one in those early days. But I think where it gets harder, and we stuck with it because it's in our DNA and how we act, is when you get to scale and you have to still do that stuff with a lot of people who care and who do these things with you. But I think it's just so important that you are honest and also you don't hide behind the brand. That you're human and authentic and transparent with people. And we can pull up the examples. I think the better examples are probably at scale than even in the early days because that's when it gets harder to do that.
Lenny (00:49:52):
So let's chat about that. Just... So this is about getting started.
Claire Butler (00:49:56):
Yeah.
Lenny (00:49:57):
How do you do this at scale? Or does it change completely? Do you continue doing this in a different way? How do you approach it as the company grows?
Claire Butler (00:50:02):
You just totally still do it, right? I think that that's just so important, that's how it stays, right? In the early days you do this stuff and you kind of get the flywheel going. You get these people, you have these people who love you, but today that's still how Figma spreads the most, right? We're going into new markets, we're going into new places, we're launching a new tool, and that becomes so important to how we still drive adoption. And so some of those things, the tactics, look a little bit different, but the themes are still the same and what that looks like at scale. A couple of just examples of that are those advocates, right? That's I think a huge one. When I was a marketer that advocate was just my partner. He gut-checked everything that I did. He'd be like, no, that's too thirsty here.
(00:50:46):
You're using a fluff word again. You know what I mean? Also, he was how we pitched the company. He was the people we talked to, he'd go to lunch at Etsy or whatever and just get feedback on things. And that function has really grown with Figma. So now that's a whole team at Figma, it's a large team and it's scaled with us with every product that we launch. So now we have developer advocates, FigJam advocates, and regionally. So we go into a new region and they're part of the landing team. We're in Japan, we need to find the Japan, now we have two of them, it's the Japan designer advocate because it's just so core to how we do things and we've scaled that. So I think on the credibility side, I think that those advocates and scaling those advocates are the magic dust that, I always call them the magic dust, that make sure that we are able to build those relationships and stay authentic around everything we do.
Lenny (00:51:40):
And these advocates, again, they're just, their background is designer, and then they end up being an advocate designer?
Claire Butler (00:51:45):
It's now developer, FigJam person. But they're passionate that... Their profile is, they're passionate users who oftentimes they find us more than we find them, right? You couldn't just post this job online and go source for it. It's like this will emerge from the community and then they love it so much and they know the product so well. They're technical experts. But yes, they were, for the designer ones, they were all previously product designers.
Lenny (00:52:10):
Awesome. Is there anything else you want to share around at scale, how these things change? You mentioned transparency ends up being really important. What else there do you think is really important?
Claire Butler (00:52:18):
I think there's two examples. The one is building with users. Because I think this is a good one that I like to get into because you're like, how do you scale that? You get so many bug requests, you go to our feature request page on our forum, and it's just so many. But also as you're building product, you're always like, oh, well I could go do all of these fixes and bug updates, but I also have to go build new stuff to grow. And that's always a tension with any company as you're looking at a roadmap. One of the ways that we've done that and still continue to focus on things that people care about that's so related to the craft of quality is through we do quality weeks with engineering.
(00:52:53):
And then we decided a couple years ago, we had this idea where we were like, oh, what if we package all of those quality updates up into one thing and launch them together and we could even show the tweet or the forum request that spurred us to do this. And that was where our idea of little big updates came, which is a launch that we do every year. Figma, they come from these quality weeks with engineering, that's where the engineers can just go and look at Twitter, talk to our support team, get all these small things that annoy people to fix them, and they just fix them all and they get so many done. And then we launch them all together. And that's one of our most popular launches that we do because people are like, yes, I care about this. This improves my quality of life every single day.
(00:53:37):
Back to that discussion of two clicks versus one click and things like that, they're that small, but we still do it. And I love that little big updates when I think, Airbnb did something like that too, with the a hundred updates thing on their website.
Lenny (00:53:49):
Airbnb has shifted fully to that, which is only big launches, just wait twice a year and launch a bunch of stuff. That's exactly, that's fully how they operate.
Claire Butler (00:53:58):
That's another way that we do the building with, and I think that even giving the engineers, we give them the ability to pick them, right? So they're like, oh, yep, this tweet, I want to fix this bug.
Lenny (00:54:07):
That's got to be so satisfying.
Claire Butler (00:54:08):
Yeah, exactly. And in the marketing even, we'll pull examples like, oh yeah, that for one, the person who said that. So that one's big. And then on the transparency side, I think where this gets hard at scale is all of a sudden you have a lot of people who care about your products. And I think it's really easy as a brand because you are a brand at this point, as you're getting bigger to be like, oh, I can hide behind my handle or the Figma handle, or do I really have to say something about this? And so just two examples of things like that where you just, we've chosen to be transparent when we didn't have to be or you might not, or downtime. Downtime is always a big deal. And I remember there was a specific instance, I think it was last year, maybe two years ago, where there was this issue with these servers and an AWS cluster went down and we didn't know what was going on.
(00:55:01):
And so we had downtime multiple times in a week and people were pissed, right? Things were not going well. Again, back on Twitter, we built... The double-edged sword of Twitter is you build this strong communication channel with your users and they communicate right back to you if they're not happy. So it's inundating us. And I remember we did a public postmortem and we always do that. If something happens or something goes wrong, we're like, yeah, that was bad. Here's what happened and here's the technical reason and here's how we fixed it. And then we tweeted that and promoted it and took just full accountability for it. And we always choose to make those choices when they're hard. And that was just one example. But I think the hardest example, and back to your question of the most stressful days at Figma, the true most stressful day Figma, for me, was the day that we announced the acquisition.
(00:55:52):
That was probably one of the harder moments of my career, where... My brand is social, that's my job, is running social. And all of a sudden you have this onslaught on social and you have to figure out what to do. And I remember the way that we announced it was we just retweeted Dylan. That was all that we had said
(00:56:07):
Raji on our team, I remember I was talking to him about it and he was like, "We've got to talk to our users. We just have to talk to them directly. We have to show we're the same company. We just have to not hide behind the brand." And he was totally right. And so I remember we decided that day that the next day we just had to have an open public forum where we could talk directly with our users and let them ask us any questions. And so we'd held the Twitter space the next day with Dylan and Cho and Raji and Tom, and we just had it open and people could ask us anything they wanted and we were able to be just really honest and transparent with them about everything that we could.
(00:56:44):
And I think that that is just a really good example of how even when it's really, really, really, really hard, you still have to just be transparent. And I think that that's when the tide started to turn of people giving us a chance to prove that everything would be great, even when it's the highest stakes and the hardest thing of still listening to people, maintaining that connection and not hiding behind the brand.
Lenny (00:57:06):
It feels like transparency is core to the values of Figma. Have you codified your values and is that one of them and is there anything there?
Claire Butler (00:57:18):
Interesting. We have codified our values. It isn't explicitly listed out, which is interesting, but I think of it as our value, especially with our users. We think about our values a lot as have fun with it, build community, love your craft, and all of those definitely come through, play, but maybe that should be one because I think it's so core to how we make decisions and our framework of when we have a decision which way we're going to go.
Lenny (00:57:43):
And also we mentioned Cho a couple of times, but on Twitter, he is always asking people, what do you need in the editor? Here's what's going great.
Claire Butler (00:57:49):
Absolutely. It's still how we get so much feedback is talking to people directly and Kris will come on when people have bugs and just respond to them. He's our CTO. People are just actively on there, listening to people, fixing bugs, responding.
Lenny (00:58:06):
I want to shift to kind of the second step of the go-to-market motion, but before I do that, I have a couple of things I wanted to touch on briefly. One is you haven't mentioned Config, this conference that you ran, which is a good example I think, of scaling a lot of the things you're talking about. It used to be Twitter, social graph, find people on Twitter. Now it's like this epic conference that I think people just love. I was on Twitter the days of Config, and it's just my whole feed was just like, oh my god, Config is the best thing. So many talks and so many people.
Claire Butler (00:58:34):
Config is such a good example. I remember, I can happily talk about Config. The way that we do Config, I think... I'd never run a conference before, maybe that's probably part of it. And I brought somebody on who had, but she and I were both sitting together and being like, okay, so we're doing a conference. How do we get the content for this conference? What do we do? And we didn't know. And so we just decided, oh, so much of what we do is listen to our users. Let's put out this call for proposals and see what they want to talk about. And so that's how we got and get a lot of our content for the conference. And a lot of it comes back to what I was talking about earlier, which is very technical deep content that targets individual contributors for the practitioners of the tool.
(00:59:20):
And through that process, we build these relationships with these speakers, our advocates help them shape their talks. And then I think that we do produce really strong technical content through that process and through Config. And we're also able to, with these people that we work with, help them grow their own profiles and that also helps them stay more connected to us, helps them become thought leaders in their own right. And so I think we're able to just draw so many different people who are the practitioners and the ICs because we're not just putting thought leadership out there. We're talking directly to how to use the tool and the things that individual contributors are still dealing with.
Lenny (00:59:58):
Yeah, it's kind of a lot like this podcast and my newsletter. It's like how to actually do stuff, not just a bunch of big ideas.
Claire Butler (01:00:03)
Really. Yeah, no fluff.
Lenny (01:00:04):
I remember seeing a tweet about it where someone filmed being inside of and they're like, it's a rock concert, it's not a conference.
Claire Butler (01:00:10):
Oh, that too. We also just have fun. That's another big part of it as well. I remember literally saying, how can I make this more fun? So that was a big part of it.
Lenny (01:00:19):
Sounds like another value.
Claire Butler (01:00:20):
Yes.
Lenny (01:00:21):
Okay. Let's talk about step two of this go-to-market motion that you've developed, which I think if I were to just simply describe it as help people spread it within the organization. Is that right?
Claire Butler (01:00:31):
Yep. Yep.
Lenny (01:00:33):
Cool. All right. How do you do that?
Claire Butler (01:00:34):
All right, so again, I've got four things here and I'll list them out and then we can go through them. The first is make it easy to try the tool and to share it without a lot of gates so that you can do this. The second is those DAs. I want to talk about how those DAs work in our sales process.
Lenny (01:00:50):
Oh, Designer Advocate.
Claire Butler (01:00:51):
Yeah, sorry. That's our acronym for them, designer advocates, because they are so core to how we sell and how this works. The third is finding the operational thing that allows you to scale. For us that's design systems, the thing that was the biggest blocker to somebody using Figma and turning it into your biggest reason to adopt. And then the last one was still about maintaining and growing that connection with those internal champions over time. So those are the four things, and again, it looks different, similar concepts with different ideas when you look at that in the early days versus what we do today with it with scale.
Lenny (01:01:30):
Awesome. Let's get into it.
Claire Butler (01:01:32):
All right, cool. So the first one's making it, the products easy to try and share. So we talked about this a little bit, but if you go to figma.com today, it's very easy to sign up for a free account. I have a free account myself on my personal side for designing my house, which is a thing I used to before, but you just go and you can try the tool. And I think that's so important for us to allow someone to use it over time for a long time until they have confidence enough to be able to want to spread it within their organizations. But then it's also pretty easy to create a free team and share stuff with your organization. In the early days, you could just share a link and that was it, and you could use the tool and everything was free. Once we implemented pricing, which was about two years after we launched, we had this thing called a starter team.
(01:02:21):
And this is actually something that was switched. So initially the way that it worked was our starter team was that you could have unlimited files but only collaborate with two or three people, and that was the starter team and you wanted to add more people to collaborate with, and then you hit the paywall. We realized that wait a minute, that's hurting us. And so we switched it and now it's like you can have something like three files, but unlimited collaborators. And that was huge for us. And that's a place where you can see it in the metrics very clearly, where it's like, oh, this is really easy for people now to share before they have to start paying. This is huge.
(01:03:01):
And so then you get people to start using it for free with their teams and the teams get confidence in it before then they all have to start uploading it to their procurement team or whoever it is to start paying for it. So not introducing payment too fast and giving people that time to build that advocacy and to try it out with their teams, with people before they have to pay, I think is huge there.
Lenny (01:03:24):
That's such a good and important topic that I want to pull a thread on a little bit. So what you discovered there is you don't want to get in the way of the growth engine of the product. If it's going to grow through people spreading it, you don't want to cut it off at three. That seems like a monumental decision that changed everything. Any sense of just how you came about to realizing that? Or was it just obvious, okay, of course we need to change this?
Claire Butler (01:03:45):
Well, I think it was intuitive and it was more about the change management process of how to do that when people... At this point people were using the tool and using that starter tier and setting people or what that looks like. And for a long time you could also get around that and just collaborate with people in drafts and just share a link too. And we wanted to shut that down. So it was a bigger decision on just change management, but I think we intuitively knew it and it was much more about to the change management of how to make that happen.
Lenny (01:04:13):
Is there anything else you learned about what should be in free and paywall versus what should be in freemium? Just broad thoughts.
Claire Butler (01:04:21):
Well, I think the other interesting thing is too, and I think I said this, but so much of ours is, so we have a couple tiers. We have a free tier and then we have a pro tier, and then we have our org tier. And the free tier, free tier includes this free starter team. And so you can just do that, go to figma.com, and go do that. Pro is all enter credit card, and then org is you talk to sales. Org and enterprise, you talk to sales. And so I think the other key thing here is we get a lot of upsells to org from pro. And so it's also a thought of what you put in org versus pro. So that's the other decision because pro is also relatively inexpensive, so that grows a lot too really quickly and it's still very important to us, but still most of our marketing qualified leads that are sales leads likely come from pro or from free.
(01:05:11):
And so it's the decisions that we think about are like, okay, what do you want to sell on? And to go from free to pro, it has to be pretty natural because you don't have any people involved. And so it's like they have to just do that on their own. And then when you go from pro to org or enterprise, it's more about the organization and the scale. And that's where that design systems conversation comes in that we could talk about. But that was the thing that we really indexed on for org and enterprise of why you would want to upgrade from pro to org. So it is this multi-step process, but it's also nice because you can increase your investment in the product as you're building your own confidence in the tool.
Lenny (01:05:51):
The other really important nuance in the way that you structured pricing, it's unlimited viewers, but it's just editors that you charge for.
Claire Butler (01:05:56):
Yes. So true. So many people, especially if you're a designer and you're working with our product manager, you can comment and so much of this is to yes, you can spread it and you can use Figma for free for a really long time because you can just comment on the tool. And it also gets us through many more places with the organization and helps us be more useful to more people because yeah, viewers are free.
Lenny (01:06:21):
This one topic could be a whole podcast. And I have so many questions. Let me ask maybe one more and then I'll move on. How often do you revisit the packaging and pricing at this point? And do you have any advice there?
Claire Butler (01:06:32)
Yeah, I mean it's interesting because the product's still growing. We just launched variables and dev mode back in at Config this year, and that influenced pricing and packaging and still is, right? And so FigJam too. And so I would say the core foundations aren't something we revisit a lot, but we're continually adding new features and we have to think about what tiers should they go in, what does that look like? So those things influence that all the time.
Lenny (01:06:56):
By the way, I recently upgraded to the non-free pack because I hit that limit of three with the designer that I work with.
Claire Butler (01:07:02):
Yeah, it's also just kind of annoying because you have to keep moving things in and out drafts.
Lenny (01:07:06):
That's exactly what it is.
Claire Butler (01:07:07):
It's like, oh, this is worth my $12 a month or whatever, just to not have to bother with it.
Lenny (01:07:11)
Yeah. Once you realize, okay, yeah, it's not that much in the scheme of things, I'm just going to, but it's interesting how it's not that much, but I still like, nah, I don't really want to pay that if I don't have to.
Claire Butler (01:07:20):
Oh, for sure. We all do that. Right? Especially because so much of pro, so many people have individual pro accounts, right? Because not necessarily a business or maybe it's a small business or you're an individual and it's very different from an organization where someone else is paying for it.
Lenny (01:07:33):
Yeah. So funny. Okay, step two is around designer advocates. Talk about that.
Claire Butler (01:07:39):
Yeah, so I just think these DAs, so sorry, I keep calling them DAs because that's what we call them internally.
Lenny (01:07:44)
It's cool. Now we know.
Claire Butler (01:07:45):
Advocates are just so special and such a big part of Figma. And like I said, it took us so long to start charging or bring in a sales team. And when we first hired our first salesperson and our first sales rep was the same day that our next designer advocate started, who... Eventually the first designer advocate left and did something else. And we brought in another designer advocate and he started on the first day that the sales team started. And at this point, more people were using Figma. We'd had that pro tier going for a while, and Tom, who is still here today and is leading that team, Tom Lowry, he was a passionate Figma user, but he was a passionate Figma user who brought Figma to his organization. But the first one, we were so early, he didn't have an organization to bring it to, he just loved the product. But Tom, he brought...
PART 3 OF 4 ENDS [01:09:04]
Claire Butler (01:08:27):
He really didn't have an organization to bring it to. He just loved the product. But Tom, he was the internal champion at his company, who got his company to adopt Figma. So, when he joined Figma, that was really the mindset that he brought to this, was also like, "How do you use this as a team?"
(01:08:42):
And why I think this is so special, and was so foundational that they started together, is that they would go talk to users together, and they would bring him into the sales process. But he was never a salesperson. Never had a quota, doesn't live on the sales team. Technical expert who has such a deep passion, and a deep, deep, deep, deep understanding of the tool, that he would come in and just help explain the product to other designers.
(01:09:08):
And it goes back to that same theme that I talked about earlier with marketing, where I realized that I would never have the credibility with designers that a designer has. Same is true with sales. They're never going to know the product as well as a designer will.
(01:09:21):
So, Tom being there, and Tom being able to be like, "Oh, I understand exactly what you're talking about, and what your problems are. Here's how this works." Or "Here's where you're blocked," or "Here's an idea or best practice how to use this."
(01:09:34):
That just became so powerful and so useful for them and for the sales team, that they ended up calling it the Tom Factor, [inaudible 01:10:15]. So, it wasn't necessarily a structured process at the beginning. They'd just like, "Hey Tom, can you come help talk to this company with us, or help show them how this works?"
(01:09:51):
But then they called him the Tom Factor because he was so powerful, and their deals were so much more likely to close if he joined the calls. But it wasn't his full-time job either. He also is connected to the products. Because he's this special person who was a designer, was a [inaudible 01:10:40] user of the product, and then talks to hundreds of customers. So, he has the best way of synthesizing product feedback, and then bringing it back to the product team because he has all of that context. So, I think that that role is just so special, and it's something that we've actually chosen to scale because it's just so valuable. In the same way it's valuable for marketing, it's valuable for sales.
Lenny (01:10:29):
I think we're going to spur a lot of companies building these teams with this conversation.
Claire Butler (01:10:32):
I can't speak highly enough about it. Marketing, we think about it, as we're scaling this role, we're marketing product and sales. That's where these people come in. And I think when you have a technical IC audience, I don't see how else you could build any credibility or get anywhere with people if you don't have someone who deeply understands it, integrated in marketing and in sales.
Lenny (01:10:52):
Who does this team report to?
Claire Butler (01:10:54):
Me.
Lenny (01:10:55):
Awesome.
Claire Butler (01:10:56):
Yeah.
Lenny (01:10:58):
Okay. So, we're talking about how to help your product spread within an organization. Talked about developer advocates. You talked about making it easier to spread. What else?
Claire Butler (01:11:06):
Let's talk about design systems. Let's say you're a designer and you're designing an app, and you need a button. Rather than going in and making a new button every single time, you need a library of the button ... with the color, the spacing, the padding, all that stuff already predefined.
(01:11:24):
Maybe it's tied to code, maybe it's not. But you just want to pull that in. And then, maybe there's someone on the design system, and maybe there's a brand designer or someone who's like, "Oh, we changed this from this font to that font." That you know that, and it just updates everywhere. Or a padding change, and it updates everywhere.
(01:11:38):
And that's the most simplistic version, is a button. But this stuff gets way more complex. This turns into, "Here is our welcome screen. Here is our header bar." All of the different components that then become whole pages. And it's a huge efficiency.
(01:11:54):
If you have a very robust design system, you're just pulling in all of those components, instead of having to design those from scratch every single time. And it's consistent. If you have hundreds of designers in an organization, they're all making buttons, they're going to be slightly different. And then engineering's like, "Wait. What patenting do I use?" It's very inefficient. So, a lot of organizations use these design systems, and they become very advanced over time. But Figma did not have design systems in the early days. Or if we did, they ended up having them at the file level. But you couldn't share them with other people.
(01:12:25):
So, that was a huge blocker for us for a really long time, was these big companies were like, "Oh, yeah. This is cool, but I need a design system. How else am I supposed to work with engineering?” Because this is so big in engineering, too. Because when you're able to identify all of these different buttons and these components in advance, you could tie them to code. And then it's easier for them because they don't have to inspect it every time. So, it's way better for everybody. It was our biggest blocker. But then we decided, "No, we're going to focus on this." And in the early days, that was just meetups still. And it was like, "We need to do design systems meetups." And we were all like, "What are design systems?" Or that I'm just like, "What is design systems?"
(01:13:03):
And then I went and read a pattern way of thinking and Brad Frost's atomic structures design systems, and started learning about it. But anyway, in the early days, we just literally brought … There's a community of design systems people, and we brought all of them together. Met with our product team, met with Dylan, started just having these really informal meetups around design systems to learn from these people and start just learning, hearing from them. And then they started building out more features from it. And then we just started really leaning into the technical aspects of how companies use and scale design systems. Because, while design systems are so important, it's also very hard to get an organization to do it. Because it's like an efficiency thing that they also have to invest in, that is immediately connected to a launch that day.
(01:13:43):
Every company is at a different phase of maturity of where their design system is. But we really leaned into the content, into the features, into eventually showing how people do it in Figma. Both at the beginning level, but then at the very advanced level, to really lean into that. And then, that also went into marketing. That was ... We have DesignSystems.com, it's a Figma property. We had a whole conference around it in the fall called Schema, where we just bring in these advanced design systems practitioners and they just show you how're they're working. And that's so important, too, because design systems are one of the main reasons you upgrade from pro to org or enterprise, is you're at this phase where you're getting more organized. You're more advanced, you're a bigger company, so that's one of our big gating features for upgrade, so that became just the key thing we leaned in on.
(01:14:30):
And that's bottoms up specific, because the people making the design systems are not like the VP, still. The next phase of bottoms up are the ICs, and then the design systems people. And now those internal champions are largely the design systems people, too. They're either the biggest blockers or the biggest champions, depending on if you can win them over.
Lenny (01:14:51):
I love just that lesson of the thing that is blocking you from being adopted, see if you can turn that into an advantage.
Claire Butler (01:14:57):
Totally. Totally.
Lenny (01:14:58):
Feels like, looking at Figma, it's like, wow, with so many advantages for a product to spread ... It's single player, you can use it on your own. It's got multiplayer, you could invite people. It gets better as more people are using it.
(01:15:09):
Versus, I don't know, a company like Slack, where it's useless on your own. Is there anything there about just, these lessons you're sharing are most helpful for a product that is useful on its own? Or could it be useful for all kinds of products? Anything there?
Claire Butler (01:15:25):
That's what I was talking about with the IC. An IC has to get a lot of value out of this on their own. And I think it has to be technical. Or, that's a hypothesis that I have. It's certainly easier if it's a technical product. They get a lot farther, because people want to talk much more about the product.
(01:15:41):
They care so much about the craft, and they want to spend a lot of time learning and understanding it. And I think that's true with designers, that's true with engineers. That's not true with every audience. Not every audience is ... deeply cares about wanting to learn the craft in the best way possible for a specific thing. So, I think that one of the ... I don't know about requirements, but things that makes this a lot more likely to be successful, is that your IC, there's a tool, and they can use it on their own. And it's technical. I think that helps a ton.
Lenny (01:16:12):
Coming back to the strategy of helping Figma spread within an organization, I think you mentioned there's one more item around champions?
Claire Butler (01:16:20):
Oh, yeah. Just the last thing there is, you have to keep that relationship going with those champions forever. Because they don't go away. And sometimes they get mad at you, too. I remember, there's one. I think it was at one of our companies, one of our bigger companies. And he was upset about something, and he tweeted it.
(01:16:41):
And then we immediately had to go talk to him and understand what he wanted, and what was wrong. They don't go away. But then also, I think a lot about how, through the process of maintaining a relationship with those people, we're actually able to help them, and what they get out of it beyond just the tool. Especially over time, especially as we have a larger platform, I think a lot about how can we help them grow. Whether that's growing their careers. Like they, because they brought on Figma, they get a promotion, or whatever that looks like.
(01:17:11):
But we have more direct control over things like, "Oh, you're going to speak at one of our events. We're going to amplify you on social. We're going to promote you and make you a thought leader.” And it works really well for everyone. Because these people also have the deep technical expertise to show other people, "Here's how I've flip my design systems. Here's how I do this." And [inaudible 01:18:03] people who want to learn from them. And we have the platform to be able to amplify them. So, I think a lot about, "Yeah, how can we help these people grow in their own careers, and get something out of this, too, beyond just the level of the tool?"
Lenny (01:17:42):
And then that builds back into building credibility for Figma, because now there's all these additional designers talking about Figma.
Claire Butler (01:17:48):
Totally. It's all a circle. It's all [inaudible 01:18:23].
Lenny (01:17:49):
Flywheels within flywheels. What a business you've built over there. Maybe just the last question along these lines ... What changes as you scale? A lot of these are things you did early on. What changes as you grow as a company, in this bucket of helping the product spread?
Claire Butler (01:18:02):
Yeah. I think the key thing is that you have to keep doing it. One of the things that I feel like, at my role now at Figma, that I think a lot about, is how I can keep advocating for this stuff when we are starting to implement more top down motion, and having to really prove ROI. Or thinking about, "How do you scale the sales team?" And all those things.
(01:18:24):
So, a lot of what I'm doing, too, is thinking like, "Okay. How do we keep this going and keep this model successful as the company is still growing?" Because it's not necessarily as intuitive as you are starting to add in more of some of these more traditional methods and motions. So, that's something that I think about quite a bit. Things like that conference that I talked about, Schema, that's a big one. Config, that's a big one. Scaling our DA team, and really having them grow with the company across regions and across products, is really big. So, it's how do you keep protecting those things. Because it's not immediately obvious when you bring in just a ton of new people.
Lenny (01:19:03):
Right. It's easy to break the thing that was working.
Claire Butler (01:19:04):
Totally. And you have to do new things, too. You have to layer on new things. But how do you not just walk away from this thing that got you to where you are, as well?
Lenny (01:19:14):
Is this a fit for everyone, this sort of approach? Let's say every B2B SaaS company, what are maybe prerequisites for who should apply this sort of approach and this motion?
Claire Butler (01:19:25):
I thought about this a lot myself, actually. Because Figma also has new products. So, I think to myself, "Oh, can I replicate this?" Like FigJam. FigJam's one of those examples. And Dev Mode, all of a sudden we're working with developers. So, I've thought about this a lot. And I don't know if there's like, "Oh, you have to have this, or you have to have that." But I think there's certainly things that make it easier. And they're both true on the market side, of the type of the audience, and also on the team side.
(01:19:50):
Within the market, I already mentioned it. But I think it really helps if people are technical. And you have this technical audience of people who really care about the craft, and they get a lot of value out of the tool by themselves. Because that just allows them to really learn something and really build confidence in something, before they have to spread it or start collaborating. And it gives you something to talk about with them that's not collaboration. Because, like I said, no one wants to talk about collaboration. Nobody wants to talk about it. So, you have other things you can talk about. Even though collaboration's so important, no one wants to talk about it.
(01:20:19):
So, being technical is important. And caring about your tools, that's another one that I think a lot about. As a marketer, I don't know how much I care about my tools. Some of them I do, but a lot of them I don't. If you're like, "Oh, Claire, you have to move from Dropbox Paper to Google Docs," I'd be like, "Fine." Maybe that's their personality. But designers, specifically, and I think engineers are the same way, just as examples, have deep passions for their tools. Probably because they're in it eight hours a day, so they're using them all the time. So, it certainly helps if you ... These people already care, care deeply, about what their tools are.
(01:20:55):
Another thing that helps is that you have a community that exists within the target audience already. We had that with designers. Yes, we grew it a lot, and have grown with it a lot. But like I said, that Twitter community, that existed without us. That was there before we were there. So, it made it a lot easier for us to get started, because we didn't have to make something to bring people to us. We had a distribution channel already in place that we could work through. That helped a ton. And then I think the last one was that that core IC audience has a lot of connection points within the organization. Designers are so collaborative. Like you were saying, as a PM, you were working with designers. They work with everybody. If you're building something, you need comments, you need feedback. So, it was really natural for them to be a super-spreader, because their role was such that they were collaborating with a lot of people.
Lenny (01:21:44):
And again, when people are hearing this, they're like, "Of course Figma did so well. They had all these advantages." But I think people forget how many disadvantages that also [inaudible 01:22:24]. Like convincing a designer to switch to a new tool ... very hard.
Claire Butler (01:21:54):
One of my favorite stories there is that when we launched Designer News, which was a popular forum back in the day, the first response was, "If this is the future of design, I'm changing careers." Because designers do not want to be collaborative. There was this process where people were like, "Oh, no. I want to do my work on my own, and then present when I'm ready." It was a massive shift in getting them to think in a different way to do this. So even to me, it was intuitive. But of course, you'd be collaborative. But designers did not want to be, all of them, right away.
Lenny (01:22:23):
I think it's only a clearly successful product after the fact, only after the fact. This reminds me of another story [inaudible 01:23:02] shared with me about Uber, which was also very classically not collaborative and very siloed. And there was a big push to adopt Figma to help encourage more sharing, because that was against the culture.
Claire Butler (01:22:40):
Yes, yes. That was a key problem. And it's still a key problem with a lot of design organizations, is that they're siloed. And it's an organizational shift to get people to be collaborative.
Lenny (01:22:50):
What sort of team do you need to have in place to approach growth and go-to-market in this way? What did you find was really important?
Claire Butler (01:22:57):
The most important thing there is that you have an executive and a leader who believes in this. I did not start this; Dylan started this. He was the core person who believed in this, and who drove a lot of this. And he continues to. And he's built this up to be a culture of our team.
(01:23:13):
And since he believes in it, he's able to help bring more people on board and make everyone believe in it. And then, I think the other thing is, through that, is that thing that we were talking about earlier with metrics. I think so much of this is people being like, " That doesn't scale. How do you measure this?” And yes, we are [inaudible 01:24:05]. We are working on all those things. But it's not immediately clear. The metrics don't immediately show you if something's working or not. It goes back to signal over metrics. And I think that that's so important.
(01:23:43)
And having leaders who believe in that, too, who are able to trust their own intuitions and their own guts, is so important. And it's so interesting, too, because I was just thinking when I was ... Just now, that I was talking about earlier about how trusting yourself and trusting intuition is the hardest part, the most stressful part in the early days. But even here, it's the thing you need the most to be successful. So, I don't know how that connects back, but it just feels like that's just so important in this type of model. And with just being at a startup, is that you're able to believe in it, and have the confidence and the trust in yourself.
Lenny (01:24:16):
I'm going to quickly summarize this model just for people to have a very clear, succinct explanation, and then comment on anything I'm forgetting and missing. I'll keep it really brief. And then we'll get to our very exciting lightning round.
(01:24:28)
So, the idea here, basically, is step one, make individual contributors at a company love your product. Step two is get them to help spread you within the company. And to get people to love your product, the four keys that you shared is: Build credibility for your product, build a product with your users, focus where you can connect with your users, one to many. In your case, it was Twitter. And build a relationship with users so that they can start to trust you. And transparency is a big part of that. Before I move on to step two, anything I missed there?
Claire Butler (01:24:56):
Nope, that's it.
Lenny (01:24:57):
Okay, cool. And then step two is help them spread that product within the organization. And what you found was really important there. One is make it easy to share the product and try it for free. Two is designer advocates being involved in the sales process, have the Tom Factor. Find and target the operating thing that spreads adoption. In this case, I think it was design systems, you mentioned mostly. And then the final piece is shine a light on champions, and help them be successful. Make it help them in their career.
Claire Butler (01:25:25):
Yep, that's it.
Lenny (01:25:26):
Awesome. Well, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?
Claire Butler (01:25:30):
Yes.
Lenny (01:25:32):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?
Claire Butler (01:25:35):
I recommend management books to lots of people. The other piece of this that we didn't touch on at all is scaling a team, and all the things that go into management.
Lenny (01:25:41):
That'll be our next step, our next podcast.
Claire Butler (01:25:44):
Teaching, and also growing new managers. So, Radical Candor and Dare to Lead, to be honest, are the ones I recommend the most. Because I do a lot of [inaudible 01:26:26] coaching new managers and helping them learn how to manage. And those are the first two I start with, because they're so good.
Lenny (01:25:58):
What is a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've recently watched and really liked?
Claire Butler (01:26:02):
I just watched 100 Foot Wave on HBO. And I watched it because I'm going to Portugal next week, and that's the place where they have the biggest waves in the world. And it was just really interesting to learn all about this, Nazare and Portugal, and all the waves and the surfing culture that's grown there. That was just a fun one that I watched recently.
Lenny (01:26:21):
And is your plan to do a 100 foot wave?
Claire Butler (01:26:23):
No. Because I am expecting, so there will be no surfing for me.
Lenny (01:26:32):
Oh, wow. Congratulations.
Claire Butler (01:26:28):
Yes, I know. I will be doing yoga on the beach while my partner surfs.
Lenny (01:26:32):
Amazing. We just had a kid. That's a whole other podcast. This podcast, just, parenting starts to come up again and again. It's interesting. Okay, we'll keep going. What is a favorite product that you've recently discovered that you love?
Claire Butler (01:26:48):
Okay. You might cut this because it's a little promotional, but FigJam. In the last couple of months, especially, I've spent a lot of time having to create strategies and files and explanations, and I've spent in meetings. And I spend all of my day in FigJam, literally, all of my day. And I work with Figma. I use the product. And I was using Figma for a long time. But FigJam for me, in my role, literally use it every single day. And now I cannot imagine living without it. It replaces so many different tools for me.
Lenny (01:27:20):
Great pitch. We will not be cutting that. I'm also a big fan of FigJam.
Claire Butler (01:27:23):
Great. It is true, it's very true. I'm in there all the time. I think I'm the most active FigJam user. [inaudible 01:28:01] validate that in the metrics. But I'm in FigJam all the time.
Lenny (01:27:31):
Next question, what is a favorite life motto that you like to repeat to yourself, that you share with people? Something that comes up when I ask that.
Claire Butler (01:27:39):
When I was younger, I really was ... I've always been motivated. But like, "Oh, I have to get this thing right now." Whether it was in my career, or I was an athlete growing up. I really wanted to perform and do well in things. And I just put a ton of pressure on myself.
(01:27:53):
But I recently got, or not recently, in the last maybe five years, got this motto of consistent pressure over time as being more of my motto. And taking some of the pressure off of having to do things immediately, or get to a certain place too fast. Maybe it's more of like Atomic Habits, or things like that. But I'm just much more in this mode of like, "You're not going to get everything done. It's a startup. But career, whatever, it's not going to happen immediately." You just have to keep working at it, and not giving up. And having that grit to keep going and keep pushing over time, is way more important than any immediate accomplishments.
Lenny (01:28:26):
That is so good. I just added this question to lightning round and these answers are so good each time. Consistent pressure over time. I so get that. Reminds me of how I think about the newsletter. It's just like, "Keep at it, keep at it. It doesn't have to be the best thing ever, every single time."
Claire Butler (01:28:40):
Just don't give up.
Lenny (01:28:41):
Great answer. Final question, what's your favorite use case of Figma that you never expected?
Claire Butler (01:28:46):
I think I mentioned this a little bit, but I use it for home renovation, FigJam especially. I renovated a house with my partner, and we're doing another one right now. And I couldn't do renovations without it. I copy and paste. I start with Pinterest, get ideas. But then I pull them all to the mood board on FigJam.
[NEW_PARAGRAPH]And then I circle things, and this helps me communicate with my partner. I'll send it to him and get comments from him on stuff, links. So, yes. We also will draw out rooms and model things up, and have them on the iPad. Yep. Interior design and home renovations on FigJam.
Lenny (01:29:23):
Claire, we've talked about making people love your product. I think people will love this episode. Hopefully, they'll also spread it within their organization. Thank you so much for being here. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out? And how can listeners be useful to you?
Claire Butler (01:29:37):
I guess Twitter. I'm not active, per se, but that's probably ... I don't look at LinkedIn, so Twitter. That'd definitely be the place. Just Claire T. Butler there. And then, helpful to me, you can tell me your feedback on FigJam and Dev Mode. That would be really helpful to me. And then I guess the other thing is parenting tips with work. I'm a little nervous about that. I love my job, love my career. And I'm going to be a mom soon, and need to figure out how to make that work. So, I want to hear how other people have done that.
Lenny (01:30:06):
I can give you two quick tips right now. One is, there's a guest post during my Pat Leave, that Tamara ... I forget her last name, wrote. Which is basically a leave guide, a guide to setting yourself up.
Claire Butler (01:30:16):
Oh, I need this. I'm working on this right now. I need this.
Lenny (01:30:18):
Okay. I will send this to you, and I'll link it in the show notes. Also, right before I went on Pat Leave, I had Noah Weiss on the podcast, who was just leaving Pat Leave.
(01:30:27):
And he gave me this awesome advice of "Don't over-extrapolate every moment." This is less about getting ready for paternal leave, and more just being in it. Which is, "Don't over-extrapolate things that are going on." That one thing that's bothering you or is a problem, is not going to continue, necessarily.
Claire Butler (01:30:43):
Let it go. Good one. I love it.
Lenny (01:30:46):
All right. Well, that's a parenting podcast, a little bit, which is totally cool. Claire, thank you again so much for being here. I'll let you go.
Claire Butler (01:30:55):
Thank you. That was really fun.
Lenny (01:30:56):
That's my KPI for this podcast.
Claire Butler (01:30:59):
Great, great. Great.
Lenny (01:31:00):
Bye, everyone.
(01:31:02):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.
PART 4 OF 4 ENDS [01:31:58]
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:00:00):
What I say to people at Stripe... In our onboarding, I used to run a session. I was like, "If you're not sure who the decision maker is, one, it's probably you. And I'd rather you act that way than not because you're going to like slow the whole company down. Follow a process and get it done, and don't forget to actually make a decision. And if you don't know who the decision maker is and you're worried it's not, you just ask. Don't get stuck." Too many people get stuck and it makes your work terrible, right? What do we all care about? Progress, impact, momentum. If anything I would say about advice to people generally is be a force for positive momentum and it will be actually a real career maker.
Lenny (00:00:50):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast, where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard one experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today, my guest is Claire Hughes Johnson. Claire was most recently chief operating officer at Stripe for the past seven years, where she helped scale them from a small startup to the legendary company that it is today. Before that, she spent about 10 years at Google where she was VP of self-driving cars, VP of global online sales, director of sales and ops for Gmail, YouTube, Google Apps, and AdWords. Before that, she was in politics. She's also on the board of HubSpot and the Atlantic. And this week, she's releasing an incredible book called Scaling People, which in my opinion should be and likely will be on every founder's bookshelf. In our conversation, we dig into many of the meaty topics that her book covers, including building your operational cadence, defining your company and personal operating principles, your company's operating system.
(00:01:46):
Also, tons of tactical advice around saying things that you cannot say, building self-awareness, distinguishing management from leadership, so much more. I say this a couple times in our conversation. If you enjoyed my newsletter and podcast and the fact that it's very tactical and full of templates and frameworks, you'll love Claire's book, and you'll love learning from Claire. I had such a good time chatting with Claire, and I know you'll learn a lot from this conversation. With that, I bring you Claire Hughes Johnson after a short word from our wonderful sponsors.
(00:02:19):
This episode is brought to you by Linear. Let's be honest, this sheet tracker that you're using today isn't very helpful. Why is it that it always seems to be working against you instead of working for you? Why does it feel like such a chore to use? Well, Linear is different. It's incredibly fast, beautifully designed, and it comes with powerful workflows that streamline your entire product development process, from issue tracking all the way to managing product roadmaps. Linear is designed for the way modern software teams work. What users love about linear are the powerful keyboard shortcuts, efficient GitHub integrations, cycles that actually create progress, and built-in project updates that keep everyone in sync. In short, it just works. Linear is the default tool of choice among startups, and it powers a wide range of large established companies such as Vercel, Retool, and Cash App. See for yourself by product teams describe using linear as magical. Visit linear.app/lenny to try Linear for free with your team, and get 25% off when you upgrade. That's linear.app/lenny.
(00:03:27):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate growth. If your business stores any data in the cloud, then you've likely been asked or are you going to be asked about your SOC 2 compliance. SOC 2 is a way to prove your company's taking proper security measures to protect customer data, and builds trust with customers and partners, especially those with serious security requirements. Also, if you want to sell to the enterprise, proving security is essential. SOC 2 can either open the door for bigger and better deals or it can put your business on hold. If you don't have a SOC 2, there's a good chance you won't even get a seat at the table. Beginning a SOC 2 to your report can be a huge burden, especially for startups. It's time consuming, tedious, and expensive. Enter Vanta. Over 3000 fast growing companies.
(00:04:18):
Use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2. Vanta can get you ready for security audits in weeks instead of months, less than a third of the time that it usually takes. For a limited time. Lenny's podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Just go to vanta.com/lenny. That's vanta.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discount. Get started today.
(00:04:47):
Claire, welcome to the podcast.
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:04:49):
Thank you, Lenny.
Lenny (00:04:51):
So you wrote this book. It's called Scaling People. It's coming out this week. I actually read a preview copy, and it's incredible. Everyone listening to this should buy it, especially if you're a fan of this podcast. It's full of frameworks and templates and guides and all these things that I try to do with my newsletter and podcast. And so if you like what I do, you're going to love this book. And I can't imagine how much work it must have taken to write a book like this. So my first question just have relieved are you that you're done with this book and you can move on with your life?
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:05:21):
I am so relieved, Lenny. Writing this book was not my idea. Patrick and John Collison, Stripe's co-founders, really sort of pushed me into it. And I'm glad they did. I will admit that, as I am with most things they pushed me into, but it was a lot more work than I thought it would be, and it's very rewarding to have it done. Of course, though I've been re-looking at it and realizing there are things I want to add information or tweak what I originally said, but maybe we'll have to do a second edition. We'll see.
Lenny (00:05:55):
That's the benefit of a newsletter. I can just edit things and they're immediately live.
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:05:59):
Yes.
Lenny (00:06:01):
I want to talk about John and Patrick a little bit. But before that, something I wanted to ask is I find that when I write stuff, I am able to better understand and crystallize my own thinking. And I'm curious, having written this book, what is it that you were able to better understand and crystallize in your own thinking through that process?
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:06:20):
It's true, and it's funny, because if you asked me, I would've said I crystallize more by talking and speaking. But whenever I do write something down, I'm glad I did. So I probably do more crystallizing by writing than I would admit, but maybe I'm just lazy and I just like to talk. There's a part of the book, I think it's toward the end of the third chapter, which is about hiring, and that's a really long chapter. Turns out I had a lot to say about hiring and hiring leaders and processes and what you need want to set up. And as I got toward the end of the chapter, I found myself saying to the reader... You maybe have read this and thought, is she for real? You need to do all this work? You need to put all of this in? And I had to say, well, look... I started the chapter saying, if you believe that talent is everything, then your hiring process is everything.
(00:07:11):
And so yes, you do need to put that work in. But I think, Lenny, to your point, when you see all the templates and the frameworks and the examples and the advice from my career... And I was at Google for almost 11 years, I joined Google when it was about 1800 people pre IPO and left when it was about 60,000. I had eight different jobs while I was there. And then joining Stripe when it was about 160 people, and now we're over 7,000 people. Yeah, I have a lot of examples, but really what's crystallized is how much work it is to build, to build a company. You know this. And I hope this book is a bit of a shortcut, but there are no shortcuts. I hope it will accelerate people's knowledge so that they can get down to work with our product and with our customers.
Lenny (00:07:58):
There's a story you share at the end of the book, I think it's in acknowledgements, about how people went and took John Collison out for dinner and were just picking his brain, and "How did you scale Stripe? How did you build this amazing machine of a company?" And he often came back from these dinners, and he's just like, "Claire, they just want to talk to you. You did all these things, not me." And it sounds like that kind of encouraged you to write things down, and then led to this book. One, is that true? And then two, I'm curious, what else did you learn from John and Patrick Collison that have stuck with you? I imagine there's a lot, but kind of what stands out?
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:08:31):
Yeah, no, absolutely. I think it is true that at Stripe, we're fortunate where we have so many users, customers who are themselves founders or interesting companies growing up around the world, whether at scale like Amazon or scaling. I've spent time with Discord and Toast and all kinds of interesting companies that are growing up around us. And a lot of their questions are not necessarily about Stripe's products always. They're really about, "Well, how do you guys do this thing?" Or "We're having this challenge. Are you having this challenge?" And John, yeah, would often come back from trips. He would travel more, and he is often probably meets with more customers than anyone in the Stripe leadership team, maybe other than our sales leaders. And they would ask about scaling, and he would joke. He's like, "We need Claire in a box." So I think the book is Claire in a box, I guess.
(00:09:23):
But Patrick also would have that same experience. And when I contributed a chapter to Elad Gil's High Growth Handbook, even though if you look at High Growth Handbook, which I also really do recommend not just because I'm in it, I'm probably the least, I don't know, celebrity participant in his chapters, and my chapter got a lot of traction because I think it was very specific. It was very tactical. And Elad actually helped me to realize, look, examples and details and frameworks, my working with Claire document is in there, is like... He said it's catnip. And I think that is also what inspired Patrick to push me to do basically a longer version of that chapter that I did with Elad. But I've learned a lot from both of them. I used to think that I was... My parents are teachers, Lenny. I used to think I was very curious, and I'm a learner and I'll seek out information.
(00:10:21):
And I grew up in a very educatory environment, right? Well, once I met the Collisons, the two of them are huge sponges, seeking out knowledge constantly. But also, anytime we were confronted with anything, even things I felt I'd done before, that I had the experience and we were going to build it, they were like, "Well, who have you talked to?" Or "What have you read?" And it was really good. I don't think I made enough phone calls in my earlier career and asked people's advice and asked for help and found the person who did that thing five years ago and found out what they learned. And I think that's probably my biggest lesson from working with both of them, is how much it pays to seek out knowledge from others because we're all just learning all the time.
Lenny (00:11:11):
Is there a story or example of that comes to mind that was really beneficial where you actually ended up follow that advice and reached out to someone, talked to someone, and that changed the way you think, changed the way you operate?
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:11:21):
There are two things that just jumped into my mind. The first one is early on at Stripe... When I joined, we were about 160 people. I started bringing in some leaders. We were building out go to market, we were starting to stabilize our support operations, building out recruiting and HR, all the things. We were really growing. And it became very apparent that we needed to put in some kind of job structure. Levels and ladders is what you would call it, which is there are different levels of pay, and they have to do with your experience and your impact and their expectations of those different levels, right? There's an engineering ladder. And this stuff is probably making some people listening like their skin start to crawl because it's never fun or easy to define all that, and it's not perfect. You're immediately getting into something that feels pretty suboptimal, but it is worse to have nothing because it starts to feel very unfair in the environment, especially if you have to start to change up compensation and reward or reward systems, right?
(00:12:24):
So I realized, oh my gosh, we're going to have to put this in place. We didn't know HR people, so I basically ran a project. And the first thing I did though, thanks to Patrick and John, is I talked to Square, I talked to Airbnb, and I talked to two or three other companies. But those two conversations, I'm not going to say who said this, but one of them, the person said, "Oh, that's a blood bath." They were not encouraging about what we were about to go through. And another one said, "You know what? I'm so impressed that you're doing that so early. We waited too long." And actually, that's what a lot of my book. It's about is when should you start to think about this thing that you might need, right? And it's sooner than you think. And so putting in levels of ladders felt like ripping the off, honestly, but I was glad. One company I talked to waited until they were like 800 people, and it was apparently not fun because people don't like to be... Who likes to be categorized?
Lenny (00:13:26):
Yeah, and put it at a level that maybe they're not happy with, right? They're like, "Oh, I thought I was a lot more senior than that."
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:13:32):
Yep. Yeah, exactly. It's not easy. It's a form of change challenging. And I would not say we did it perfectly, but I'm glad we did it. I think that example was definitely one of them. Another was like we were really... We wanted to roll out 24/7 support in multiple channels, email, phone, chat in multiple languages and getting from where we were to where we wanted to be as quickly as possible. Not many companies have done at the scale, because Stripe has millions of customers. We're B2B, but we're B2B at a very high scale, which actually Google was as well. And so that was beneficial to me coming into the Stripe environment because I'd done parts of that for Google. And again, that's an example of something I thought I knew how to do, sort of, but we certainly didn't do it perfectly, and it's certainly different when you're talking about payments.
(00:14:24):
That's people's money. That is a business'... If they don't know how to contact you and they have a problem, that is a huge issue. And so I did seek out a lot of advice. And I would say... Did anything change dramatically what we did? I think if anything, the advice pushed me to go faster on some of my intuitions about, for example, using vendors and outsourcing parts of the model. And I realized we're not going to scale all this internally, especially not at the speed that we're going, but it's hard to start to use outside sort of contractors if you haven't filled figured out all your tools and processes. So that balance was sort of freaking me out, but you just got to push through it.
Lenny (00:15:15):
There's a couple directions I want to go, but I'll go in an unexpected direction. At Stripe, you're kind of infamous for your titles. When I created this career ladder document.
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:15:24):
[inaudible 00:15:24].
Lenny (00:15:24):
Yeah, it's like everyone's product manager., They're like a VP of product potential and it's like product manager. What's the rationale behind that? I guess, and what's the benefit of that? But, we don't have to go too far down the road. I'm just curious.
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:15:37):
So this is something that Patrick and I actually really agreed on without a lot of discussion, which is not always the case. It has to do with a combination of optionality as you scale and grow, and also culture, right? And so the minute you start titling a lot, you're signaling hierarchy and authority. And the culture piece to Stripe still today, which is I think we could use more, at least more overt trappings of structure because it can get confusing. And I'll be the first to tell you that, and I admit that this might have carried on too far. But early on, at Stripe, there's a real belief. It's not a particularly hierarchical company. And if you're the person who has the knowledge, you are the expert on the thing, you better be, one, in the room helping make the decision, and two, driving, helping to drive the decision. And I don't care how senior you are, right? And that was the cultural signal that was important, which was about mutual ownership, and also expertise not sitting in hierarchy.
(00:16:43):
And then the optionality thing is probably a little more obvious, which is don't make somebody the CMO, or even the head of marketing, if you're marketing team is two people, right? Yeah, you might make the right choice, but two years later, your marketing team's probably going to be more than two people, say it's 20. And are you going to have to layer somebody or have too many titles? And then someone feels like they're losing something, right? It goes back to the levels and ladder saying, but it's worse because you've given something, and then you're sort of taking it away, and that's just not... Organizationally, you want more flexibility. Honestly, I'll say my final thing, which is I have a little bit of a knit where you meet a company. I get what's happened, which is in order to hire this person, they had to sort of say, "I'll make you the VP of sales or the VP of this," but the company's like 25 people and there's seven VPs.
(00:17:40):
If you're a customer or you're evaluating it, you're kind of like, "Really?" It's a little incongruous with the scale. So we kind of more flexible. We had a lot of growth, head of this or growth lead. I know you're all about growth, Lenny. Well, we definitely took growth and find that very broadly. But the other thing I've said to people internally... Sorry, you can really get me going on this one. I bet you didn't think that. If you are a stripe and you're going out into the market, actually it speaks to the same thing, which is you're going and trying to sell to a customer who's a lot bigger than you. I'm not saying make up a title. Don't say you're the VP of sales, but you can be creative about how you represent your scope because you probably have really big scope because you're one of the only people helping to sell the product. And that will help you because a lot of more established mature companies are trying to do that hierarchy match, where "Well, bring your SVP because my SVP is coming to the meeting."
(00:18:42):
And we could be like, we don't really have that. It just gives you a little more selling flexibility too.
Lenny (00:18:48):
I like that. I like combo where you can just say something that fits in this situation, even though that's not your technical title.
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:18:53):
Yes, you can say, "Oh yeah, I actually am in charge of optimization for our payments product." I'm sure you are. I'm sure that's what you
Lenny (00:19:01):
Do. Coming back to something you talked about with the career ladder, and I had a question around this, you talked about how oftentimes people do it too late, and I'm curious why it's so important to think about the stuff that you wrote about in this book so early in your company's life cycle. I think in the book you mentioned that it's oftentimes as important to get your operational structure and cultural structures in place incorrect as finding product market fit or finding your first few customers, which I think would surprised a lot of people. Can you talk about why you found that to be so important?
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:19:35):
Not only can I talk about it, I wrote a whole book about it, so let's try to restrain me. But here's what I would say. Obviously product market fit is the most important. And what I do say in the book is focus on that and don't get too far. My book is definitely not zero to one. It's more like maybe 0.5 to 1.5 or one to two. Because I do think when you're smaller and focused on product market fit and finding your user and getting that traction, that shapes a lot of how you work and your goals and who you hire, and that all makes sense. I think the thing that happens though is, one, some companies don't quite realize they're hitting it and they start to get behind on actually building the company part. Because guess what?
(00:20:23):
It turns out product market fit is just the product, and that is not a company, and that will not scale, to point. You see these companies that sort of fall over and there's sort of a bad article about them, and often it's not the product, it's the fact that they didn't actually build the company very well, and that started to harm, in fact harm the product and harm the mission. You have this vision, you're going to solve this problem with this product. And all of a sudden you can't solve it because you didn't scale the org properly. You didn't keep the cultural fabric strong as you grew, right? And so that's why I think it's so important. And so let's say you are hitting traction, and hopefully you do notice it. Because I think a lot of founders, you're kind of paranoid.
(00:21:08):
Like Stripe, I don't think Patrick and John fully embraced that they needed to start scaling maybe until I showed up, and that was part of hiring me. I was like, yeah, this is it. It's happening. It's not just look at the numbers. It's like look at the inbound support demand, look at the inbound sales leads. I just did the math, and I was like, this company should be probably twice the number of people it is right now, which of course freaked everybody out, but it was very obvious to me because I was coming in outside with that perspective. But more importantly, not just scaling things like sales and support... And as you probably know, if you work in payments, you've got a lot of other functions that are very important around risk and compliance and you name it, or the machine learning models and that help you do those things.
(00:21:55):
But for the sort of structures and operating processes that I talk about in the book, I do have this analogy which I think you picked up on to building a house, which is you have the supporting beam. Say it's a post and beam structure. You need the posts and the beams, and then you're going to have to do the mechanicals, right? There's going to have to be some amount of wiring in order for you. I don't know if you have your solar panels, but you got to bring in the heat, you got to bring in the cooling and plumbing, and then you have foundational stuff that you have to build or the whole structure will fall over. And I think of putting in the posts and beams and the mechanicals and the foundation as actually essential to scale. Because if you do those things well, you build them in such a way. This is almost like a Russian doll kind of thing, but you build them so that they're replicable, right?
(00:22:49):
So the way that you do goals as a company can start at the company level, and this is how OKRs were so beautiful for Google and they can replicate down to the individual. And the same common structure allows that to happen at really different levels of scale. And that's what you're looking for, is what are these common things? We do not a lot of them, by the way. You don't want to mandate a lot, you don't want to put too much structure in place, but enough that everyone can play with it up and down what I would think of as the stack of the company. And if you don't start putting those things in early, people will just invent those things. And then you'll have... Picture a house that got added on to 17 times and it's not even two years old. It looks not super stable. And then you're going to find yourself having to do a tear down, which I think we've all seen companies do that.
Lenny (00:23:40):
I definitely want to get into that house structure and all the components of it. But before we get there, if you're a early stage founder just looking for product market fit, maybe the skipping ahead a little bit, but which elements do you think are the most important that they need to do now? Because they're going to read your book, which gives them so much advice on all the things you can do.
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:24:01):
Yeah.
Lenny (00:24:02):
If you have to pick a couple things that you have to nail when you're just starting out before product market fit, what do you think is most important?
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:24:08):
I think really that early, keeping it very simple and being focused on that goal of product market, which is like what is the problem you're trying to solve? What's your vision?Everything you have to do for an investor pitch deck matters not just for the investors. By the way, people forget this. A lot of the story you tell to investors, early ones especially is the story you should be telling internally to anybody you hire. Why do we exist? What problem are we trying to solve? What early customers have we attracted, and what's their feedback. That's what you mostly need, but you need to remember to share it and don't just use it for fundraising, or don't just use it for a board meeting or an investor meeting. Use it internally. And I think you can get pretty far actually with that core content. As you start to...
(00:24:56):
The first thing you're probably putting in place is a little bit of hiring process, and I think that's going to matter sooner than you think. Don't just be tempted to hire people in your friends. Think about what you need, what capabilities you need to build even pre PMF, right? And so as I said, there's a chapter about that, but I think some of the simplest versions of it is how do we evaluate talent? What kind of talent are we looking for? Where do we go look for talent, figure that out, and sort of train people a bit internally on interviewing. I think interviewing is not a skill that comes naturally. People think it does. It does not. And there's really basic easy tips and tricks you can find even on the interwebs about interviewing. And I really recommend... And my book has examples of rubrics, questions you can use. How do you really get at... Because it's hard to really evaluate someone in 30 minutes or 45 minutes.
(00:25:49):
So I think interviewing some of your fun fundamental early investor kind of content you need. But then when you start to get some traction, then you're showing to codify and actually document what I call more foundational content. Because if you're pre-product market fit, you're probably small enough that you just can tell everybody all the things. You don't have to send them the packet or have them sit in the onboarding. But the minute that you're starting to get any kind of hiring speed, you're going to want to document it more and you're going to want to start to put some very lightweight processes of how you get things done in place, because again, you're trying to replicate velocity. It's easy when you're all in one room and everyone knows like, "Oh, this is the most important thing to get done today," hack, hack and hacking away. But then pretty quickly, that is not going to be the case.
Lenny (00:26:38):
I definitely want to go one layer deeper on that, but there's this area I wanted to get to before we dive into some of the weeds around that, which is I found it really interesting that you started your book with this idea of personal operating principles versus here's how the company should work. It starts with here's how you should think about yourself. So I want to go... There's four of them... But before I get into them, can you just describe what is the idea of a personal operating principle and why is that important?
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:27:02):
Remember the book is about two things, company building and company structures, and all that, replicating all that good step and management. So the other thing that the book is really about is management tactical guides to... It would be easy to build companies if there weren't humans involved, right? But there's humans and they're complicated, and I'm complicated and you're complicated. And there are things that motivate us. There are things that demotivate us. They're not the same things, though Lenny and I, I think you and I have some things in common, but point is the book starts with you. And I think a lot of people think management starts with the team, or even the company. And actually, I think founders make this mistake. Founders think, well, it starts with my product. And yeah, but it actually starts with you. And so the book starts with sort of my belief system, which is self-awareness, which is the first operating principle. Self-awareness to build mutual awareness is actually the most fundamental thing you need to crack if you're going to succeed at company building or management, in my opinion.
(00:28:08):
But I would say I'm one of those people who has strong opinions that are pretty loosely held. This one is a strong opinion strongly held, which is the more that you can seek feedback, seek to understand your motivators, your strengths, your blind spots, your tendencies, and take that on board and expose it to others, you're going to be a much more effective company builder and manager. So it starts with you. And those operating principles that I articulate are sort of mine, but they're also foundational to the content of the whole book. I do think authentic leaders tend to have their own, right? Lenny, you probably have a few that you... You maybe have not articulated them all out loud, but I do have mine and they're in the book, but I think you would also find that some of them you could adopt. If you were looking for were some to start to use as a leader, I would hope that I've put forward a couple that might be useful.
Lenny (00:29:04):
I want to talk about these four, but while you're on that topic, what are ways to help crystallize your own operating principles? What advice would you give people to do this? Because to your point, people probably have them in their head, but they haven't really written them out.
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:29:17):
That's right, they haven't. The book has an exercise that I recommend in it that's a little bit more about crystallizing your personal values, but that's kind of the place you want to start. And it's essentially there's a whole menu, and you can find these online, of say 70 or 80 different values. And by values, I mean family, ambition, impact competition. People value education. People value different things differently, by the way. And there's no judgment. You might value being a very competitive person and I might value collaboration above competitiveness, and that's fine. We probably would both be very effective in a team for different reasons, right? So basically if you take a list of values and you say, okay, if I had to pick 10 of these that matter to me, then if I had to pick five of them, and then you really force yourself if I had to only pick three of them...
(00:30:09):
And it's actually good to have this in a dialogue with someone that you work with or well, and you sort of had to explain, well, why? Why, when I'm really pushed, do I have to hold on to say education or learning as a value? Or why do I have to hold on to integrity as a value? And I tell a story in the book about a manager I worked with where transparency was a very important value to him. And the thing is you usually have a story behind that value, right? And in the book, I use the name Eli for him. Eli ends up sharing this story at this offsite that we had. And the transparency value actually was a little bit problematic to manage because Eli would tell everyone everything, including his team, even when we weren't finished with the plan, right? But Eli got up and told a story of being younger, like seven or eight, and realizing his mother was very sick, and no one really told him what was going on.
(00:31:07):
And then unfortunately watching the process of her dying and then being taken out to lunch by his stepfather and told, "Your mother is gone." And okay, well, your whole worldview kind of explodes when you hear that, and you're like, oh, okay, this transparency thing is really real. This was a formative experience for him and it has changed how he operates, and it will probably have changed it for his whole life. And if you can get to that point on your own, of telling yourself, what was the story? What was the thing that made this so important to me? Then you're starting to be in a mode of self-discovery and then you're starting to document, okay, if these are my three top values, and here's why. And then I think what you want to look for are my, what I would call my work style tendencies? And so you get your values, and then you sort of go on a... I'm sorry, I could go on about [inaudible 00:32:08]. I warned you. I wrote a book about this.
(00:32:09):
But basically, all these work style assessments, Myers-Briggs, DISC, Enneagram, you name it. And by the way, I would take all of them because I find that very good. I mean some of it's just data. You're just taking on data. But a lot of them come down to are you introverted or extroverted? Are you more introverted or extroverted? Where are you on that continuum? And are you more task, if you kind of picture a horizontal and a vertical, are you more task or people oriented? And so I would take your values, and then I would plot yourself. Am I a more extroverted task-oriented person, which means you're kind of a director, get what done kind of person? Or am I a more extroverted people-oriented person, which might mean actually you're probably great at being very charismatic and building some followership and maybe selling a vision? A lot of salespeople are very extroverted people oriented people.
(00:33:03):
And then you start to see, okay, if this is my sort of tendency in my default and this is my value system, what are the ways that I operate that really make up who I am and becomes almost a belief system. And my operating principles in the book, one is to build self-awareness, to build mutual awareness. Another one is say the thing you think you cannot say. I think that I've come to believe that often your biggest strength, one, is also your weakness, but two, is something that you don't know is a big strength because it's almost like breathing. For me, saying something actually fairly openly and directly but in a non-threatening way is a thing I do. John Collison actually once said to me, he's like, "It's so interesting when you give feedback, that can be actually pretty brutal, I leave feeling really optimistic."
(00:34:02):
But I don't mean to be brutal, but I think I can sort of unpack and say this thing, like here's my observation, here's going on, and it's not judgmental, it's not threatening, it's actually opening up an opportunity for people. So say the thing you think you cannot say. You would actually find that more of us can do that. And then I come back to distinguish between being a leader and a manager, which is something early in my career, I did not do well, Lenny.
Lenny (00:34:30):
Before we get to that one actually, just to briefly ask you a follow up question, because I love that you're getting through all four here. This is great. But I was going to ask, is there something.. So clearly, you're really good at saying the thing you cannot say, and I love that. Many people are not good at this.
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:34:30):
No.
Lenny (00:34:45):
Do you have any tactical advice for someone that is not good at this for how to actually say something uncomfortable?
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:34:51):
I think the main thing is, and Fred Kaufman has this in his book, Conscious Business, this concept of a left hand... He calls it the left hand column, which is you're in a dialogue with me or you're watching a meeting happen, and you've got a running commentary in your head. And honestly, some of that stuff is pretty harsh, right? You do not want to open your mouth and just say that thing. But what Fred says is, learn how to detoxify the left-hand column. I would say think about a way to say that thing that you think you can't say. You've filtered yourself out, which I don't like. And I want you to think, okay, can I? And I think that the... Here are the tricks, a couple of them. One is, ask a question.Right? A question is not threatening. By the way, the question could even be, is there something we're not talking about? It feels like to me... And then you own.
(00:35:47):
So the next trick is you own it. This is your observation, this is your perception. This is not a judgment. I am not saying, "Lenny, I think you really botched that interview." That's not useful. If I said, "Lenny, you know what? I wonder if you missed an opportunity in that interview. Did you feel like you missed an area that..." And then you're kind of curious. You're like, "What do you mean?" And I'm like, "Well, I'm kind of looking at this with you, and I'm standing next to you and I'm observing it." Right? That's less threatening. So one, ask a question. Two, make an observation that you own. So if I said, "I feel like there's something we're not talking about, and I wonder..." Oh, I own it. "I wonder if it's the fact that these two teams both seem to have the exact same project."
(00:36:32):
I talk in the book about a meeting I was in where it was very clear that we had two teams in conflict, and no one was saying the thing that was really pretty bad. I was like, this is pretty bad. We have two teams that seem like they both own a piece of work and are in conflict with one another. But I would say if you do those two things, ask a question, own the observation yourself, don't pass a judgment, you will get way farther than you would've ever thought sharing. And by the way, that sharing, one, there's probably other people who just haven't, can't get it out of their head, and you have ar opened up a door that a lot of others can probably walk through. You're not alone.
Lenny (00:37:12):
You have this framework, I think you call it being explorer, not a lecturer. Is that what you just described? Is that how you describe it?
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:37:18):
It is. And to me, what I just talked about was more of a meeting or a conversation scenario, but I think that this... I'm glad you brought that up. I think this is actually a very fundamental management framework of mine, which is in a one-to-one interaction, your job as the manager... First of all, too many people think your job as the manager is to be the expert and tell people what to do. No, actually, your job is to enable people to be their very damn best on your team. And you have to create an environment and a context and provide them information, and then you need to provide them a form of coaching. Now, again, I think people start think coaching is lecturing, like let me coach you how to make this Excel model. And sometimes they do. Sometimes someone comes to you and says, "Can you exactly show me how to do this thing?"
(00:38:05):
Fine. But most of management is actually exploring with someone. It is being curious. It is saying, "I have seen this pattern of your work. Have you seen this pattern? Is there something..." I have a whole other framework which is about hypothesis based coaching. I think intuition as a word gets kind of a bad rap, and I kind of get why, look, especially if you work with a lot of engineers, which I do. It's not particularly always data driven, but guess what a scientific hypothesis is? It's a well-informed piece of intuition. And I think too many managers wait until they have a million pieces of data to make an observation to someone about an area for improvement. Instead, I would say take some data, form a hypothesis, and then explore it with the person. Because if you're well intended, which I think any good manager is, I'm bringing up this thing because I'm trying to help you see it and tell me if it's true so that we can both help make it more effective, better.
(00:39:11):
One very light example could be, "I felt like in that meeting... How did you feel that presentation went?" And the person sort of says, "It's fine. I think I got through the material." You say, "Yeah, I felt like you were maybe a little bit nervous. I'm just exploring. Were you..." And by the way, the person could say, "Oh, no, no. No, no, no, no." And then you could back off, or you could say, "Oh, well, maybe it was just me, but I noticed some physical. Your leg was shaking a little bit, your voice, you were kind of repeating yourself." And they're going like, "What?" And you're all you're doing is holding up a mirror... And you have to own it. You have to say, "My experience of you in that meeting was that you seemed nervous to me. Maybe you were not, but actually maybe this is just a physical coaching thing."
(00:40:04):
Have you ever had that? I have a few people on my teams who do this weird thing. This is pre virtual world, but when they're sort of getting it uncomfortable in a meeting, they put back their chair up off the table, sort of exit the circle. And that is a very physically big statement. And they had no idea, Lenny. They had no idea. I'm just watching the meeting, and I'm like, oh my gosh, you're like four feet from the rest of the group because you do not like this topic. And what I need to explore with you is how do you vocalize that instead of physically exiting the room or exiting the circle? These are just examples. Sorry, I could keep going. But I really think that that attitude of exploration and mutual sort of collaborative, let's discover some things about you...
(00:40:54):
And by the way, it can be mutual. They can go right back at you and say, "Well, I observe this." Great. Great. I've interviewed a lot of people for the book, different leaders and managers from lots of different fields, but one of them was Reid Hoffman, who's a more typical. But Reid, we were talking about the other operating principle, which is management versus leadership. And Reid was pretty honest. He's like, "Look, I'm more of a leader. I'm not a manager." He's like, "I'm not a great manager." And then he told me the story. He's like, he had in his first company that he was building, he had a guy that he'd hired who was more operational. And Reid was sort of making an observation to him about something they should do, and the guy goes to him, "Reid, I wouldn't hire you to manage McDonald's."
(00:41:42):
And Reid was like, "Okay, good. So tell me what we need to do so we can fix this thing." But what actually Reid's operating principle, interestingly when unearthed that whole thing, was that he prides... It's very important to him to create an environment of open feedback. He said, what I love about that story, yeah, it's funny and embarrassing, but actually that guy was comfortable saying to me, "I wouldn't trust you to manage a McDonald." And I think that actually I found inspiring because I don't think everybody who founded a company or who's managing someone has created an environment with how much trust in it, right? And that's how Reid thinks he gets a lot of stuff done, is people just come right back at him with the feedback.
Lenny (00:42:26):
This episode is brought to you by Dovetail, the customer insights platform for teams that gets you from data to insights fast, no matter the method. There's so much customer data to get through from user interviews to NPS, sales calls, usability tests, support tickets, app reviews. It's a lot. And you know that if you're building something, hidden in that data are the insights that will lead you to building better products. And that's where Dovetail can help. Dovetail allows you to quickly analyze customer and data from any source and transform it into evidence-based insights that your whole team can access. If you're a product manager who needs insights to motivate your team, a designer validating your next pick feature, or a researcher who needs to analyze fast, Dovetail is the collaborative insights platform your whole team can use. Go to dovetailapp.com/lenny to get started today for free. That's dovetailapp.com/lenny.
(00:43:19):
So we've done three of the operating principles that you personally use, which I love. I love that you're going to going through [inaudible 00:43:25]
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:43:24):
Distinguish management and leadership is the third one, yep.
Lenny (00:43:28):
And then just to summarize real quick, the second one was to say the thing that you cannot say. The first one was-
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:43:34):
Say the thing you think you cannot say, yeah.
Lenny (00:43:36):
And then first, build self-awareness to build mutual awareness.
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:43:39):
Yeah.
Lenny (00:43:41):
And what's cool is you're sharing all these amazing stories and tactics. In the book, you actually have templates to do each of these things for yourself. So a lot of this is pointers too. If you actually want to do this, go check out the book and you can actually do this. It's not just in a bunch of high level stuff. And then the fourth is-
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:43:57):
Come back to the operating system.
Lenny (00:44:01):
Let's talk about it.
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:44:02):
So this one is, sort of like I was talking about, touchstone documents that you might create for your company. This is our operating principles, our values. This is my touchstone, which is I think that especially high growth environments, but every environment you operate in can get really chaotic, and there's a lot of ambiguity. There's a lot of stuff you don't know, and it's kind of easy to get paralyzed or to sort of give into the chaos. And you're like, oh my gosh, I don't know what this day is going to bring. I'm just going to randomly assign some stuff, and I'm just going to get through it. And all you're doing in a lot of those moments is creating more chaos. And I think a really important role of definitely managers, but some leaders too is to create a stability when there doesn't feel like there's a lot that's stable.
(00:44:52):
And where stability comes from is in ritual and in common practices that you share. So we set quarterly goals or monthly goals. And that's a ritual, and that's a thing we do, and it's actually a source of stability. And yeah, it feels like a process. It might feel like a way of managing, but it also has a cadence to it. And I think one of the things that happened is you picture yourself sort of spinning out of control. You think, how do I come back to this is the order I do things, this is how I get decisions made, this is how we make plans, this is how we make decisions. Those touchstones are not processes to run the thing. If they're done well, they're stabilizing because they're a common way of approaching that everybody has, so they can at least hold onto that even when all the other stuff is going haywire.
(00:45:45):
You've got a customer churning, and you've got a big launch happening the next day, like, oh my God, oh my God. Come back. What's our launch? How do we launch products? We have a way of doing that. We do not need to spin out of control and reinvent the wheel here, right? And that's a stabilizing thing. And the other thing on come back to the operating system for me was, as my career scaled, as I went from a individual contributor, to managing a small team, to managing a bigger team, to managing multiple teams, to managing managers, you get it, I realized actually, and I started to have multiple functions. So I was context switching between... At Google, there was a point where I had some product people, industrial design operations, really BD, really different functions. Actually, how I fundamentally ran them at the bare bones, at the house architecture level was the same.
(00:46:38):
And that gave me a stability as a leader where I would dive into a meeting. I'd be like, all right, let's look at the metrics that matter. We all had... We had them for every team. Let's look at the goals we set. And that also helps you stabilize when your contact switching between seven different projects or seven different teams. And so I wouldn't say it's the operating principle that I talk about the most, but I think if you were like, "What's your sort of... How do you scale yourself?" I would say, "Well, I actually have a common operating system like a computer, and that is how I maintain a sense of stability."
Lenny (00:47:17):
Perfect segue to the next kind of broad area I want to spend time on, which is this house metaphor and the three components of it that you talked about. And this is like the core of the book. Can you talk about again, the three kind of pillars of this house structure? And then let's just go through each of these things.
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:47:33):
Yeah, it's definitely, the beginning of the book is about company building, and the company structure chapter is all about the sort of supporting beams, the mechanicals, and then the foundational stuff. And interestingly, it's sort of, well, I guess when you build a house, you build the foundation first. So one is the founding documents that you might create, which I'm happy to talk about. And then another are the supporting structures, which are some of the ways you do things we talked, like quarterly business reviews or OKRs, or how you use planning to create a structure that everyone... And then the mechanicals are what I might call the operating cadence, which is essentially the rhythm of how you work, right? The calendar, the year that we all experience tends to dictate a little bit how we work. Mondays feel different than Sundays, right? Well, companies have that same kind of a cadence, which is often also calendar driven, but also can be event driven.
(00:48:28):
We've talked often at Stripe about how our customer event, which we have called Stripe Sessions, is as important internally as it is for the customers because it's a forcing function for our cadence, how we plan our products, what we want to have achieved by that point, what we want to demonstrate. And that's true for a lot of companies, but we actually use it in our thinking about our cadence of the year. And actually, we've built this other event that I usually help run, which is an internal event that happens generally about six months before that, which is great because you can demo the stuff you think you want to demo internally. You sort of create a cadence of we're going to push ourselves to do some crazy wild stuff, internally demonstrate it, and then see if we can externalize it by the time we hit the customer event.
(00:49:16):
But that is a cadence. Quarterly business reviews are part of your cadence, et cetera. So that's the fundamental, but really while I'm trying to do is say, one, I don't think this stuff is super hard. You know this. It's kind of hard work. It's just putting it in place, and then actually using it. I think where a lot of leadership teams go wrong, especially of young companies, is they experiment with different vehicles to try this stuff. And then they either don't actually follow them or they throw them out the window after they haven't tried it for very long, and it creates a lot of chaos. So I would say do very few things consistently and try to do them well, and then see if they're working for you, and then once a year, maybe think about a revision. But don't keep throwing out new things you heard that other companies do. And it turns into a weird grab bag of operating stuff. You're nodding because you've seen this too lot.
Lenny (00:50:16):
Yeah, I think a problem I've seen is people think there's going to be this perfect system and process that's going to not have any flaws, and they're always like, "Oh, it's not perfect. We got to optimize it further." And what I find is it's always just like, this is the best one you can come up with at the time. This is the best idea you have now. There's going to be flaws. Just work around those flaws. But just know there's never going to be the one thing that works.
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:50:35):
There is no one. There's no perfect org structure, there's no perfect operating approach, there's no perfect, yeah, performance and management and level system. But having one and committing to it is good. And don't let the perfect be the enemy of the good.
Lenny (00:50:50):
There's another, you mentioned that I thought it'd be fun to talk about, that it's often chaotic at a company. I imagine people think about Stripe from the outset, like, oh, they've got it all figured out, so smooth, just runs like a machine. And I think people look at other successful companies and they're like, man, things are so crazy at our company. This isn't normal. But I think, you tell me if I'm wrong, most places are crazy and chaotic internally for a long time and often, right?
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:51:15):
Yeah. There are different kinds of chaos, but it's so true. What is that? There's like a saying. Don't ever believe your best press or your worst press. It's never as bad as whatever someone's saying it is never as good. It's just normal is not pretty. It's a lot. And that is true. It's happening everywhere. I used to have a friend who was building a company. We would see each other. We both were from the Boston area, and it's a long story, but we'd end up on the same flight off in Rhode Island, coming back to Boston occasionally for stuff, for family. And we'd be in getting yelled at by the passengers because we'd be in the aisle of the airplane comparing notes about stuff that was broken.
(00:52:02):
And we had this expression, it was like, oh, and then I picked up the rock, and under that rock were some really ugly, creepy crawlies. But that's just like the way it is, is it's never perfect. But I guess I would go back to what I just said about having some stabilizing ways of doing things because that can create, I don't know, I'm not trying for a perception that the thing runs a machine, but more of a, that is a well run thing, right? And how do you create that perception? Because you adhere to some ways of running things and that are consistent, and it feels better even to the outside, even if there's a lot of chaotic stuff going on.
Lenny (00:52:45):
Coming back to the founding documents, could you just talk about what are in this group of founding documents? And I think even more interestingly, what's a sign that you should invest more time in this area as a startup?
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:52:55):
Yeah. Very classic stuff is in here, nothing that you haven't seen or examples of. So one is I think it's good to have a mission. When I joined Stripe, we did not. It came to be apparent that to increase the GDP of the internet was probably the mission, because people kept repeating that back to us, and Patrick had written it on some website copy early on. But it was interesting that candidates and customers kind of grabbed it. It was very Stripe because it's a little bit intellectual and pointy headed and aspirational, but also it is... The GDP does involve economic progress, which we're all about, right? We're building infrastructure for commerce and payments for not just the internet actually. But anyway, point is have a mission, or at least the beginning of what's your one line of what you're seeking to accomplish.
(00:53:47):
And then I'm a big fan of writing sort of what we Stripe called our long-term goals, which were just not our short distance, but our longer distance, like why did we exist? And so the mission is one line, so you need a little more meat behind that, right? And actually, I think if you looked at our long-term goals, which by the way I thought would be a three to five year goal, I would say they're still relevant today. But one of Stripe's long term goals is to advance the state of the art and developer tools, which would not be something that everybody, especially every customer of would initially call out. But when you think about it... Lenny, you just did it. You think about it for a minute, you're like, yeah, the API and the docs and a lot of stuff that we've open sourced, Stripe cares.
(00:54:38):
Our forever user is fundamentally a developer. It's the person who's integrating Stripe, right? By the way, simple integration, complex integration, anywhere in between, we really care about their experience, and we care that the tools are excellent, because how are you going to increase the GDP of the internet if you don't advance the state of the art of developer tools? Right? Anyway, point is articulating that, because until I said that to you and I could talk about it with you and say you came to work at Stripe, you might not understand why we invested in certain things or why it meant so much to us in terms of our user experience and the mission. So articulate those things. And some of them might be a little bit aspirational, but they should feel at least real enough that you can have that conversation about... You look at anyone who works in a company, what they choose to do all day with their time should be guided by things like, what are we trying to accomplish?
(00:55:35):
What are our long-term goals? So if they don't know them, how are they going to make the right choices? So that's one. And then another is a lot of companies write company values, or at Stripe, we wrote operating principles. I think you had [inaudible 00:55:50] on, and she talked about these, and we even sort of took a version of ours and put them out for candidates so that they could evaluate, do I want to join this company, because I kind of want to know what it's like to work there? And I think that's really valuable to do because not every company is right for every candidate, and the more you can mutually match the better. But having some operating principles matters. I think you can go farther than that, but that's where I would sort of start, is those three things.
Lenny (00:56:17):
Awesome, I like the simplicity of this.
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:56:21):
How you know is people are asking you. Especially new hires are asking you a lot of questions about what's important, or "Why do we do it this way?" You said it yourself at the beginning. Doesn't writing something down, crystallize it? Time to write it down and crystallize it for everybody who works there.
Lenny (00:56:40):
And just to summarize you as a mission, your operating principle/values. What was the third one?
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:56:45):
Yep. Long-term goals.
Lenny (00:56:47):
Long-term goals.
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:56:48):
And sort of more details on why you exist. What are you really trying to accomplish?
Lenny (00:56:52):
Interesting. And then are those numbers in your experience, or is that a story of what [inaudible 00:56:57]?
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:57:00):
Those are a little bit more, I think headlines. And I think your shorter term goals have numbers against them, right? So if you looked at your long-term goal, which might be... Another one of Stripe's is about accelerating globalization, and if you thought about what would that require, that would require us to be in a lot of markets. That would require us to have users and customers in a lot of market, and also to eliminate friction across borders. So those things, which is a very high friction thing, unfortunately in payments, and moving money, which it shouldn't be if you want to advance globalization, accelerate it, right? And so that can then become numerical goals and short term goals.
Lenny (00:57:41):
Basically objectives, and then-
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:57:43):
Yeah, it's sort of the longer term objective, and then the key results part is early is shorter term. But actually, if you're having trouble writing your company goals, actually zooming way out and being like, "If we're going to meet this mission, what do we have to accomplish in the long term?" You can then walk back from that and be like, "Oh yeah, every goal we ever have probably fits in these three to five buckets." Bam. And then you write your short term goals actually more easily because there's always going to be one about, say, international expansion. There's always going to be one about additional products because we're trying to do X, and you can't do it with one product, or whatever. You can imagine the example.
Lenny (00:58:22):
Awesome. And I know your book has a actual examples of a lot of this stuff.
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:58:25):
It does. It does.
Lenny (00:58:26):
So again, pointer to that. Okay, so that's the founding documents. The next piece is operating system. Maybe we go there, just what fits into an operating system for a company? What are the components of that?
Claire Hughes Johnson (00:58:38):
I think a lot of the components we've sort of touched on, which is do you have some sort of goals? This is now goes back what we were just talking about. For Stripe, we have an annual set of numeric targets that we put together, we have a system of goals or OKRs, objectives and key results, but sort of like what is your structure for setting milestones that you want to achieve, whether they're numeric or more like a binary, we got this thing launched, we didn't? And then QBR, so quarterly business reviews. How do we review parts of the business? What is the cadence? Well, first, what is the form by which we do that? Which would be this... I share examples in the book of this might be the template you fill out if you're a team and your reporting on how it's going and versus your strategy and your goal.
(00:59:24):
And then there's also getting into metrics and dashboards. What are things that you look at internally to measure progress, the input metrics and the output metrics? And I give some examples of that. And then mostly, I think there are other... As I said, there could be less frequent forms you use, like a user event or a launch, a way of launching products, et cetera, but it's really simple. It's mostly goals and how do you review the business. Planning. I talk a lot about planning, which is. You said this earlier, and you and I think both agree, which is there's no perfect process to plan for the next year or the next two years, but you still need to fight your way through having something, especially after a certain stage. And every COO I meet with, we sort of ring our hands together.
(01:00:11):
We're like, oh, planning and everyone hates us, too burdensome, but you still got to keep trying. You got to do it. And so we talk about planning processes and what they might look like and how you set them up. And then that's how you'd use goals and QBR to measure against the plan, right? So those are some of the operating systems. And then the cadence is just how often do you do these things? Actually, one of our big lessons, I think companies that are moving quickly and that are younger tend to resist some of the calendar based cadences of more mature companies because they seem slow. You're like, really? You're going to just achieve that goal in three months? Or are you artificially restricting yourself to some lowest common denominator of time? And so I get that fear, and I would say your cadence doesn't have to be one quarter or one six month, or even 12 months.
(01:01:08):
Stripe, we did sort of six month processes for a while. So instead of a year, we did it in six months. Still, there were things that took, by the way, a year or longer, but I think that play around with the timeframe and don't feel restricted by what other companies do. But one of our lessons on the QBR was sometimes those quarterly, because that stands for quarterly, those quarterly business reviews were too infrequent, especially for new product areas. They we're still in development. They were still getting a lot of feedback, launching a lot. And so we just said, okay, they're not quarterly anymore. They're like every six week business reviews. Fine, change your cadence. The point is to have one, because then it's predictable for teams. They know what they're marching toward, they know when they're going to be reporting out, and they can set their goals in a way that makes sense to make progress in that timeframe.
Lenny (01:02:02):
One quick question there. What's a sign that your cadence is off? What's a flag that we should go shorter or longer?
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:02:10):
Well, everyone usually complains about these things, but I think if the... One, nothing, like you said, it's probably too fast if not enough progress is being made in between whatever your review or your reporting function is, and it's probably too slow if the content you're reviewing seems stale. And you're like, "Well, we knew this," or "We already did that thing," or "Yeah, we already had the meeting where we talked about that." That's another thing that's interesting, is some companies will have a pretty frequent metrics review cadence, and then an infrequent strategy review cadence. And what happens is the metrics review becomes the strategy review because you're not talking about the strategy often enough. And so you're talking about it through the data, and so then by the time you get to the strategy review, you're like, we already had this meeting. And that's just a sign that some things are just off. And to me, it's about timeliness and freshness of the content, but also that there's actually new content. If there's not new content, you're creating work for people. By the way, give them time to work.
(01:03:12):
And so I think don't fool yourself that thinking, having more frequent checks on things is going to actually make things run faster. I would say that the opposite can be true. And so be very wary of actually slowing velocity down by creating overhead. One thing we try to do at Stripe is if we're looking at metrics, let's just look at your dashboard live. Let's not create a special presentation. I actually just share your screen please on your dashboard, right? Which is a good discipline, because one, that means you have to have a really good dashboard that's real time, that's web accessible. No one had to pull or massage the data. That's a good sign. But it's also, you're not wasting people's time prepping all that information, which happened even... By the way, at Stripe, even when we put that in place, we still ended up with versions of that problem.
Lenny (01:04:04):
Yeah, [inaudible 01:04:05] I think mentioned that. I think there's a term for it, data something, where you randomly get chosen every week and someone has to present your data.
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:04:04):
The metrics review meeting, yes.
Lenny (01:04:10):
And it's like the next day, you're going to have to share your meetings and [inaudible 01:04:12]
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:04:12):
Yes. We called it the spin the wheel, the spin wheel on who gets to present. But that has a logic in it, which is then you're not working. So just prepare it.
Lenny (01:04:26):
Right. That's awesome. I love that policy. There's so much more I want to chat about. There's chapters on hiring, self-development, personal development, all these things.
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:04:34):
Team development. Yep.
Lenny (01:04:36):
What was that?
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:04:36):
There's a, yeah, intentional. There's a team building.
Lenny (01:04:40):
Team building.
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:04:40):
And performance management.
Lenny (01:04:41):
Yeah. Okay, so we could go through all that stuff. Instead, I want to talk about the COO role broadly.
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:04:47):
Yes.
Lenny (01:04:48):
I asked on Twitter, preparing for this chat, what people wanted me to ask you about it. And most of the questions ended up being about the COO role and things like that. So I just have a few questions lined up here for you.
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:04:48):
Sure.
Lenny (01:04:58):
Okay. So Amir [inaudible 01:05:04], with little accent at the end there, he asked just at what point do companies need a COO, and how would you judge if someone is a fantastic COO?
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:05:12):
Oh yeah. Well, I would first say most companies, if you looked at the universe of all companies, do not have a COO. I think it's fewer than 20%. It's definitely fewer than 30. And I think that's something to know, that I don't think it's an automatic role to have or hire. And I think you see it in more prevalently in earlier stage or high growth companies. You also, by the way, see it in certain business models. I actually think Apple was an interesting version of this, where Steve Jobs was oriented in terms of product and design, but also that Apple has... It's very intense to manufacture software and hardware that then works together. I learned that when I worked on self-driving cars at Google, and you need a very intensely operational, detailed manufacturing, hit the marks, hit the timelines person. So I think some businesses that have a very deeply operational, say a manufacturing component, that role might be more prevalent.
(01:06:19):
But point is, it's not an automatic. I think it's useful in a high growth... In an environment where you're having... Think about the founder/CEO of a company that is achieving product market fit and also having to build a company, and hire all the leaders. That is a lot because you are building the product and the business, you are building the company, and you are building all the people, bringing them all in. And that is where I think a COO type of role can give you leverage, which is... Essentially, it's a layer that takes some of those functions and helps build them with you and on your behalf, and also in some cases, bring some experience in maybe there's a particular function like go to market that needs to be built. And I think that's where you see it come up. What I've said to some people recently is I'm a little worried, just like there's a mythical founder, that there's some mythical silver bullet COO hire that everyone's like, "I will just find that person."
(01:07:20):
And first of all, we're all human beings. I'm not perfect. I certainly did some things well when I joined Stripe, and other things not as well, and I'm working on my self-awareness of what those things are. But I would say one lower risk strategy could be to bring in, say, a head of business operations or a role that's sort of COO like and try a couple of functions with someone and see if they scale with the company and with the role, and then maybe you decide they're a COO. I mean, I mentioned Stripe's business operations team. You could hire a business ops leader and sort of say, "Hey, build this team to help be the Swiss Army knife to help scale the company, and then maybe that turns into more." Or there's some CFOs that are quite operational. They could take on more scope sometimes.
(01:08:11):
But I think there are other paths to getting that leverage, and there are also ways to de-risk the hire because you could end up searching forever, right? And I worry that it's become too much of a panacea in people's minds, like somehow they're going to find... And people will call me, and they'll be like, "I just need to find you." And I'm like, "One, I may not be right for your company, but two, that was a lot of work, and I think we actually, in the end, maybe got pretty lucky." How would you know someone is fantastic? Someone said something very smart to me, which was... I was in a meeting. It was me and Patrick. So Patrick is the co-founder and CEO of Stripe. And they said that having just the right amount of tension in our relationship was how you knew it was working for the company.
(01:09:03):
And it gave us both a little bit of pause, but we ended up having quite a good conversation after that meeting, which is there has to be mutual understanding and trust and an ability for Patrick to say, "Hey, can you go do this thing?" And then believing, I will do it at the level of quality and intensity and intentionality that he would like. But there also has to be some friction, where I would maybe say, "No, I'm not going to prioritize that. I don't think that's important for the company," or I'm going to give you feedback that I don't think we're doing this well, or he's giving me feedback. The customer experience is suffering. All your scale stuff is degrading this thing, right? So fantastic is not all hunky dory. Fantastic COO is just the right amount of friction intention with forward momentum and mutual trust, because then the whole is greater than the sum of its parts, right? That's what you're looking for.
Lenny (01:10:03):
I was actually going to say, I've worked with some founders, and they have this concept that they hire a COO, and they would just solve all these cultural issues they're having these relationship issues. And sounds like that's exactly what you're saying, is that that is not often the solution to some of these deeper issues.
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:10:18):
Well, that would be the other problem, is actually believing... I was getting recruited, Lenny, and people would... Essentially, I felt like the founders were saying to me, "I'm going to give you all of the things I don't like doing as your job." And I was like, even if I'm by the way not qualify to do all those things, number one. And two is sometimes that list would be quite long, and that would make me nervous. I was like, "Do you really not running a company actually? Is that what's going on here?" And really, I think they weren't confronting elements of their work that needed to evolve and change. And what I loved about joining Stripe was... I think people also think, "I'm just going to hand all this stuff to this person and..." I'd love to say I took all this off of the Collisons plate, and Billy and John and the other people who were there at the time, and no, we actually were more collaboratively worked together, and I think it helped...
(01:11:18):
Well, one, you don't feel as isolated because you're in a team, but also there's more joint work than people realize, I think at least in the companies I'd like to work for.
Lenny (01:11:30):
For the final 10-ish minutes we have together, and you have to run-
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:11:33):
Yes.
Lenny (01:11:34):
... I was thinking I could go through just a rapid fire set of tactical questions and see maybe one piece of advice you would share with someone that's maybe struggling with this thing.
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:11:44):
Okay.
Lenny (01:11:45):
And the first is from a also Twitter person, Manuel [inaudible 01:11:52]. And he just had a question around, as you're scaling, keeping alignment strong is challenging. What would be something you'd recommend to someone that's scaling quickly and trying to keep people aligned?
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:12:02):
Well, a lot of what we talked about, having common codified documents of what we believe in, how we work, and then using communication practices very intelligently. Never think that one communication, meaning an email or an all hands, reaches the audience. You have to be smart about how you communicate.
Lenny (01:12:23):
Awesome. Amazing. On a different podcast, we talked about how the leaders are often the repeater in chief, just having to repeat the same thing again and again.
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:12:30):
Yes. And just like a marketer, use different channels. Some people read emails, some people watch videos, some people attend the meeting. Repeat.
Lenny (01:12:40):
Love it. That'll be our clip to take away from this. I was watching an interview with you, and you talked about the value of offsites for creating cohesion within a team. Can you just talk about why offsites are so important to a company and a team?
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:12:53):
I think offsite is really a vehicle. The concept is the following, which is when you yank people out of their day-to-day routine, you create space, and also you imprint memory. And so if you say, "We're going to do a very different thing with your time today or the next two days, we're not going to do our emails, we're not going to do our regular meetings, we are going to sit and work together, we're going to brainstorm," you're basically activating new parts of their brain, and then you're also having a group experience that cements a belief system usually, or a set of plans. And it also helps bring people along. We formed this thing together, it's not effective if I say, "I locked myself in a room for three hours, and then I came out and here's the plan." You want to lock yourselves as a group, as a team in a room for three hours. How do you do that? And so that's why I think it's valuable. It's just out of time, in a way. You're taking it out of your day-to-day time, and I can't not found a good substitute for that.
Lenny (01:13:56):
On a different topic, one of the most common questions I get from product managers and just founders that I haven't tackled yet, and I'm curious what your take is, is around just keeping the company updated on what's happening broadly.
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:14:07):
Yes.
Lenny (01:14:07):
What have you found works for just keeping people informed on what's happening across the company and-
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:14:12):
Having really smart communication practices is something that I think a lot of companies don't invest in early, and it's partly because it feels like extraneous, but it's a lot of time. If you're going to communicate well, you have to invest in your intranet site and what's on it. Ideally, everyone logs in and sees information on the homepage of your company internally. Do you have a newsletter? Do you have founders do like a message or a quick video, whether that's on Slack or email. There's a lot of smart tools. You can learn a lot from social media in some ways, but you actually need a strategy for it, and you need a set of people who help make sure it happens so that again, it creates stability and cadence. And if I want to find information about X, this is where I go. And I think there's also that if you do it well, it can replicate down to teams, which is, oh, we have our weekly snippet stock that everybody can see the important news or whatever it is.
(01:15:09):
But you need to create those things because they'll start to spring up, but then you'll have a million of them, and you won't be able to point people to the core messages. But it is not a thing to be taken lightly. And I think having someone who really not focuses on internal marketing, I'm talking about just good, "Here's what's important. Here's what you need to know." Sales teams actually do this really well, because they have to, because they have to keep the sellers up to date on the product and up to date on how to pitch it. And so it actually is worth talking to smart sort of sales leaders who've scaled and saying, what do you do that keeps everyone on the same page
Lenny (01:15:48):
As you're talking, I realized [inaudible 01:15:49], who we mentioned a couple times, she left Retool, and she's working at a startup that has trying to solve this problem, I think it's called. It
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:15:56):
Is a lot about what they're working on. And it's because it is, again, an unsung thing that is critical and that I don't think people naturally come to.
Lenny (01:16:03):
Next question, what are one to two, or maybe three things that people can do to run more effective meetings? I say give this masterclass on running more effective meetings. And just to boil down, what are a couple things people could probably change?
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:16:16):
I do have a video on YouTube about running an effective meeting, but I think the number one thing is the work of a meeting is not calling the meeting. Calling a meeting is easy. In fact, that is a problem. The barrier is very low, and it should be higher. What you really want to know... People need to know why are we meeting, and what is the point, what's the objective of this meeting? Is it to make a decision? Is it to share information? Who needs to be here? One of my favorite things to say is make the thing that's implicit explicit. Too many meetings are implicitly about something and not explicit enough. And I'm like, "No, no, no. I want to know why I'm here. Are we making the decision? Who's making the decision? And how?" Even better, you say, "Does anyone not need to be here? Because we'll just send you a note afterwards about what happened? Right? Make it more efficient, but be really explicit about the point of the meeting, and really do some inquiry on whether it's important, whether it's needed.
Lenny (01:17:17):
Maybe a final question is around decision making. So product managers who are, a lot of the audience of this podcast, have to, one, make a lot of decisions, get people to alignment, but they also don't classically have authority over anyone. What advice do you have for aligning and decision making?
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:17:34):
I love product management, so much accountability. So little authority. Such a hard job.
Lenny (01:17:39):
What a fun [inaudible 01:17:41].
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:17:41):
Everyone's like, "I want to be a product manager." I'm like, man, that is one of the hardest jobs in tech.
Lenny (01:17:45):
Yeah.
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:17:46):
But anyway, how do you get people to a decision?
Lenny (01:17:48):
Yeah.
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:17:50):
Actually, it's exactly... And I mentioned in my book, Gokul's SPADE Framework, which you can look up. He has a coda on it. But actually, it's the same thing that I said about meetings, which is making it very explicit, that there is a decision to be made, who is making the decision, the criteria by which the decision's going to be made, who will be informed. There's all these models. There's racy and radar, and there's a million different decision models. Just pick one, make it explicit, explain that's what's happening, and get people through it. Follow the model and do it. And by the way, you can always have an asterisk, which is if we want to revisit this decision, this is what we do. But I think too many teams get paralyzed because they're afraid, like, well, maybe they're not the decision maker, or maybe... When I say to people at Stripe in our onboarding, I used to run a session, I was like, if you're not sure who the decision maker is, one, it's probably you, and I'd rather you act that way than not because you're going to slow the whole company down.
(01:18:52):
But really, I think the other thing is, in the book, I talk about this framework that Bezos uses, type one, type two decisions. Is it high impact? Is it irreversible? Is it not? Really evaluate, what kind of decision is this? How hard is it? And then follow a process and get it done. And don't forget to actually make a decision. And if you don't know who the decision maker is and you're worried it's not you, just ask. Don't get stuck. Too many people get stuck, and it makes your work terrible, right? What do we all care about? Progress, impact, momentum. If anything I would say about advice to people generally is be a force for positive momentum, and it will be actually a real career maker.
Lenny (01:19:41):
I love that. Maybe we'll make that the title of this interview. With that, Claire, I know you have to run. Anyone listening, you got to buy this book. Like I've said at the beginning, if you like my newsletter, it's exactly my newsletter, but as a book about operations.
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:19:54):
Thank you. Scaling People.
Lenny (01:19:56):
Scaling People. Is there a website they can go to to check it out on Amazon, or is there-
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:20:00):
They can go to press.stripe.com/scaling-people.
Lenny (01:20:00):
Amazing.
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:20:06):
Or Amazon. Just search scaling people on Amazon.
Lenny (01:20:08):
Cool.
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:20:09):
But thank you, Lenny. I appreciate it.
Lenny (01:20:12):
Absolutely. Just two final questions. Where can folks find you if they want to maybe ask you questions, follow up, reach out? And then two, any other way people can be helpful to you, other than maybe pre-ordering the book?
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:20:20):
Well, definitely pre-ordering the book and giving me feedback on that. I guess Twitter is probably the best place to find me. I'm @chughesjohnson on Twitter. But honestly, I do hope you'll consume the book in some form and interact with it because the goal is to make it useful. We talked about this, Lenny, your podcast for my book is just trying to be of use, and I hope it is a positive force for positive momentum. And I really appreciate the opportunity.
Lenny (01:20:49):
Absolutely. Thanks for making time for this.
Claire Hughes Johnson (01:20:53):
Thank you.
Lenny (01:20:53):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.
Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
You're VP of product at Facebook. You're director at eBay and PayPal. You're on the board of Intuit. You've been the CEO of Ancestry now for the past three and a half years. This is a career path that a lot of people dream of.

Deb Liu (00:00:11):
Some of the best PMs I have ever worked with are terrible PMs for their career. They just drift from job to job. "Hey, should I take this role or this role? How do I think about this?" But if I said you had to write a spec for your career, what does success look like? How are you going to get there?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:24):
You wrote this awesome post about introverts and how hard it is to be successful as an introvert.

Deb Liu (00:00:28):
The workplace is really favoring people who can speak up. It looks like self-promotion. I wouldn't want to do that because it's self-promotion. But instead, what if I called it educating about all the great work your team has been doing? Helping people see why your team should get more resources, you have to actually share what you do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:45):
Is there something that you believe that you think most other people don't believe?

Deb Liu (00:00:49):
The most important career decision you make is who you marry. Is this person lifting you up or pushing you back? You will have a much more successful career if your home life is in balance. It's like a yin and a yang.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:03):
Today, my guest is Deb Liu. Deb was VP of product at Facebook where she spent over 11 years and while they're created and led Facebook marketplace, which is now used by over 1 billion people monthly, she also led the development of Facebook's first mobile ad product for apps and its mobile ad network. Also built the company's games business and payments platform, including Facebook Pay.

(00:01:23):
Prior to Facebook, she was director at both PayPal and eBay. She's on the board of Intuit and for the past three and a half years, she's been the CEO of Ancestry. I actually generally have a rule of no CEOs on this podcast, but to me, Deb is a great exception because she's a product person at heart. In our conversation, Deb shares a ton of tactical career advice, including why resilience is so key to career success, how to PM your career like you PM your product, how to be successful in business as an introvert, what she's learned about building multiple billion dollars zero to one businesses within a large company like Facebook and so much more.

(00:01:59):
Deb is so full of wisdom and I'm really excited to share her insights with more people. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Deb Liu.

(00:02:18):
Deb, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Deb Liu (00:02:21):
It's wonderful to be here, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:23):
It's wonderful to have you here. You have had such an incredible career. You're VP of product at Facebook. You're director at eBay and PayPal. You're on the board of Intuit. You've been the CEO of Ancestry now for the past three and a half years. This is a career path that a lot of people dream of and honestly just like one of those roles is a dream for a lot of people. And so I wanted to start with just this question and I want to see where the conversation takes us. If you could give one specific piece of advice to someone that's looking to do well in their career or to do better in their career based on what has worked well for you, what would that be?

Deb Liu (00:03:02):
Always be learning, and I tell this to everybody, so I often tell people, someone who's always learning is always going to exceed someone who's the expert today. You're going to find people... The one thing about school is that we go to school and there's such a thing as getting a hundred on the test, a perfect score on the SAT, graduating with a 4.0. Well, there's nothing like that in careers, right? We think it's actually a non-linear experience and there's always something better than you at speaking or presenting or strategy or execution. But if you're always learning, learning from the best, getting feedback, you're always going to get better every single day.

(00:03:35):
And that's what I have always held, which is each job I took, I didn't necessarily qualify for it. I wasn't necessarily the very best at it, and so it became the student of being better at that job. And once I mastered that, I was a student for something else, something else and something else. And so I always balanced learning and impact, which was you can have the most impact, the job you know the best, but then you stop learning. And if you're learning all the time, you're not necessarily having impact.

(00:04:00):
So how do you keep going back and forth and back and forth so that you're not going straight up a lot or you're actually laddering back and forth into different things where you're having an amazing time where you know everything and then you're the newbie again and learning new things, and you're incorporating what you used to know into what you're learning and the impact that you have today and so on and so forth.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:21):
This episode is brought to you by Pendo, the only all-in-one product experience platform for any type of application. Tired of bouncing around multiple tools to uncover what's really happening inside your product? With all the tools you need in one simple to use platform, Pendo makes it easy to answer critical questions about how users are engaging with your product and then turn those insights into action.

(00:04:44):
Also, you can get your users to do what you actually want them to do. First, Pendo is built around product analytics, seeing what your users are actually doing in your apps so that you can optimize their experience. Next, Pendo lets you deploy in-app guides that lead users through the actions that matter most. Then Pendo integrates user feedback so that you can capture and analyze what people actually want. And the new thing in Pendo, session replays, a very cool way to visualize user sessions.

(00:05:12):
I'm not surprised at all that over 10,000 companies use it today. Visit pendo.io/lenny to create your free Pendo account today and start building better experiences across every corner of your product. PS, if you want to take your product-led knowhow a step further, check out Pendo lineup of free certification courses led by talk product experts and designed to help you grow and advance in your career. Learn more and experience the power of the Pendo platform today at pendo.io/lenny.

MUSIC (00:05:40):
Pendo.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:44):
This episode is brought to you by WorkOS. If you're building a SaaS app, at some point your customers will start asking for enterprise features like SAML authentication and skim provisioning. That's where WorkOS comes in, making it fast and painless to add enterprise features to your app. Their APIs are easy to understand so that you can ship quickly and get back to building other features. Today, hundreds of companies are already powered by WorkOS, including ones you probably know like Vercel, Webflow, and Loom. WorkOS also recently acquired warrant, the Fine Grained Authorization service. Warrant's product is based on a groundbreaking authorization system called Zanzibar, which was originally designed for Google to power Google Docs and YouTube.

(00:06:31):
This enables fast authorization checks at enormous scale while maintaining a flexible model that can be adapted to even the most complex use cases. If you're currently looking to build role-based access control or other enterprise features like single sign-on, skim or user management, you should consider WorkOS. It's a drop in replacement for auth zero and supports up to 1 million monthly active users for free. Check it out at workos.com to learn more. That's workos.com.

(00:07:03):
You talked about you got into a new job maybe you weren't ready for and you had to learn on the job. So either maybe share story one of those experiences or just like how do you actually do this? So someone's listening, they're like, how do I learn? What am I learning?

Deb Liu (00:07:14):
We'll start with my career in tech. So I had worked in consulting before business school. I went to Stanford for business school, came out to California, didn't know that much about tech, but I really loved using eBay. So I interned there my first year in business school and then when it came to finding a job, I really wasn't sure what we wanted to do, but we wanted to move back to the East Coast. And so I wasn't looking and I couldn't find a job. I think it was really hard. It was 2002. And so I ran into Tim Wenzel and Catherine Wu. So Catherine Wu was from Airbnb as you might know her. And Tim Wenzel put together the PayPal Mafia. He was the recruiter for PayPal.

(00:07:51):
Went to this table and I said, "Absolutely love PayPal, use it all the time. I'm a big seller on eBay," and he's like, "Do you want a job?" I'm like, "No, I'm actually going back east. "And he's like, "Just come in and talk to us." And so I said, "Okay. Well, what kind of jobs do you have?" And he's like, "I have jobs in product and I have jobs in marketing." Now, I've taken marketing class obviously in business school, and I said, "I wonder what this other product job is."

(00:08:12):
So I look over at Catherine and I've seen her around Stanford before, so she was a year ahead of me and I said, "Well, what do you do?" She said, "Product." I'm like, "That sounds good. I'll do that." And that's actually how I fell into product management. Well, I actually, and I'm embarrassed to say faked my way through those interviews, because during the interviews they're like, "Well, what would you build?" And since I was an avid user of both products, I could really richly say, "Here's the product feedback I have. Here are the new products you should build. Here's my feedback on things that we should be doing differently."

(00:08:39):
And they said, "Congratulations." And they gave me the job. And embarrassingly I went to the first day of work and I said to Amy Clement, who was the VP of product at the time, and I said, "Okay, I literally have no idea what this product job is."

(00:08:54):
She showed me the ropes and she was so incredible. She actually showed me, she said, "All those ideas you had, all that energy you've had around building these things, we go do that. Let's go do it." And I said, "Well, how do you do that?" And she said, "Well, you write down what you want to build and you work with the engineers to do it." And I just remember thinking, "This is crazy. I have no idea what I'm doing."

(00:09:14):
It was such an incredible adventure though. Those first few years, I just learned so much about the craft of building, how to really think through product use cases, how to think through what customers wanted, not just the customer of one, myself, but really what true customers and customer cohorts wanted. And so it was really a time when I felt like I was really blossoming, but I didn't come in with mastery. I came with a curiosity and I think that's what made me a great product manager was that I didn't have a set way of doing things. There wasn't some playbook I was trying to play. There wasn't some framework, but instead I was willing to learn.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:46):
So one takeaway might be from this, the phrase, fake it till you make it. Any thoughts on just how to... I imagine many people right now are like, "Oh, I'm trying to get a job as a pm. How do I do this? That sounds great. I'm going to pass this interview, figure out the job after I joined."

Deb Liu (00:10:02):
Coming in with humbleness was really important, but during the interview process, actually, I didn't realize this, but they asked me questions as if I was a product manager, as if I knew what I was doing. I think when you have passion around a product or passion around a company or around a business model or around something, it shows. And so it's not necessarily faking the enthusiasm or faking the idea that you want to work there, but you don't have to know how to write this spec or PRD or briefings or anything like that. You don't know how to do customer research or do data analytics or read reports, but instead show your passion around the product itself, around the use case, around the customer.

(00:10:41):
Show who you are and why you care. I think sometimes people just say, "I want a product job." But you have to be able to fall in love with the problem. You have to fall in love, not with the product, but I said the problem, right? The use case. What problem are you trying to solve? And if you can do that, you can be a great product manager even without a lot of experience.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:00):
That's an awesome piece of advice. So just lean into the passion. First of all, part of it is you have to be excited about the thing you're trying to work on or thinking about the company you're thinking about joining. Sounds like that's a prerequisite here. We have a podcast episode with Uri Levine who has a whole book called Fall in Love with the Problem, which is all about that same idea actually for startup founders.

Deb Liu (00:11:20):
I'll have to read it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:20):
Yeah, he always wears a shirt, fall in love with the problem, not the solution.

Deb Liu (00:11:23):
Yes, is absolutely the most important skill for a product leader.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:27):
Something else I've heard you talk about in terms of something that contributed to your success is being okay with failure and just bouncing back quickly versus avoiding failure. Is that something that you can come back to a lot?

Deb Liu (00:11:40):
Well, here's what I noticed about everybody. I've coached a ton of people in my life. I have managed big teens and the people who are most successful are not the people who had no failures, who were lived charm lives, head up into the right careers and got promoted every cycle. The people who were most successful were the ones who actually through adversity, learned to turn stumbling blocks into stepping stones. They were the ones who got hard feedback and then came back stronger because now they learned what to do differently.

(00:12:09):
They were the ones who products failed, but they said, "You know what? I'm going to turn this failure into success. I'm going to take those lessons and make this company stronger." When you live a charmed product life, you always work on everything that's easy. You don't actually... Trees are strong because they bend in the wind, because they're tested, because it's cold, because it's windy, because there's conditions.

(00:12:31):
And that's how a tree goes grow strong and tall over many generations. And I think sometimes we think, "Oh yeah, I wish I lived a charm life." And that is not what we want. You want to have enough adversity that you learn to overcome so that you can build stronger over time and build resilience in your career.

(00:12:50):
I've seen that so much, which is the best product leaders I ever worked with are the ones that have the toughest stories, that had the hardest feedback, but also the ones who were able to bounce back quickly and make it happen.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:02):
We have a segment on this podcast called Failure Corner where people share a failure they went through kind of along the same lines and something we learned from that experience. Is there an example of that from your career where a failure made you stronger?

Deb Liu (00:13:13):
Yeah. I remember there was a job that I really wanted at Facebook and I'd been there for a long time. I had been leading different teams. I was a VP of product and then GM. There was one job that I never got to do, so I got to do all the jobs I wanted and Mark gave it to someone else. I told him at the time when he gave it to the first person who was amazing at it, I said, "If this job were open, I'd like to be considered for it."

(00:13:37):
The job opened up later, gave it to someone else. And I said to Mark, again, "I really wanted that job." And he said, "Not only will I not give you that job, you'll never have that job at this company."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:49):
What?

Deb Liu (00:13:51):
He didn't say it harshly. But he was giving me feedback about something which he did not see me in that role, in a role that I really wanted. And I had to decide each time like, "What do I do with this information?" This is my dream job. Actually, I decided I was going to turn the job I had and the job I wanted, and that's a choice. I could have said, you know what? I can't have that job. I could go do something else, but I didn't. I took the job I had with the team I had and I turned it into this thing that was going to be something we wanted.

(00:14:20):
And so I think sometimes it's not... I think that that experience was a very humbling experience because to be told no and then to say that this will never happen was really hard. But at the same time it was a reminder that you're not right for every job even if you think you are. And that you can take the raw materials of what you have and turn it into what you want.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:40):
Are you able to share what those jobs were that you wanted to get that you never got?

Deb Liu (00:14:44):
I never actually shared it publicly, but it's something which I had always had a role where I did new things for the company and there was a role where it was running something which more of an existing business, but I had always been kind of the innovator, the new stuff person. I had taken over so many new things. And so maybe that wasn't the right thing at the right time for me, but it was something that was really incredible and a turning point for me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:08):
Great segue to an area I wanted to spend some time on which is building zero to one stuff within a larger company. So from what I can tell you built 2 billion businesses within a large company, Facebook marketplace, and then the ads platform within Facebook and maybe more. I don't know, the payments stuff, the games. I don't know. Maybe there's billions of dollars there I don't even know about. And this is very rare and very hard, and it's something we talk a little bit on this podcast, just the skills to build something new.

(00:15:38):
I know with marketplace it was not something people believed in for a long time. It took a lot of work to convince people to actually give it a shot. So I guess the question here is just what have you found are key tactics to start something new and allow it to continue to exist and get to a place where people start to believe it? What has worked for you?

Deb Liu (00:15:57):
So first, I didn't build the ads platform. I actually built the first direct response ad product company ever had. But we'll talk about how that led to why direct response is a vast majority of the ads revenue for the company. But one thing that it was really interesting is that I really saw my opportunity in Facebook to be somebody that zigged when other people zagged. There were amazing people who did a lot of the really core products working on feed, photos, videos.

(00:16:25):
I came in actually on the payments team and we worked on payments and eventually built games, which was the first billion dollar business. It was very successful. We worked with the likes of all the game companies that were on the Canvas games platform. And it was just an incredible opportunity to start from scratch and built something really cool. We built Facebook credits, which eventually became the Facebook payment system.

(00:16:47):
And then from there on I built the first direct response ads product. And again, leveraging the skills that we had, we had a lot of relationships with game companies because of my time and payments. And so we just said, "Hey look, what ad product do you want?" And they said, "Actually, your biggest challenge is the shift to mobile. Build us a mobile acquisition engine." And we said, "That's doable."

(00:17:09):
At the time the company was very brand oriented. Most of the ads... Actually almost all the ads on the platform were brand and we were not even on the ads team. So we actually worked on this team called the platform team. We said, "Okay, we'll build an ads product for the Facebook feed, the new mobile Facebook feed." And suddenly it became a billion dollar business within about 18 months, which was such an incredible journey.

(00:17:30):
We worked on the mobile advertising platform, so basically the mobile ads network. That was a great experience. And so each time I worked on something, it was just... The thing that you have to remember is the failure rate for something like this is very high. You start something and the amount of iteration... People think, "Oh yeah, it's easy." You start something and it's linear because you have all the resources of this company behind you. But actually everything in the company is like, "Let's do the most important thing."

(00:17:58):
These are seeds and we'll just let them... And so if you do that, you have to know that you don't get a lot of resources, you get a lot of attention. And I appreciated that because I think I work best when people aren't... There is not a lot of scrutiny. I think sometimes large companies, they say, "Well this innovation team," and then they check in on them way too much. They're like, "Week to week progress, where are you going? What's your strategy?" But so much as you know of building something new is the iteration process. It's the failing a lot.

(00:18:27):
We actually tested five or six versions of the ads product before we got it to take off and it took months, and then we were on the verge of death multiple times. In fact, I actually went back to run the payments team while I was working on that product because the team we had gathered still want to continue working on it, but I needed a second job back on the payments team because they asked me, "We don't think this thing is going to work. You should go run your old team again." And I thought, "Well, I will do both."

(00:18:52):
And so I did both for a while until it really took off. The thing that I think a lot of large companies don't realize is that you can love something to death. And so with every new product, I'd rather do it out of the limelight, do it with the minimal resources and have the freedom to fail because success and failure really is... In startups, failing fast is really important or succeeding fast.

(00:19:18):
It's the long slog that makes it really hard. In a company, you end up getting cut if you're the long slog product. And so being able to just say, "You know what? We're pruning this. We're doing the next thing, the next thing." And then having the time to iterate and grow is really critical.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:33):
So as a leader trying to do this and create space for this, is there something you've learned about how to allow for, "Don't over scrutinize us, don't look at us too carefully. We don't want to be in the limelight. Don't put too many resources on this yet." Is it just like, "Hey, Mark. Here's what I think." I imagine it's not as easy as that. There's a lot of influence and that kind of work. Is there any tactics that you could share to create this sort of environment?

Deb Liu (00:19:59):
I think the most important part of the environment is really patience. And again, this is a portfolio strategy and I tell every PM who... I used to do a new hire PM class and I say, "Look, a lot of you are going to go into the core product and your job is to grow X by 3 to 5% every six months. Growing engagement or growing sessions or maybe growing video views or whatever your metric is, you're trying to grow something 5% and then you exceed expectations."

(00:20:27):
And I said, "And then a bunch of you are like, 'I want to do something new. I want to build something from scratch.'" And I said, "By the way, a very, very successful company for a new set of products has a 50% hit rate. So half of you are going to come back in a year and have a different job because that did not work out. Do you have the resilience to do that?" And I think somebody, you enter a large company... By the way, you can have an amazing career building core products because that is an incredible journey within... Because you learn so much about the mechanics of what that takes.

(00:20:59):
And yet at the same time, I found a lot of energy from doing something that someone hasn't done before. And so I really enjoyed the, "Hey, this thing could fail. Let's pivot. Let's try to figure out. Let's prune this. Let's try that." And not everything I did there succeeded, but a lot of the things that are the lasting products are once that gotten really big. And so for me it was a greater reward and it made a journey so much more interesting.

(00:21:24):
But for others, I think work on the core product, learn the skills. It is absolutely respectable as well. But if you choose to be the person who works on innovation new products, expect in a year, you might literally have nothing to show for it, but the lessons that you learned. And I think those lessons are really precious and we often underestimate that too.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:42):
Along those lines, do you think it's a good career move to do a zero to one thing within a bigger company? Or is it often a bad idea? Do you have any advice there for folks?

Deb Liu (00:21:52):
It depends. It depends on your personality in the company. So the one thing I realized about my role was that I did a lot of... I had five different careers at the company over 11 years. And so most people don't realize that when you work on new things, you're constantly adding to your portfolio, subtracting from it, growing things, pruning them. And so you could just work on so many cool things except everything has similar... It's like it rhymes, but it's not exactly the same.

(00:22:19):
So you learn the lessons of how to get things done, how to get resource, how to get support when the product is not working, how to not get prunes in the next culling. And those are really, really important skills. But I think for people who are just starting out of the career, it is a very high risk thing to do. So if you're very early in the career, I encourage people just learn the core skills first. You can learn the core skills when there's a lot of stability. This product is growing X percent, like 5%, and you're going to grow at 10. That's amazing.

(00:22:47):
That is because you are there, you're going to change your trajectory of the product, or this thing has a hundred thousand users, you're going to get it to 200,000. Those are the kinds of things that are going to be successful for you and you can put on your resume. But I think it reaches a point in your career where you have to decide, when am I going to take the big swing? Because the big swings are the things that you write your career stories about. They're not just, I moved this metric X, but I changed your trajectory in this way.

(00:23:17):
And so the big swings though have a lot of failures along the way. And so you have to understand you're making trade-offs in that. I encourage everybody to take some time, two, three years in their career when they're ready for the big swing, where if it doesn't work... If it works, you run the team, you run this amazing product. It doesn't work, you can always go back and go back to the core products.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:39):
It's interesting how your strategy here is very similar to a product portfolio strategy where as a team should have a few big bets and then a lot of incremental stuff. And it reminds me about this awesome post called You Are in Control of Your Career. And the argument in your post is you should PM your career the way you PM your product. So there's a lot of synergy here. So maybe just diving into this post and advice around this, how should someone be PMing their career, the way they PM a product? What's your take there?

Deb Liu (00:24:05):
By the way, for your PM audience, I want to say this, which is a lot of the greatest PMs are the worst PMs of their careers. They love products. They love the crafts. They love the customer research, the data. They have plans, they have timelines. And then when it comes to career, they have none of those things. They just drift from job to job. "Hey, should I take this role or this role? How do I think about this?" But if I said you had to write a spec for your career, what's in there? What are your milestones? What are the skills? What are the features that you want to have of your career? How are you going to get there? What does success look like?

(00:24:41):
You actually have metrics for your product, and yet you don't have metrics for your career. I coach a lot of people and when I coach them, I ask them, "Well, where do you want to see yourself in five years? Where do you want to go?" And half the people have no idea. I think that's really tragic because when you PM your career, it's about intentionality. But I'll tell you the story of my career and how I was the accidental PM and then eventually... I told you how I accidentally fell into PM, but also fell into so many of the things that happened in my PM career.

(00:25:10):
And if I had to go back, I would think much more deeply about what I want to accomplish. So I ended up at PayPal working for a guy named Dave Lee who reported to Amy Clement, and then he left. And so she offered me his role. I had only managed people for, I don't know, 15 seconds. I was two years out of business school and I was definitely not qualified to do his job. He was the director of product. I wasn't even a director and I was running the team for eBay.

(00:25:34):
So basically the PayPal part of eBay, which was basically half the company's revenues and profits. Totally unqualified. I ended up in this job and I do a good job. I ended up doing it for several years. I built up the team and we have a great relationship with eBay. Our team was very close and we were able to actually build something really lasting that worked really well. And then I had a baby. And so this happens in a lot of women's careers. I was turning 30, I had my son, and I had to leave for six months.

(00:26:08):
So I handed my product to my successor, Mike Woo and he ended up taking over. He did such a good job while I was gone, I didn't want to displace him when I got back. And so I thought, "Well, I'll go and look for another role." I couldn't really find a product role I liked, I mean, because there weren't that many product director roles. And so I ended up in corporate strategy. So I worked for the amazing Rajiv who was CEO at the time. He since passed and I wrote his speeches, worked on strategies, I worked on digital goods and charity, and ended up building that into a vertical for the company. So charity, social commerce and digital goods.

(00:26:40):
And I thought, "Okay, this is an interesting job." So I create the job, have a couple product managers, wasn't really sure where this was going, and then one day I was like, "You know what? I'm not feeling this. I have a child at home." I had gotten into what Cheryl Sandberg calls that kind of between kids situation where I was bored of my job.

(00:26:59):
I was working one of the VPs I worked with and I resigned. I said, "I'm leaving tech, just I'm going to stay home and maybe start something small." He convinced me to hold off and he said, I'll find you a job. He calls me a week later and he said, "Found you a job with Stephanie Tilenius leading the buyer experience at eBay product." And I said, "Oh, that sounds interesting." So I said, "Sure, as you notice, I do not have a plan. I'm just drifting. I'm so fortunate that I had amazing mentors who gave me opportunities, but end up working for Greg Fant and Stephanie Tilenius at eBay for two years.

(00:27:34):
I led the buyer experience. We did some really good work there. And then went on maternity leave again. And I get a call from a friend, my old engineering manager from PayPal, "Hey, I'm at Facebook. Do you want to come? You can't come into product. You need a CS degree for that, but we have a product marketing job open." I was like, "Sounds good." Drop into Facebook. And so again, no idea what I'm doing back in product marketing. So I spent a few years doing that. Eventually was invited into product and so on and so forth.

(00:28:02):
And each job that came along was organic, but also kind of accidental. I see that happen in a lot of careers, which is my story when you look back, looks great. It looks like it all worked out, but I had almost zero intentionality in any of these. And I think that had I had more agency and I thought about what I wanted, I could actually measure is this the thing that would get me further or not?

(00:28:24):
I ended up extremely lucky, but not everybody does. And so I think having a plan allows you to compare every decision. It's not like when you're offered an admission to college, we're looking at three different offers maybe with financial aid or not, and you can make a decision, "Oh, they're offering me this department, but I can't get into this department." This is how far it is from home. But jobs and roles or nothing like that. Someone calls you one day, "Hey, I'm at Facebook. Do you want to come? I'm actually on maternity leave." And he's like, "Just come talk to me." I'm like, "Why not."

(00:29:00):
And you end up dropping into different parts of your life and I think sometimes by saying, "Here's where I want to go and here's how I want to get there," you can have such a better career. And so I do encourage everybody to do this and to think about what does success look like in five years and how far am I from that and am I heading in the right direction?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:20):
What's interesting is I also had a similar path to you where I had zero plan or intention or goal and also just follow things and things worked out. I wonder how often that happens and I wonder if this idea of having intention and planning a roadmap is something you do if things aren't working out because maybe there's some good to not overthinking it and just following pull. I don't know.

Deb Liu (00:29:45):
Well, I think the problem is this with you and me, Lenny, is that hindsight bias is a problem. We made it because we weren't intentional in a lot of ways, but for how many people, is that true? For how many people who aren't... You don't have a plan and you get there. I always tell people, if you are sure what your destination is, that's definitely where you're going to end up. But if you actually aim in the right direction, you can shape your learnings, you can shape your roles you take, you can shape your skills towards the place that you want to go.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:16):
When you talk about getting this offer from Facebook, usually those are like you have three days to decide.

Deb Liu (00:30:21):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:22):
And it feels like that's when the things you've done ahead of time of here's what I want would be most helpful.

Deb Liu (00:30:29):
Also, I think the thing about job opportunities in particular is they tend to come serially. It's only you presented these offers. It's like one role is so different from another and they often don't happen at the same time. They might say, "Well, you have to decide in two weeks." And then you say, "Well, there's this other company I'm talking to and you get a lot of pressure to say yes to this versus this."

(00:30:49):
And to really having a measuring stick is this getting me closer or further away from where I go? Can allow you to actually take serial decision making to a place where you're measuring against a long-term goal.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:01):
I did a meditation retreat once and when you're meditating, there's this kind of guidance of don't try too hard, don't push yourself to go into a direction, "Oh, I'm not doing a good job. I need to get to this enlightened state." And instead their advice is just push your cart in a direction and think about that's the direction you want head, but you don't need to grasp on to here's where I need to land, here's where I need to go. And I wonder if just having a thought of here's where I want my career to go. I want to be on boards in the future. I want to start a company in the future. I want to become a designer in the future. At least start there maybe just like a direction that you're heading.

Deb Liu (00:31:40):
Yeah. There's a woman who I worked with in product and now she's the founder, very successful founder, and she said to me, "I want to join the board of this Fortune 100 company." She told me the company, and I said, "Okay, that's a lot." So she said, "How can I get there?" And I said, "First, it's probably going to take you 10 years because look at who's on the board. I happen to know a couple people on the board." And I said, "Why don't I introduce you to one of them? And they can tell you how to get there.

(00:32:04):
But the point is she knew where she wanted to go and she said, "I'm willing to take it first step today." And I said, "First, you've never been on a board. You were very successful, but this is not... There's so many steps before you get there. It's like before you go to Harvard, you have to graduate from elementary school to middle school. You have to take the SAT, you have to apply. I said, "Let's start from the first step and let's break this problem down."

(00:32:29):
But I love that she knew where she wanted to go and she's like, "Even if I don't make it there, I'll be happier having made this journey." And I love that for her. And I think she's still earlier in her career, she has so much time ahead of her, but it's really incredible to see her kind of on this path and to know that that's her dream, and that I can help her a little bit along the way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:48):
It also relates very much to your idea of thinking of your career like a PM thinks about their product where one of the tactics is to imagine the ideal scenario and work backwards from that versus incrementally what's the next thing? What's the next thing? So in this case, she was thinking, "Here's where I want to head. Okay, what's the next thing to get to that direction?" I love that.

(00:33:07):
This episode is brought to you by Webflow. We're all friends here, so let's be real for a second. We all know that your website shouldn't be a static asset. It should be a dynamic part of your strategy that drives conversions. That's business 101, but here's a number for you. 54% of leaders say web updates take too long. That's over half of you listening right now. That's where Webflow comes in. Their visual first platform allows you to build, launch, and optimize webpages fast. That means you can set ambitious business goals and your site can rise to the challenge. Learn how teams like Dropbox, IDEO, and Orangetheory trust Webflow to achieve their most ambitious goals today at webflow.com.

(00:33:53):
Okay, going a slightly different direction, I'd say the post that you've written that has most resonated with me was about introverts and how hard it is to be successful as an introvert, and that basically have to learn to be an extrovert as an introvert because in business extroverts are most valued. Can you just talk about of your insight, what you've seen around this and how and your advice to introverts like me about how to be successful in business, what you need to change?

Deb Liu (00:34:22):
Well, first, I love the book, Quiet by Susan Cain. She talks about the power of introverts. Unfortunately, the world doesn't see the way the world the way she does. I wrote this post. It was the secret bias no one talks about, which is the workplace is really favoring people who can speak up. And I tell the story of somebody on my team who's just an amazing product manager, and yet every time she came up for promotion or calibration, people were like, "Oh, what does she do?" And it was because she was not good at broadcasting or explaining what she does.

(00:34:54):
I would take her to executive meetings and she was really bad at answering questions or talking. And so we would prep and prep and prep. I just knew her skills and I could see her every day moving the product forward. But for some reason people... Because your peers also have influence over people's ratings and their promotions, and I was constantly just trying to figure out how to get them to see her brilliance. I asked her once, I said, "I noticed that you never answer questions when we do these presentations." She's like, "Yeah, because I'm a processor. And by the time I process, I feel like the conversation has moved on."

(00:35:28):
And so I really feel like the world, it's not built for somebody like her who's a brilliant product leader, but people couldn't see it. And I realized that so much of what products and just general leadership is, is not just doing the work, but actually... It's not just having the product, it's having great product marketing to go with it. Let's call it that. Okay, so I've been in product and I've been product marketing. You make a light bulb, but you're selling light.

(00:35:53):
I really think about how that she was making amazing number of light bulbs. She was lighting up all the houses, but she was not marketing the light. And I think that was the thing that was really missing. Is that fair? Absolutely not. There are a lot of people who are born introverted. Is it fair that a product manager who isn't introverted, isn't extroverted is struggling with that? No, but that's the world we live in. And so it's one of those things where you get to choose what you do.

(00:36:21):
First, I think for the individual is realizing that you are your own best marketer. You have to actually share what you do. If a great product is out in the world, but no one is told about it, did it exist? And so one of the things that's very important is really to get that product marketing.

(00:36:39):
The second part is we should change our workplaces so everyone can be successful. And I think that that's a really important skill. As more introverts get into leadership, they need to actually change the world to make more space for people like them as well. So one of the things that I found was in my leadership teams over the last several years, we had this thing where we all vote, but we vote offline in a document and we put a number in and then we put our comments in.

(00:37:05):
And that way everyone has an equal voice in this document. And then when we talk about it, usually, of course the extroverts speak first, but everyone has a vote and we can actually see what people's point of views are. And I love that. I love that when there's something we used to do at Facebook is we used to go around in a circle and everybody would give their opinion in a meeting. I do that still today. I ask every single person as a business leader at this company, would you do this?

(00:37:30):
And even I joke with our chief legal officer, Greg, I say, "You are a business leader and the lawyer. You can't just say, well, legal advises X." I'm like, "But what would you do?" And so nobody can take a backseat to decision making. Everybody has a voice. So there's so many of these kind of bias interrupters, things that we can do to actually make the world easier for those who weren't speaking up and taking 80% of the air in the room. And I do think that we have to craft a workplace where everyone can be their best.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:59):
In the post, you also talk about as much as we want to change the way people run their companies and think. I love your advice of you also still have to learn how to speak up and act more extroverted even though it's not natural to you. Is that right?

Deb Liu (00:38:14):
I think we do a disservice when we say we're not good at speaking up because it's a skill like any other. And if I told you the difference between your product being successful and not being successful is you giving this presentation, they're going to kill your product if you don't sell this to the executives. You would figure out a way to stand in front of those executives and defend the freaking heck out of your product. But why aren't you doing that every day?

(00:38:35):
And I think sometimes we forget that not everything is as essential as they're going to cut your product if you can't convince them to keep it. But every day you're actually building credibility for your team, getting more resources, getting more people to talk about your product inside your company, getting more press for the product outside. All of those things combined into momentum for your product. And don't you want the best thing for your product and your customers?

(00:38:58):
So if you think about it that way, it's not, well, I'm uncomfortable. I hear this a lot where people say, "Well, you wouldn't understand. I'm an introvert." And I'm like, "So was I." But instead I just said, "Okay, this is a necessary skill and it's a learnable skill. You don't have to be comfortable with it. You don't have to love it, but you just have to do it."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:19):
What about from another perspective of why people don't do this, which is it feels like self-promotion and it feels like icky like, "I'm just sitting around promoting myself. I don't want to be doing that." Anything there that helps people get over that piece?

Deb Liu (00:39:31):
Well, I just remember I was talking to this ERG group and I was asking about... There was an upcoming calibration and self reviews were due in a couple of days. And I said, "Well, what are you doing for your self-review?" And somebody raised their hand and said, "Well, I'm really bad at self-promotion. What advice would you have for me?" And I said, "If you think your self-review is self-promotion, you're just not going to do a great job at it."

(00:39:56):
What if I called it educating your manager about all the great work your team has been doing? What if I called it helping people see why your team should get more resources? Suddenly you're cracking open, you're changing the question right from, "Oh, I was self-promoting to actually I'm helping my team get more resources and support." And suddenly she was like, "Oh yeah, I never thought about it that way."

(00:40:22):
But I think often if you frame it one way, it looks like self-promotion. I wouldn't want to do that because of self-promotion. But at the same time, if it's education, what if I said, "I was talking to a PM who's really incredible. I've mentored him and sponsored him for a long time." And I said, "I don't understand why you don't have more of a voice. You've learned so much about the craft. You've done this at multiple companies." And he said exactly what you said which is I'm not really self-promoting.

(00:40:46):
And I said, "If you see it as self-promoting, you will never do it." And so let's talk about why you don't actually do this. And he said, "I've seen a lot of people who are really great on LinkedIn write these articles, but they have nothing to back it up." And I don't want to be like them. And I said, "Okay. Well, you read my blog, you follow me on LinkedIn, do you think I have nothing to black back it up?" And he's like, "No, of course not."

(00:41:07):
And I said, "Well, then why do you put yourself in his category instead of mine?" And I think it was just a moment where we just came to an understanding where he in his mind was like, "I don't want to be that person. It's an empty vessel that has no substance behind it." And I said, "Do you think the things I write have no substance?" But it was an interesting conversation because he had taken this mantle that it was self-promotion and that behind what if people think I'm nothing behind it?"

(00:41:32):
I'm like, "I know you have something behind this. I have been your manager. I have worked with you for many years, but you see how just reframing it has really changed his way of thinking about it." Still working on him. But I actually think he has so much to give and I think he has learned so much about the craft, and I wish that more product managers feel comfortable that they have something to give to the world.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:53):
I think what you're saying right now will resonate with a lot of people when they see people posting. I feel the still of just like, "I don't want to be this guy that's just posting nonsense on LinkedIn just to get likes," even though it's kind of what I do now full time. Hopefully it's not nonsense.

Deb Liu (00:42:08):
But it is all substance. So, Lenny, we know the substance behind it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:11):
I tried, but I think there's posting on LinkedIn, posting on Twitter. There's like an innate just doing this because I want to get attention when often... And the way I started this is just like things I've learned that I think are useful, I'm just going to put them out there. So just to double click a little bit, I think this is a really powerful point. What actually have you found helps people get over that? Is it someone like you and his corner being like, "You have really great stuff to share, you should actually do it. Don't be as worried as you are, as you think you might be." Is there anything else that works there?

Deb Liu (00:42:41):
Actually what worked for me was I was working with Bos and I talk about our relationship in my book, but we made a contract when I started reporting to him. And Bos, for those of you don't know, is currently the CTO of Meta. At the time he was the head of ads and then our team moved into his team. And so I was reorged into his organization. And as I said we did not have the best relationship before that. And so we made a contract to work together and I had written like, "Here's how I want you to take care of my team. Here's how I want you to support our products." And I wrote them this long, my part of the commitment.

(00:43:13):
Then he wrote back, "Here's what I'm asking of you. I want you to write and publish something every month." I was like, "What are you talking about? Why would you say that?" He said, "You have so much to teach people. Just do it." I said, "I don't really have that much to say." And he's like, "Just trust me on this. You'll figure it out." His advice was write what you repeat. If you say something more than once, just write it down. And then the next time someone asks you, you can just hand them.

(00:43:40):
He has a great blog if you have read it. I just normally thinking that is a weird thing for your new manager to say after you had a lot of conflict together before that. But he took my contract, which was... By the way, he's like, "Oh, do you want to codify this in some way?" I'm like, "No, I just..." But every month from then on, I would literally just write something and it was my promise to him. And I did it faithfully and I published it internally. So I didn't publish it externally for a long time.

(00:44:04):
And then sometimes they would ask me if I want to publish it externally for the company and I would say yes. And so I did it for years. I reported to him for years. And then we switched managers. He moved over to Reality Labs and then I had a new manager and I continued and I continued this. Then I started doing a publicly, and then obviously I wrote a book. Because of him and his encouragement, it got me to a totally different place. And part of it was just the commitment. I now had accountability because I knew he was watching. I'm not actually sure if he was actually watching every month. But I felt the accountability to do this and I've done it every single month since.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:37):
So it's interesting that that's another example of your manager giving you the space slash forcing you to share publicly being a really good lever to get someone over this fear.

Deb Liu (00:44:48):
I think sometimes just doing it gets you over the hump. For example, my friend, Ami Vora. She writes an incredible blog. You have not read her Substack, you should. But she's an incredible writer. She'd write all these things internally and I said, "You should publish this externally." Now she does that and it's really great. And I think part of it was just seeing her just put it out there because she is one of the wisest career coaches that I have and managers that I have ever worked with. And so I'm like, "You have so much to say and to share."

(00:45:16):
So to see it out there, I feel like for years we all got the benefit of it because we knew her. But the world was not getting the benefit. So in some ways just having accountability. So we created a little accountability group to help each other write, and it was just a reminder, "Hey, did you do it?" And so I think it's sometimes what's necessary to get over that hump is either having someone forcing you, like your manager who you made a commitment to, or just having a friend to say, "Hey, by the way, where's this month's post?"

(00:45:41):
Those things matter because now you got over the hump of, "I have to do it." And now it's just about how good you're going to make it and how much time you're going to put into it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:49):
Awesome advice. And by the way, folks don't know we've had both Bos and Ami on the podcast in the past.

Deb Liu (00:45:55):
Aren't they both amazing?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:56):
Amazing. And Ami's episode is one of the most popular episodes. More popular than Bos, CTO of Meta.

Deb Liu (00:45:56):
I know.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:56):
Who would've thought?

Deb Liu (00:46:06):
She has a lot of coaching wisdom I think that everyone should hear.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:08):
Yeah, she's amazing. She has a great Substack. We'll link to it again in the show notes. We'll link to your Substack as well.

Deb Liu (00:46:13):
Yeah, please do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:15):
Go Substack. I want to move in a slightly different direction. Talk about growth for a little bit. You have a really nice perspective on how to think about growth. I think a lot of people think of growth as like, "Here's a magic bullet. We're going to do this thing. It's going to go, "Wow, we're going to win." And your approach is, you talk about it, it's a game of inches. Growth is a game of inches. Can you talk about your perspective there?

Deb Liu (00:46:34):
Yeah. Sometimes we think it's like what is the huge step function? But actually most companies are like... We call it points of growth, right? It's like if you can move things 1% a little bit faster every single week, think about the amount of growth you get at the end. And so it's not just, "Okay, what's going to get you the 3X? You can get to 3X 1% at a time, 5% at a time. Single digit growth. And sometimes it is the small things that matter the most. And so we think about product-led growth, it's really about finding the aha moments, the opportunities. And sometimes opportunities are things that seem really silly.

(00:47:10):
I heard the story at Facebook that one of the big things was just adding the, next to ads, they put the word create an ad, was one of the biggest growth drivers. And that was it just putting a link because people just didn't know how to get to the ads flow. It was things like that where you can actually bend the curve of choices that you make. Same thing, each of the growth teams I've ever worked on, it's like really the small things adding up. It is a list we used to work on payments growth and we had a list of a hundred things we were working on hypotheses.

(00:47:42):
And then we would pick and we would grow them by picking the first 10 and we would start working on them, the next 10, the next 10, and we would go through these sprint cycles. And the same thing when we were growing the ads product as well. Marketplace, each of them were just like, "What are the small things that add up to big things?" And I think sometimes we overthink it.

(00:48:00):
Instead, you probably have a hundred ideas. And by the way, it is absolutely okay if the 80% of them don't work. I tell people sometimes we overthink as product manager if we just had the perfect plan, the perfect battle plan, but instead imagine you're a team and you can ship, I don't know, let's say four things. But what if you're a team that can ship 20 things with the same with a 20% success. You get just as much output and yet you know what doesn't work also.

(00:48:30):
What if you can move it from 20% to 30%? Suddenly six things work, not just four things. And so in the same amount of time you have all the lessons of what didn't work, plus you're getting 50% more output. And so you thinking about growth as this engine of, it's a learning machine of what doesn't work, what you reiterate on, what you change, and you're constantly getting better and better and better.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:50):
I think what you're saying will resonate with a lot of product people where there's always this like, "We're just doing a bunch of optimization, incremental work. Still sucks, boring. Let's take some big bets." And in my experience, and sounds like in your experience, a lot of the wins actually... And Facebook is famous for this, just relentlessly looking for ways to grow, optimize, optimize, optimize because that's where a lot of growth comes from.

(00:49:14):
At the same time, obviously you need to take some big bets and take some swings and look for step function changes. But I guess for someone that's just like... I don't know. Is there any advice on just creating that culture of like, "It's okay to optimize for a long time, there's a lot of opportunity optimizing"? Is there anything you've learned there or is it just bringing in a Deb and it has to be a top down?

Deb Liu (00:49:32):
I treat growth like, let's say, a product marketing team. It is an augmentation for a product that works. So if you have a core product that works, you have a team that's working on... So for us at Ancestry, it's like search and hints of the core. What is the mechanics? You want people to add people to their family tree. You want them to add stories, okay? There's teams that make sure that the uptime is good, that the hints are working, the search delivers results.

(00:49:57):
And you need those teams, you need those core teams kind of functioning. But growth is actually optimization on top. It is making it so that you get to the search flow faster. The hints are surfacing better, that people are accepting them, that if we put the button here versus here, that people are going to discover things faster. And so it's really taking the core engine and actually wrapping it around the user interface around the experience, around the flows so that people can get to it faster, they can have more satisfaction, they can have more impact. And that's what I see growth as. It's not the core product. It is the cherry on top, making that product more accessible and more usable and better every single day.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:37):
Along these lines, I think it surprised people to learn. There's at least a hundred people at our Airbnb just working on pricing, optimizing pricing recommendations. There's endless opportunity to just make all these core components of an experience better and better and better over time. Okay. Last thing I want to talk about, and this is completely unrelated to everything we've been talking about mostly, which is your 30, 60, 90-day plan.

(00:51:00):
So you wrote this post a while ago, just like, here's a great 30, 60, 90-day plan when you join a company. I've heard that many people use this. It's really effective for helping someone onboard and be successful. And I think it's mostly for execs or is this for just anyone joining a company?

Deb Liu (00:51:16):
It's for anyone.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:17):
Okay, anyone.

Deb Liu (00:51:18):
I created, it's actually when I joined Ancestry because I hadn't started a real new job in 11 years. And I thought, I'm going to be a student of how to land well. So I read a bunch of things, I read and I decided I was going to adapt all of those things into a summary and then I was going to try it real time in my blog.

(00:51:38):
So in my blog I write, "Here's what I'm going to do," and then I tell you what I did and how it worked and some things. And then I actually do a look back as to all the mistakes I made. And so I did this live. It was not planned quite as well as I would thought, but I put it together and I wrote the 30, 60, 90-day plan and I have a template. I always tell people it's focused on listening and learning first and then doing. So that's the crux of it, which is in those 90-days it's like you got to get used to the environment. You want to have some impact at the start. You want to have a couple quick wins, but you want to understand the lay of the land and you want to listen because you have something to contribute.

(00:52:19):
But if you don't understand the language, you don't understand the culture, you might actually make huge mistakes. And so for the first 30 days, I did a listening tour. I talked to over 60 people in 30 days and then I summarized a state of the union. Here's what I'm hearing, here are the challenges people feel like we're facing. Here's what people's wishlists are. And by the way, one person sent me a wishlist of five things and at that year, I think it took me till year two to finish his five things. And then I sent him a note. I said, "By the way, the first time we met, these five things you wanted to see, we just finished the last one."

(00:52:50):
And he's like, "I can't believe you remember." I took extensive notes and I summarized it. I think it's important because people want to hear that you hear them. And you don't have to be a manager or CEO to do that. I think people on teams often feel like there's no outlet for the things that they want to say. I encourage, especially product leaders, especially if you're joining an existing team, to listen really behind what people are saying and then offer to help them do one thing.

(00:53:17):
So especially when you're meeting with a new engineering team for the first time, actually ask them, what is one thing I can do to help you this week? I always say one thing, it's limited. This week, so getting 15 new headcount. Probably not going to happen. And it's like, how can I give back? And suddenly you're building a reciprocal relationship. And so a lot of this 30, 60, 90-day plan is really to help you find your footing and then to start having impact immediately.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:43):
Say you join a company and you're like, "I'm going to do 30 days listening," and then your boss is like, "No, we need to ship stuff. Get on it, ship this stuff." Is there any advice for trying to push back on that, create space for listening when there's deadlines, things aren't [inaudible 00:53:56]?

Deb Liu (00:53:57):
I encourage everybody to get on the same page on this 30, 60, 90-day plan with their manager. So actually don't just keep it to yourself. Share it with as many people as you can. So I think it's very important that everyone sees what you're trying to accomplish and what your output is going to be. Because if you don't know the output, is success there? The second part is with your manager say, "Okay. I would like to carve 20% of my time listening and I'm happy to do this work 80% of the time." Therefore every morning from nine to 10, I want to talk to somebody in the organization.

(00:54:28):
Just make sure you say, "I will do a better job and have more impact if I have this time to make sure that I'm not accidentally making mistake or I don't get a chance, I'm asking something of somebody, but I've never met them." And to really carve out space because it's really important. Once you're in it, people give you the new person card for maybe a month or two and then suddenly it's all the problems are your problems.

(00:54:53):
But what if you don't know what the problems are? And so I always say diagnose before you treat. So make sure you understand so that you can help and deliver what your manager is actually expecting of you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:04):
I'm looking at your template. So just to share the bucket. So first 30 days learning focus, second 30 days is aligning on vision for the future, and the last 30 days of the 90 days is executing, setting up, actually starting to get stuff done. Awesome. Anything else along these lines of this?

Deb Liu (00:55:23):
The one thing about having a plan also is that you don't feel rushed to do something that you're not ready for because I do think sometimes you feel like you need to have impact. I always tell people, "Do something small, give back in some ways that people see you making." But when you actually reflect, one of the biggest things I could do was actually reflect back to the organization, "Here's what I heard from all of you. I'm listening, I hear this and here's what I want to do about it."

(00:55:53):
And then in aligning it's like, "Do we agree this is a set of problems we want to tackle?" And then an execution is like, "Do we agree that this is how we want to move forward?" And I think that is such an important part of building into a team. When you enter an organization, you're also entering a team and you're part of a dance that's going around. What role do you play? And people are dancing around you and if you actually make a mistake, you could trip other people up as well. So really finding your place in the dance is really important.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:21):
And as a PM, the way I always think about is people won't assume they should trust you. You're just this person that's coming in to tell them what to do and so much of your first month, two, three is building that trust with people so that they can actually feel comfortable listening to your guidance and not just like, "Oh my god. This person is getting in my way."

Deb Liu (00:56:40):
And earning that trust, sometimes people really... You'd be really surprised, a lot of people feel like they're not heard and even just coming in and listening is a trust building exercise.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:51):
Such a good point. As we wrap up our conversation, just a couple more questions here. So first is I want to take us to Contrarian Corner, which is a segment on this podcast. And my question is there something that you believe that you think most other people don't believe? Something that you think is a contrarian perspective?

Deb Liu (00:57:10):
I don't know if this is a contrarian perspective, but I go to speak in a lot of universities. So I speak at Stanford and I'm going to speak at Duke. And I always tell people, especially young people, the most important career decision you make is who you marry. And it's not something we think that much about, especially I started dating... I met my husband when I was 18, my first weekend in college. Started dating when I was 19. We had no idea what our life was going to be like and yet every single day like this week we had our board meeting, I was in Utah the whole week. I come home and he's taking care of everything.

(00:57:43):
You will have a much more successful career if your home life is in balance. It's like a yin and a yang. If something is out of balance, it engulfs the other side. Both your job and your home life. And especially, we have three kids. Really balancing that is very hard over both of us having demanding careers. It's not something that's contrarian, but it's something which we don't think about at all when we make that decision. We think is this person fun to be with? Is this person somebody we see ourselves with? But my question is what is the impact of this relationship on your career?

(00:58:14):
Is this person lifting you up or pushing you back? Is this person someone who's going to be your greatest cheerleader or are they going to be the greatest weight on you? How do you think that that's going to manifest itself 20 years, 30 years from now? And I think it's just something I wish we thought about more and I encourage especially young people to think about that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:33):
Such a great point. What I want now is a guide for vetting these things when you're dating. Deb's guide to dating.

Deb Liu (00:58:44):
I need to write that. Although I've only really dated him, the one person, so maybe I am like the worst person to tell.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:49):
But it worked, so you're maybe the best person and now you look back.

Deb Liu (00:58:49):
That's right. That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:53):
And here's the questions I asked that worked. That's so funny. Okay, so before we get to our very exciting lightning round, is there anything else that you think might be helpful to share, something you might want to leave listeners with? Any other nuggets of wisdom or advice?

Deb Liu (00:59:08):
Well, there's one quote which I share, I thought about when you were speaking earlier, which is about people who are resilient, which is life... This is a quote from Chuck Swindoll, he's a Christian writer I used to read a lot and it was, "Life is 10% what happens to you and 90% how you react to it." And I just looked him up recently and he actually published a book with that quote. He actually had that quote in a previous book from 20 years ago.

(00:59:34):
And I just think that's so important. You don't get to choose everything that happens in your life. So much is just, it just happens, but it's the people who choose a way forward to turn stumbling blocks and the stepping stones. As I said, "Somebody who actually says, 'you know what? I didn't get the job that I wanted and I'm just going to figure out another path,' those are the people who have the most successful and satisfying careers." They're thinking when other people are zagging vice versa. And I think that there are the ones who are the most resilient and happy in the long term.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:06):
It's such a good circle back to one of your first pieces of advice of just most successful people are people that are resilient and don't avoid failure, but embrace it and find a way to turn that around. I think it's such an important point. It's so hard to do. I guess just, I don't know, just to follow this thread a little bit, is there anything that has helped you build that? Has that always been the way your mind worked? I imagine coaching helps this, helps people with this." Is there anything just like that?

Deb Liu (01:00:29):
Coaching is incredible for that. We joke it's work therapy, but really I think it's... For a long time I saw failure as this catastrophic thing. I was one of those kids who's like, "You never got a B until..." Then I got to college and I was like, "Wow, this is harder than I thought." And so I got two B's in college and I'm like, "I'm never doing that again." But I was that kid who always got the A, who got the great scores. I just thought that my life would end if I got a B which by the way is super unhealthy.

(01:01:00):
And looking back, I realized that work is not like that at all. And every time I got bad feedback I'm like, "This is catastrophic." But if you look at feedback as an opportunity, then it's very different. It's like this is a gift. I would be crushed. Every time I get a review no matter what rating I got, I would read the things that people would say and I was like, "Oh my gosh, I'm a terrible person." And I had to really rethink that. And I think coaching, leadership coaching has really helped me through that to say, "No, how do you process this and how do you get to the other side?"

(01:01:33):
And that has been so transformative for me is to have that outlet to actually talk through. No, no, no. What they're saying is not that you're a bad product person, it's that you need to do a better job communicating or connecting. And I really struggled with that. I was very transactional. I was not a connector. I was not warm. I really struggled with relationships. And a lot of the feedback I received for many years is this relationship issue. And it took me a long time to realize that people aren't saying this because I'm a bad person or that they hate me, but because they want to connect.

(01:02:03):
I was actually making it hard. And I think sometimes we take things so personally that it becomes kind of this thing. It is your white whale. It's like the thing you're chasing, but then what if you say, "You know what, I don't need to do that. I don't need to chase that. Instead I need to figure out what's behind the feedback and what are they trying to say?" And then actually change yourself over a long period of time towards that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:26):
I had similar challenges where I had this pretty real imposter syndrome for a while when I started doing well. And a coach was the key for me to help me get over that and see that if I made a mistake. Things wouldn't crumble. And that it's very normal to make mistakes. Nobody will-

Deb Liu (01:02:43):
And by the way, I think perfectionism is a curse we place on ourselves. And it's a very dangerous thing, particularly for product leaders because product managers, you know things are going to go wrong. That's literally part of your job. And yet when we have perfectionism, it is a lack of trust in our ability to bounce back and our ability to actually adapt. But the more adaptable you are, the less you have to be perfect every single time.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:09):
Just to leave people with a tactical piece of advice, say they are like, "Oh man, I need a coach," do you have any advice for how to find a coach? How to explore that route?

Deb Liu (01:03:17):
So I actually wrote an article, because one of the things I struggle with coaching is very expensive often, and not every company provides it. My husband actually works at a coaching company called Sounding Board to make it more accessible. But one of the things I encourage people to do is there are other ways to get coaches. I'm in a lean-in group and we are just like, we support each other. I'm in a coaching circle in YPO, so that's a group of CEOs. And I'm in a number of these coaching circles, which give you an opportunity to learn from each other and to get pure coaching. And I think that's a great place to start, especially early in your career when you're seeing the same people making the same mistakes.

(01:03:54):
I think as you get more senior, having an individual coach helps because the situations are so much more unique. But I do think that having that outlet, having a place to say, "Hey, is it me or is this situation not right? And how should I think through this?" That's so incredibly important.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:10):
I'm listening to this book, or reading a book called Listen right now that a previous guest recommended. It's a parenting book and it's about just the power of listening and how much that solves many problems with your challenges or with your child. When your child is having a problem just listening to them. There's a lot of power. This came from a coach that was on the podcast recently. [inaudible 01:04:31]

Deb Liu (01:04:30):
Sounds great. I'll definitely, I'll read it or listen to it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:34):
I know it's weird. I'm like reading, it's called Listen. He's like, "This is the only parenting book you need really. It solves all the problems that we deal with." So anyway, that was an awesome final nugget that I'm glad we got there. With that though, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Deb Liu (01:04:52):
Let's do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:53):
Let's do it. First question, what are two or three books that you've most recommended to other people?

Deb Liu (01:04:59):
So I love the book from Professor Jeffrey Pfeffer. I speak in his class now that I read it way before that, it's called Power: Who Has It and Why. I love the book. He actually has the more practical one, 7 Rules of Power, which came out more recently. And so it's a book that reminds us that power is not accidental, that people often get it for different reasons and how you should think about the playing field.

(01:05:23):
Another book is The Conversation, Dr. Livingston wrote that about race in America, and I just love that it's a very honest assessment of race in America. It's hard to have that conversation and I love that he uses a lot of facts and encourages people to open up and have conversations around it. And then the last one I would say is, well, Susan Cain's Quiet. I adore the book because I do have introverted kids. I myself am introverted and just to read the power of introverts as a reminder that we do have amazing people who don't communicate the same way.

(01:05:59):
I love that it's a tribute to the success of those. Even if our workplace is not adapted to it, I do think we need to adapt to it so that we can bring the best in everybody. But her book is a reminder that there's so much power even in silence.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:13):
The first book you mentioned Jeffrey Pfeffer, he's been on the podcast. I think he may have mentioned you in our conversation or-

Deb Liu (01:06:17):
I love Professor Pfeffer.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:19):
That was a fun conversation because I came into it very nervous for what his advice would be and then came up with it being like, "This is great. This is-"

Deb Liu (01:06:28):
He is very wise,

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:29):
He's very wise and just very, "I don't care what you think, I'm just going to tell you the reality of the world." Oh man. Okay. Next question. Do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Deb Liu (01:06:41):
Okay. I know this is a fandom thing, but I love Fallout. So I played the game Fallout 4 last year, and then the show came out and it was amazing. And I know that sounds so nerdy, but it was incredible. And I know that video game movie annotations tend to be terrible, but it was so great and having played the game it was even better. Is that super nerdy?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:06):
No, I watched Fallout. I don't know anything about the game, but the show itself was really fun. Just I had no idea what I was even getting into. So no. Acceptable nerdy level. I don't know if you can get too nerdy on this show. Next question, do you have a favorite product you recently discovered that you just really like?

Deb Liu (01:07:26):
Well, so actually what's really interesting is I never got into Twitter. I just couldn't figure it out. Recently I really got into Threads and I didn't think I would. I was like, "Well, just post some stuff on it," but really I just love... I could never figure out Twitter. You follow the wrong person and the whole thing, it's terrible. If somebody is posting too much or too little, but there's something about the Threads algorithm that's really worked. The first few months wasn't quite there, but I just feel like it's spot on and now I see the magic of it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:59):
That's so interesting. I've seen some stats that it's bigger than X now slash Twitter and I wonder if that's true. I got to look that up, but I've seen more activity on Threads. So maybe I need to go back there. I spent some time around-

Deb Liu (01:08:10):
Cheering from the sidelines that it's successful because I use it a lot now. And I guess I had never had a place for realtime news and it's not exactly meant to be newsy, but maybe it's just who I follow, but I love just seeing like, "Here's five headlines you probably missed." And I was like, "Oh." I know they're trying to downplay politics, but I just love that it feels like you get a glimpse of what's going on in the world in five minutes."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:35):
Okay. Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often think about, come back to, share with friends or family find useful in work or in life?

Deb Liu (01:08:42):
Ooh, that's a good question. Well, actually, I would say that it's very similar to the Chuck Swindoll one about life. So we can use that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:52):
Great. That's what I imagined because you shared that one early on. And I imagine that was going to be your answer. Final question, you started Facebook Marketplace, you built it. Now, it has a billion users, more than that. What's the most interesting thing that you have bought or sold on Facebook Marketplace?

Deb Liu (01:09:07):
The best thing I ever sold on there was I sold my minivan on it and in four days. I made my husband do it because I wanted him to test the product. We were selling our minivan and I'm like, "Just try Facebook Marketplace." He's like, "I don't know about this." And he's like, "There's too many people contacting me. I needed it to stop." So it worked really well for us. I think I have bought so many things on there. It's actually sort of embarrassing.

(01:09:30):
Recently, my daughter wanted the same desk as I had for her new room and they no longer sell it at Costco. And I found it for half the price from a woman who was moving and she's like, "Here," and I love it. So I bought probably way too many things on Facebook Marketplace actually. But it's a great thing. I actually use it as a great rental for kid stuff because you buy a kid's bike and then when they outgrow it, you sell it back.

(01:09:56):
And the rental fee is almost free and I don't have the store all of it. So I love every part of it. I still am an admin user and I send a lot of feedback back to that team still.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:06):
That's amazing. Deb, this was amazing. I'm so happy we made time for this. Thank you so much for coming on. Two final questions. Where can folks find you if they want to reach out, maybe read about stuff you're doing? Where's your Substack and anything else people can check out?

Deb Liu (01:10:18):
Yeah, so debliu.substack if you want to look. I post probably about once a week. I'm on LinkedIn, I'm on Threads, so please do find me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:27):
And then the actual final question, how can listeners be useful to you?

Deb Liu (01:10:33):
Well, I would just love to hear what you heard from today that resonated with you and what you're going to do with it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:37):
And how would they share that LinkedIn or at Threads?

Deb Liu (01:10:41):
I'm happy to read your comments or send it if you want to-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:41):
There we go.

Deb Liu (01:10:43):
... send it to me. If you've actually subscribed to my Substack, you can just reply to the first email and then I get it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:48):
Awesome. But the easy way, as you said, are replying to YouTube comments. There we go. Get people to YouTube, click that subscribe button. Deb, thank you so much for being here and thank you.

Deb Liu (01:10:59):
Thank you so much, Lenny. It's great.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:00):
Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Elizabeth Stone (00:00:00):
We can't really have any of the other aspects of the culture, including candor, learning, seeking excellence in improvement, freedom and responsibility if you don't start with high talent density. And in some ways, it's very reflective of Reed Hastings as founder of Netflix. So when he founded Netflix and grew the company over time, it was with a belief that there could be a different approach to building a company that would make it a place that people thrived in and loved being and would feel different than other places, both in the quality of that talent density, but even more importantly, the excellence and the outcomes. And that that's where people would derive a lot of sense of fulfillment. So it is very deeply seated at Netflix from its original days. And in order to do that, you have to really hold yourself to a lot of stuff that doesn't feel like natural human behavior.

Lenny (00:01:06):
Today my guest is Elizabeth Stone. Elizabeth is chief technology officer at Netflix, and as far as I can tell, the first economist to ever be named CTO at a Fortune 500 company. Prior to this role, Elizabeth was vice president of Data and Insights. Before Netflix, she was vice president of science at Lyft, COO at Nuna, a trader at Merrill Lynch, and an economist at Analyst Group. In our conversation, we cover a lot of ground. We talk about how an economics background has helped Elizabeth in her career and why she expects to see more economists rise in the ranks of tech companies. She shares some of her secret sauce for rising so quickly at so many companies so consistently. We delve into Netflix's very unique culture of high talent density, radical candor, and freedom and responsibility. We also talk about the structure that Netflix has for their data and user research teams, which she believes is a part of Netflix's secret to success. We also get into what biking and triathlons have taught Elizabeth about life and how she brings that into her work and so much more.

(00:02:08):
A huge thank you to Ali Rao for introducing me to Elizabeth. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow this podcast in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. This helps tremendously and I really appreciate it. With that, I bring you Elizabeth Stone after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:26):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta. When it comes to ensuring your company as top-notch security practices, things get complicated fast. Now you can assess risk, secure the trust of your customers, and automate compliance for SOC 2, ISO 27001, HIPAA and more with a single platform, Vanta. Vanta's market leading trust management platform helps you continuously monitor compliance alongside reporting and tracking risks. Plus, you can save hours by completing security questionnaires with Vanta AI. Join thousands of global companies that use Vanta to automate evidence collection, unify risk management, and streamline security reviews. Get $1,000 off Vanta when you go to vanta.com/lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny.

(00:03:18):
Let me tell you about our product called Sendbird, the all-in-one communications API platform designed for both web and mobile apps. In a world saturated with multi-channel communication, product teams are discovering the effectiveness of in-app communication. With Sendbird, businesses can elevate their in-app experience with decluttered and branded communication featuring AI powered chatbots, one-way messages, chat, video calls and livestream capabilities all tailored for commerce, marketing, and top tier support. Forward-thinking companies such as Hinge, Patreon, Yahoo!, Accolade and more use Sendbird to build in-app communication experiences that drive engagement, conversion and retention. In-app communication has the highest conversion, highest engagement, and highest satisfaction of any communication channel. And when it comes to investing in this channel, trust Sendbird to take your in-app communication experience to the next level. Start today with Sendbird's free plan. And as a listener of Lenny's Podcast, you'll get an additional two months of unlimited usage and access to all premium features including creating your very own generative AI chatbot. Visit sendbird.com/lenny to begin your free journey. That's sendbird.com/lenny.

(00:04:36):
Elizabeth, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Elizabeth Stone (00:04:41):
Thank you. Thank you for having me.

Lenny (00:04:43):
So when we booked this conversation, you are VP of data in Netflix. And since then you got a promotion, you're now the CTO of Netflix, which feels significantly more fancy. Question for you, what is life like now that you are CTO versus VP of data? How is it most different? I'm imagining more meetings.

Elizabeth Stone (00:05:01):
I would say the biggest thing that changed is probably the amount of context switching and the degree to which I feel behind or I have a lot to learn. And I felt like I had a lot to learn in the VP of data and insights role that I was in before in part because we cover a lot of different areas of the business and there's always people to learn from, but the engineering organization just takes that to 100 basically. So more people to get to know, more problem spaces, aspects of technical expertise that I'm just not as deeply familiar with. And yeah, a lot more meetings.

Lenny (00:05:41):
I imagine many higher stakes meetings as well.

Elizabeth Stone (00:05:44):
Yes. So thankfully not a lot of meetings that Netflix feel like now you're really in this scary room, but it does feel like the role has more consequence, which is actually an exciting thing.

Lenny (00:05:57):
Kind along the lines of what you just talked about being a CTO. Your background is actually unusual. You're a trained economist, you got a PhD in economics. And from what I can tell, you're the first CTO of Fortune 500 company that is an economist trained in economics. First of all, is that true? I don't know if I think that's true, but you tell me.

Elizabeth Stone (00:06:16):
I have not checked the list. That was one of the things I did not do after getting the title. It might be unusual. I've heard a lot of feedback on that, so I don't know if I'm the one and only, but I will definitely say it's probably unusual.

Lenny (00:06:30):
Yeah. So I guess the question is just, do you think this is an anomaly and going to continue to be really rare? Do you think this some are going to see more at tech companies? And generally do you think tech companies should hire more economists?

Elizabeth Stone (00:06:41):
Yes to the last question. That's the easiest of it. But one of the things I observed even with the focus on data science where I've been deeper for a period of time is that economics is a flavor of data science. So it is a set of technical skills for sure. It's a way of framing certain problems or solving challenges.

(00:07:06):
And so when I was first switching from economics into tech, it was before there was a lot of sort of the frenzy around data science that we've seen more recently and it was harder to make that argument that economics is a flavor of data science and maybe complimentary to other versions of data science. And I feel more strongly about that now that I've seen it up close. And so maybe by extension I would say just like I think data science can be helpful for a lot of different problems that you might not immediately think, "Oh, this is something that we should bring data to," I think that economics is generally valuable for a lot of different challenges and it's a useful perspective to add to things, especially in a business context and especially in how we want to simplify problems in a way that makes them feel tractable.

(00:08:00):
So I feel like that's been a benefit to me to have had that type of formal training and then bring that perspective or way of thinking to different roles. And so I don't know that many people at Netflix think of me as an economist, but I find it comes out in the way I think about things. So to the extent that that's true generally, I think it's useful in a lot of companies. And I feel like even since I made the switch towards tech, I've seen it become much, much more common to think about the value of having economists on teams.

Lenny (00:08:32):
Just to pull on that thread a little bit more, is there something very tactical or concrete that you can share that you find helpful with that background that you found helpful in your career?

Elizabeth Stone (00:08:42):
Other than the dismal dry science of it all? So one example would probably be in an understanding incentives and thinking about unintended consequences. I think that that is true both in terms of internal leadership, so being part of a management team that's thinking about how do we clarify priorities or motivate a company or define the problems we want to solve. And then part of it is more externally oriented. How do we want to think about what Netflix is to consumers and how we want to think about competition?

(00:09:24):
There can be a rational way of thought, which is one version of economics of shouldn't rational intelligent people behave in the following way. And then there's the, well, if given certain incentives, what might you see that we didn't think was optimal or we weren't expecting to happen but could be a consequence or repercussion here? And so I think that that type of framing, I don't know if it's unique to economics in a way because it has elements of psychology to it as well and planning ahead has become really useful for thinking through cause and effect. So that has come up in a lot of different spaces in Netflix and in other roles I've been in.

Lenny (00:10:08):
I was looking at your LinkedIn and looking at your career over the years. It seems like you've had a meteoric rise at four different companies. And I'll just walk through them briefly. So at your first job, you went from associate to vice president in three years. At the next company, Nuna, you went from manager of data science to COO in two years. At Netflix you went from VP to CTO in three years. I think that's really rare. I'm curious what is your secret sauce to being so successful at so many places and especially in the context of what advice can you share with folks earlier in their career?

Elizabeth Stone (00:10:46):
This is one of those questions that sparks the reflection that I wouldn't normally do, so that's great. I really don't think of it as a secret sauce, but maybe I can walk through some of the things that I think have been instrumental. As you listed that out, it sounds like the two to three year point is the real sweet spot, so maybe there's something about that timeline. But I think some things almost feel trite in how I would say them, which is I'm very dedicated to the work and to the teams I'm part of. It's been part who I am for a long time that I give everything I've got to the job that I'm in. And I think that dedication and that I get joy out of that has mattered. It matters because I enjoy what I'm doing. I do the best work I possibly can, less so for myself and my own ambition and more so because I think of myself as being part of a team and so I really need to deliver for that team.

(00:11:52):
I think that framing in my mind and that motivation has helped me in a few fronts, which is the way in which I build partnerships with people I work with that I really care about setting other people up for success and being someone that people want to work with, so I learn from them, they learn from me, and we get better outcomes for the business together, I have found that part of that is being someone that people can leverage to translate from technical to non-technical and non-technical to technical. So that I do think has been a relative advantage in my role. So while I was often sitting in more technically-oriented teams, a lot of the advancement in my career was to roles that required that type of communication fluency. It grew out of being able to partner with people across the businesses who didn't necessarily have the same background, but where we needed to really connect spaces so that we could be more effective.

(00:12:57):
That was something that I think really the training for that came from analysis group where it was a very quantitative set of work that we had to find a way to communicate to judges and juries for economic cases. So that was something that was trained in other roles and I think I've been able to leverage. I'm a relatively introverted only child, so I observe a lot, which means that I learned from other people. And in each of these roles I have tried really hard to watch what other people are doing, think about how could I learn something from them, whether it's the thing that I want to be able to do myself or it's the thing that I think, "Oh, that doesn't quite fit or feel authentic with my style." And I do a lot of that introspection. So I have been surrounded by amazing people in all these roles and I have a feeling that I learned a lot by osmosis and observation and then have been able to leverage that to be stronger in the roles I was sitting in.

Lenny (00:14:00):
I took a few notes here. A few things you mentioned is just like, dedication, essentially working really hard and taking your work seriously, being part of a team and setting other people up for success, translating complex tech language and problems to non-tech people, and then being really good at observing and learning from other people around you. Is there an example or two that you could share of some of these to make it even more concrete for people? Like dedication. Is that just like working many hours, being part of a team? Anything along those lines to share a story maybe to help people put this into practice.

Elizabeth Stone (00:14:35):
No, and it's a good clarification because the dedication piece really isn't about long working hours. It's more about how much I care about excellence, I guess. So giving it my best in those situations. And that might not mean that I work really wild hours or I work weekends or I'm the one who's willing to sacrifice the vacation. I've actually tried to avoid setting that as an expectation, but more that I hold myself to a very high standard.

(00:15:13):
So an example would be, especially as I've gotten more senior in roles, there can be an expectation that it's okay for other people to wait on me. So whether it's the timing for a meeting or providing input on something or reviewing a document or following through on something I said that I was going to do, and I really try to avoid that, which means that if someone sends me something, I try to be very responsive about it. If I know that I said I'm going to do something, I follow through on it in the timeline that I said I was going to do. If I have a meeting, I try to be on time to that meeting.

(00:16:01):
Those are all flavors of dedication to the work that show up in, "Oh, it seems like Elizabeth works really hard," but the motivation factor is other people are relying on me and I want to show up for them. And so that's when I say dedication and it's related to the second point around showing up well for the team, those would all be examples of I feel urgency in responding to people and doing high quality work.

(00:16:27):
For the other parts of technical to non-technical, I think a great example is actually a very timely one at Netflix, which is, we are making strides to offer live content types. So live events, live TV shows. We announced this week that we're going to be hosting WWE starting later this year and early next year, 2025. That is easier said than done. I know that there's a lot of entertainment companies that have live content. But Netflix has really been in the streaming content business, so live content is something new for us and it's something that's going to require a really close partnership between our content organization and our products and technology organization because there's a content strategy to it, there's a business strategy, there's a technology strategy to it. A big part of my role is, can I explain how we're going to approach those technical problems in a way that builds competence with the content team? Can I try to understand their content strategy in a way that sets the technical teams up for success and we understand what we need to be able to deliver on here in terms of requirements.

(00:17:46):
I don't think I'd be able to do my current role well if I wasn't able to do that type of translation for something that's going to be a big bet for the business and something we want to invest in jointly. And then to set my partners up for success in that. So I am going to do everything I can to make sure we deliver well for my content partners because I feel like that's what's best for Netflix in the business.

Lenny (00:18:09):
Amazing examples. In terms of life content, I think about the Love is Blind. I think it was for premier, whatever, reunion that we got sucked into that show. So good job. And I think there were some issues with that, right? That reunion streak.

Elizabeth Stone (00:18:24):
Well, yeah, that was about a little less than a year ago now. So the amazing thing about failure is you learn a lot. We learned a lot. We've taken notes on it and we had a couple successful events after that, including the Netflix Cup last October. And we've got some exciting events coming up. So I think that's something that strengthened us, but did reveal that we're tackling a hard problem.

Lenny (00:18:50):
Yeah, the Twitter feeds during that, Love is Blind premiere were hilarious. People are pissed.

(00:18:57):
Okay. And then in terms of the, keeping a high bar for yourself, I love that. I think about a quote that... There's a VC, Ann Miura-Ko, at Floodgate and she did this interview with Tim Ferris. She shared that her dad always asked her, "Are you doing a World-class job with this? Are you doing a world-class job with your homework? Are you doing a world-class job with your piano recital?" And that's the bar that he always had for her. And I feel like that's a really good way to think about work and life in general if you can.

Elizabeth Stone (00:19:28):
Yeah, my mother used to describe to me, probably still does, though it required more repeating when I was younger, that the last 5% is the 5% that really mattered. And so it is that framing of the extra effort you put into something to make it world-class or to make it excellent. And so I do like to push myself that way and I hope it sets a good example for other people too. It's very consistent with especially the company cultures that I tend to thrive in where that's the general expectation of the culture. So you don't feel like you're doing it alone, because then I think you can start to feel frustrated by that.

Lenny (00:20:15):
I know that this is a big part of Netflix culture and I want to get into it. But before that, I'm curious just what that looks like with people that report to you. How do you help them level up in this skill of having a really high bar? And an example I'll give as you think about maybe an example is the way I described this to my PMs was, you want to have this aura that you've got this that, "If you give Lenny something, he's got this. He's going to follow up, he's going to close the loop, he's going to get it done. If he can't get it done, he'll tell me, I feel like this thread will not disappear. He won't drop this ball." Is there anything that you've learned as a good way to help someone learn this kind of skill, understand why this is so important?

Elizabeth Stone (00:20:53):
It shows up for the people who report to me, is one part example setting. So if I don't do it, why would they do it? I treat that very seriously that we should all be held to the same standards.

(00:21:12):
And as a second thing, I give feedback when it's not up to the standard. So I think one of the things I've observed especially with people on my teams is that the expectations aren't always clear and you can't assume that they're clear if you don't share them. When something's not meeting expectations or really showing up as excellence, I think it's a combination of both giving the feedback on that and being direct about it and being specific about what would it take to get this to the bar that I am expecting or to show up in the way that I'm expecting.

(00:21:55):
And then the third and probably most important thing is help them fill that gap. So that would mean... Let's take an example. It certainly has happened frequently in many jobs. A document is okay, it's not great, it's not going to be easy for people to follow, it's not as crisp as it could be. There's things that would strengthen it. I can both give the feedback on that to make sure like, yes, it's going to take another round of iteration, yes, we're going to have to work another week on this and not be done with it, but pushing people to get there, and then jumping into the document and helping.

(00:22:32):
So I feel very strongly about, and that's kind of what I mean by setting an example of like, "Let's work on this together," and then through that, help people uplevel themselves so the next time around they know the expectations and they've had help getting there in the past. So that's probably happened a thousand times in my career where I jump in with both feet because something needs to be better and I think the teams are better for it afterwards, or I hope they are.

Lenny (00:23:00):
I think that's such a good framework just to kind of mirror back what you said, "Set expectations that the bar is going to be really high and here's what I'm expecting from you." Give them very specific feedback on where the gap is and then help them fill that gap. I think a lot of people may feel this and hear this and they're like, "Oh man, I don't want a manager that's like this high of an expectation person and it just feels really stressful." But I've had these managers and I feel like that's when I've learned the most and leveled up the most, is having someone that had really high expectations and then helped me understand, "Here's where you're not doing as well as you can. I know you can do better. Go back and work on this." I know that sounds annoying, but I think in practice it ends up helping you most in your career. I imagine you've seen a similar result.

Elizabeth Stone (00:23:45):
I think so. I mean you'd have to ask some of the people on my team. So I might look at it differently that they look at it.

Lenny (00:23:51):
[inaudible 00:23:52] differences.

Elizabeth Stone (00:23:53):
It's a hard skill because it's not always easy to give feedback, especially if you feel like you know someone's put a lot of effort into something. And so I give a lot of thought to how I deliver that feedback so it feels like we're on the same team and I'm trying to help them be successful, not to help encourage failure. And that's where I think that third piece of the framework of jumping in to help can make people feel like, "I'm in a safe space. My manager wants me to be successful. My manager's helping me here." I do often do that behind the scenes. So maybe that's another flavor of this, which is, I don't do it live in the big meeting in front of all the people where the presentation doesn't go very well. I do it afterwards where it feels like a safer space to say, "Here's a way this could have gone better. Let's think about this differently next time." So it gives people a little grace and a little bit of an ability to absorb that feedback without feeling like it's kind of on a stage.

Lenny (00:25:02):
Another thing someone may be feeling when they're hearing this is like, "Oh my god, it's going to take me so many hours to just get it to a place Elizabeth is happy with." And I know you said that this doesn't mean necessarily many hours. Do you have any advice or thoughts on just how to avoid burnout and working all the time, but also keeping this really high bar and high expectations?

Elizabeth Stone (00:25:21):
It truly is not about time. I even found myself in a meeting earlier today saying, "If we're clear on the objectives of something, it might be that the last 20% of polish on the document is a really bad use of time. So if we're going to come together to talk through..." Like quarterly business review was the example, what were the highlights? What were the low lights? What were the learnings from the quarter? Where are there places of misalignment? The reason we're doing the quarterly business review is to have a really candid conversation about how we think things are going, to have a debate about things where maybe we're stuck. It's not to have a perfectly polished document for that conversation.

(00:26:08):
So my feedback in that instance would be, I would much rather have someone spend the time thinking about what's the conversation we really want to have? "How do I tee that up?" Not, "Could I spend another 20 hours to make it look like everything's perfect in this document?" And so I think in that sense it's not just excellence, like you wrote the perfect document, I should probably be careful to not use that as the only example, but instead we really got to the outcome we wanted to get to because we were thoughtful about it and we put a lot of energy and time and iteration into making sure we got to that outcome.

Lenny (00:26:43):
And is this an example where you gave someone feedback that they spent too much time on the polish or is this earlier? And to give the pyramid of this framework you kind of shared of set expectations, give specific feedback, help them fill the gap and then do it in private, is this the expectation setting in this example or is this feedback you spend too much time on this?

Elizabeth Stone (00:27:01):
This is expectation setting. So one of the things in my new role is that there's some practices that the team has had where they're trying to understand, Are we still going to have those practices? What's going to be the same versus different about those things?" and get an understanding of my expectations. So it's great that people ask that question so that I can be clear about, "Oh wait, if you're on the last 20% of this polishing the dock, I'd rather spend time over here. And here's how I would like the conversation to go so we all get something out of it instead of it feeling like it's just a leadership reviewer on my behalf." So in this specific situation, it was setting expectations ahead of time so that we can set everyone up for success.

Lenny (00:27:44):
Awesome. Okay. So we've kind of been talking around this, but this is an important part of the Netflix culture. Just broadly, Netflix has a really special and unique culture. Even though it's been around for I think over 25 years now, it feels like the culture has come up many times. There's that initial culture deck that came out that blew everyone's minds. There's a recent book, No Rules Rules I think it's called. And it feels like Netflix has done a great job at maintaining its culture.

(00:28:10):
It feels to me there's these three important elements, and maybe there's more. One is very high talent density and a focus on high performers. Two is candor and being really direct. And then three is giving people freedom and responsibility and getting rid of useless processes like vacation time and things like that. So maybe just to dive into that first one of high talent density and this focus on high performance. I guess the question there is just like, what does this look like in Netflix? And I imagine part of it is hiring, part of it is performance reviews. And then just why is it so important? Why is this such a focus on Netflix? What happens when you have such a high talent density?

Elizabeth Stone (00:28:51):
It's just so intrinsic to who Netflix is as a company. And in some ways it's very reflective of Reed Hastings as founder of Netflix. So when he founded Netflix and grew the company over time, it was with a belief that there could be a different approach to building a company that would make it a place that people thrived in and loved being and would feel different than other places, both in the quality of that talent density, but even more importantly, the excellence and the outcomes and that that's where people would derive a lot of sense of fulfillment. So it is very deeply seated at Netflix from its original days.

(00:29:37):
A big piece of that talent density is definitely hiring. So who are the people coming in and joining the team? But a lot of it is, we can't really have any of the other aspects of the culture, including candor, learning, seeking excellence and improvement, freedom and responsibility if you don't start with high talent density.

(00:30:03):
And so in some ways it's not the end, it's the means to the end in what Reed and the rest of the leadership team has been trying to build. And so in order to do that, you have to really hold yourself to a lot of stuff that doesn't feel like natural human behavior. What I mean by that is giving the feedback, this gets into the second bucket. So giving feedback, being candid around your expectations when they're not being met, what could be better in helping people improve, and be able to receive that type of feedback yourself in order to keep talent density high? Because no one comes to Netflix as a perfect human being and stays a perfect human being the whole time. We all have ways that we could grow and improve. And so in order to keep that bar high, you have to be willing to have those types of very uncomfortable conversations. It's an uncomfortable amount of candor and feedback in order to keep that bar high.

(00:31:10):
And then the other piece of it is another thing that doesn't come naturally to humans, which is making a call in pretty timely fashion if someone's not able to meet the bar, and to say either, "I don't think the role you're sitting in is the right role, or I don't think that Netflix is the right place for you," and to make that something that is part of best practice to get to a point where you could make that decision. And that's where we refer to the keepers test, which is really just a mental framing to make sure we hold ourselves accountable for this. Where if I'm asking myself the question, "If this person on my team came to me and said, 'I'm leaving today. I have a different opportunity and I would like to take it,' would I do everything I could to keep them at Netflix?" If not, then I should be having that tough conversation about, "Should you really be here? Are you in the right role?", if I might be a little bit relieved if you said you were leaving.

(00:32:20):
The reason the keeper test and that question is useful is because no one wants to think that way. It's very hard to say to someone, "I think this isn't the right fit. I think you should move on from the company." So we have to introduce some of those reflections in order to encourage the behavior. And we also then want to get to a place where when you're having that tough conversation, people aren't surprised by it. That is easier said than done. But you can only get to that conversation around, "I don't think Netflix and you are the right fit for one another" if you've been giving feedback along the way. And so it feels like in its most ideal state, it's a mutual observation. In practice, it's not always that smooth. Obviously we are humans. But that all feeds on itself in order to make sure that we're really holding ourselves to what we say our behavioral norms as part of the culture.

Lenny (00:33:17):
How is that operationalized? Is that just mental model that you should have in mind? Or is it like every quarter you should go through this exercise? Is it part of the performance review process? How does that actually operationalize at Netflix?

Elizabeth Stone (00:33:29):
It's definitely a mental model. So when we talk to managers about what does it mean to be a manager at Netflix, it would mean you should be with some frequency asking yourself this about the people on your team. People ask me frequently, "Am I passing your keeper test?" So it becomes part of a regular manager direct report, one on one. And it is just another way of saying, "Am I meeting your expectations? What's going well? What's not going well? How are you thinking about things?" And that can sometimes be a very awkward conversation to have. So in the middle of a lot of like, "We have to talk about this project or that deliverable or this thing that's happening," to take the time to step back and just say, "How am I doing?", can feel loaded sometimes. And the keeper test, while it feels like a very heavy concept, creates a lightness around being able to have that conversation regularly. So we do operationalize it. A point that you made, I'll just clarify, we don't have performance reviews.

Lenny (00:34:33):
Oh, wow.

Elizabeth Stone (00:34:34):
So we don't have a practice that a lot of other companies do where we would think about reflecting on a rating of how things are going. We do have an annual cycle of 360 feedback where you request and receive feedback from a lot of people, but it's not an input to some output, it's just for the value of the feedback and to make sure we're keeping that muscle. And we have an annual compensation cycle where we reflect on how are people doing? And so you think about performance as part of both promotions and as part of compensation, but in that way it has to be part of the day-to-day and part of the operating rhythm because we don't create a process where that would come to the surface.

Lenny (00:35:20):
Interesting. I didn't know that. So the idea there is just ongoing, like the whole... So what many people dream of, no performance reviews, we'll give you ongoing real-time feedback. We don't have to wait six months. I feel like people talk about this but rarely do this, but that's how you guys operate.

Elizabeth Stone (00:35:36):
In ideal.

Lenny (00:35:37):
In ideal, yeah.

Elizabeth Stone (00:35:38):
In practice. It's like you have to keep reminding yourself, "This is our ideal" because it's really easy to rely on the annual 360 cycle. And all of a sudden I do get about 300 pieces of feedback. And some of those things are on things that happened six months ago and I think, "Oh, I wish you had told me this at the time, that would've been more living the Netflix culture." So we have to push ourselves to do it that way. But yeah, that is if working well, it's very timely direct feedback. The 360 site goal is sort of the annual check-in on, "Let me get the full picture. Let me be able to distill some themes. Let me tee it up for a conversation with my manager." And then it does remove the sort of crutch of an every six month performance review or something like that.

Lenny (00:36:31):
When you talked about this example of someone asking you often, "Am I meeting your keeper test?", it makes me feel like someone's just super nervous. They're like, "Am I passing your keeper test?" And it makes me feel like it could create a culture of just like a lot of stress and worry and this hunger games mentality of like, "I got to compete and worry and I might die or get fired any day." I'm guessing the solution to that is partly cultural. This is just the way we work. You don't need to stress all the time, but you may be let go if you're not meeting this keeper test. How do you avoid this just constant worry that you might be fired any day and that you may not be hitting the bar?

Elizabeth Stone (00:37:08):
In my personal experience, I have felt a lot more at ease by having these conversations than by not having them. So in many roles I've had, I haven't been sure how I was doing or things I could be doing better on, and I didn't quite know how to get that information. And that made me feel much more stressed or nervous or at risk than having it be part of the culture to have those conversations.

(00:37:45):
So the thing that I think can be nerve wracking, and I feel it myself, is the high bar for excellence at Netflix and if we're doing this while you're surrounded by amazing people. And that can feed a sense of, "Am I doing well enough compared to how everyone else is doing? I know the bar's high." For the most part, that can drive people and in a good way, but in some ways it makes people nervous. And that's where I think it's helpful to know we expect to have these conversations so you can just kind of let your shoulders relax a little bit of, "Yes, the expectations are high, but my manager says I'm doing a great job, or my manager says I'm not doing a great job, but they gave me concrete things that I could do better." And so I think knowing is better than not. And so in that sense, it's the culture combined with the conversations around performance I hope take a little bit of that stress out of it. But I've certainly heard it a lot that without that conversation, people can be nervous.

Lenny (00:38:49):
That's such a good point and such a good example that I feel like every company wants to have a high bar and have only high performers and keep the bar really high for every person they hire. I'm curious, I know this could be its own podcast and book, but just in terms of hiring people that are amazing and keeping this bar of excellence, is there anything you can point out that might be helpful to other companies hiring to help identify amazing people and make sure that bar stays high? One thing I know is you guys pay a top market for salary. I think that's one unique thing about Netflix, is we just pay people. So maybe that's an part of this answer, but just what advice do you have for people to keep a really high bar in their talent?

Elizabeth Stone (00:39:33):
Yeah, I mean on the compensation point, we pay what we call personal top of market, meaning we want to be highly competitive in the pay, but we don't want pay to be like the golden handcuffs of Netflix sets market rather than paying people a strongly competitive compensation. So I think that that's important for attracting and retaining talent and has been a big part of the culture, but almost more importantly, we hope we don't have to rely on that to want people to want to be at Netflix or for us to be able to assess whether people are going to thrive at Netflix.

(00:40:20):
The way that I've thought about hiring with that context is we know we're going to offer you very highly competitive compensation, but are you going to come to Netflix and help us identify the right problems to solve or new ways to solve existing problems? And that's a different way of hiring than you might think about, especially at scale where you're saying, "Does this person have this skill, this skill, this skill? Check they're going to fit in this box and they're going to deliver this work that I need them to do." I'm being intentionally simplistic. I recognize a lot of people don't hire actually that way. But at Netflix we try really hard to say we're looking for the new perspective or the person who's actually going to make us stronger as a team. So thinking about additive skills, additive perspectives, people who are going to push our thinking on something. That tends to help us with thinking about talent density because you're constantly introducing people to the team who uplevel.

(00:41:25):
So then the questions you have to ask in an interview might be different because yes, we're trying to assess do you have the baseline skills to be successful here, but we're also looking for the things that make people exceptional or even stronger than the team we've got. And then you think about making the magical teams comprised of all those amazing minds and what can you get out of that. And that feels like more that the talent density and practice.

Lenny (00:41:50):
Got it. So the advice there essentially is, don't look for someone just simply great. Look for someone that raises the bar for the whole team, brings in a whole new perspective.

Elizabeth Stone (00:41:58):
Yes. That's a great way to say it. Yeah, it's a good way to say it.

Lenny (00:42:00):
I think what's great about this idea of just maintaining excellence consistently is that the best people want to work with the best people. And as soon as there's one person that sucks and the company allows for that, it just brings everyone down because they know, "Hey, we can be okay. We'll stick or no one's going to do anything about it." And when you make it clear, we only want the best and only hire the best and only keep the best, it keeps the best there, right? I imagine that's part of the strategy.

Elizabeth Stone (00:42:29):
Yeah. It's definitely the goal. And I think understanding that having gaps in the team and people's skillsets or their behavior can be really toxic for other people on the team. So it's a cost.

Lenny (00:42:42):
This episode is brought to you by Xplo, a game changer for customer facing analytics and data reporting. Are your users craving more dashboards, reports, and analytics within your product? Are you tired of trying to build it yourself? As a product leader, you probably have these requests on your roadmap, but the struggle to prioritize them is real.

(00:43:01):
Building analytics from scratch can be time-consuming, expensive, and a really challenging process. Enter Xplo. Xplo is a fully white labeled embedded analytics solution designed entirely with your user in mind. Getting started is easy. Xplo connects to any relational database or warehouse. And with its low-code functionality, you can build and style dashboards in minutes. Once you're ready, simply embed the dashboard or report into your application with a tiny code snippet. The best part? Your end users can use Xplo's AI features for their own report and dashboard generation, eliminating customer data requests for your support team. Build and embed a fully white labeled analytics experience in days. Try it for free at xplo.co/lenny. That's E-X-P-L-O.co/lenny.

(00:43:54):
So I asked on Twitter what questions to ask you. And there's a great question that came in from Nan Yu. He's the head of product for Linear and he asks, "What practices does Netflix do that other companies should not attempt to do because their talent level is so much higher than other companies?"

Elizabeth Stone (00:44:15):
That is freedom and responsibility in a nutshell. So let me explain that. It's a good question. It's kind of related to what I was saying earlier, that talent density is a prerequisite for a lot of the other ways we operate. So if we want to create a work environment where we are not prescriptive about how people solve problems or the scope of problems that they could tackle, assuming they're highly impactful for the business, and we don't have a lot of process around that work, so think about being able to make large innovations to our engineering systems or introducing new ways to think about metrics and experimentation, we get a lot of those things because we give people the freedom and the space to explore and question things and experiment in a way with solutions. I think that that would be very hard if not dangerous if we didn't have a high talent density.

(00:45:32):
It's really not a top down do A, then B, then C. Even in how we go through some of our planning processes or thinking about how we think about priorities, there is a lot of room for contribution across all levels of the team and that requires talent density. And then there's things like you have to have amazing people if you're not going to have really strict guardrails that would influence the consumer experience or business stakeholders experience. We do give people a lot of responsibility on those things. So I think the lack of process and prescriptiveness is all hinging on we've got amazing people who are smart, but even better have strong judgment.

Lenny (00:46:18):
This is kind of what you always hear from people giving founders advice is, "Just hire amazing people, get out of their way and let them do their job," which is often not a successful experience. What are examples that either things that came out of this freedom, I don't know, products or features or ideas that came out of this or policies or processes you don't have that everyone else might have? So I know there's no vacation time, there's unlimited vacation time, I assume. Is that still a thing? Unlimited vacation time?

Elizabeth Stone (00:46:48):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:46:49):
Okay, cool. All right, great. And I know performance reviews, you talked about that. So I guess in either direction, is there an example of something that came out of this freedom or some process that which surprised people that you don't have or a framework or system?

Elizabeth Stone (00:47:05):
We've been able to deliver... I'll speak to my own team around innovations in our content delivery network or innovations in encoding or innovations in discovery and personalization. We're not driven by some leader saying, "I think this is a priority." They were driven in many cases by individual contributors who had great ideas for innovation. So a lot of the stuff that Netflix has succeeded in, came from creating space for people on the team. So there's probably thousands of examples of product features and things like that that came out of creating this space. And right now, the trick is finding the sweet spot so that we can operate efficiently at this type of scale without snuffing out some of that, what was kind of the core beauty of the culture.

Lenny (00:47:55):
Maybe a last question around just the culture. We talked about candor a bit. I'm just curious if there's an example that comes to mind of an example of candor that you recently saw or had to be the candid person that might be interesting to share where it's like, "Oh wow, that's what you mean when you say a culture of candor."

Elizabeth Stone (00:48:15):
There's a couple things that come to mind. I am generally a transparent leader, meaning I share information freely and openly. It's part of the culture to context, not control, which means part of my job is to make sure that people have the context they need to do their jobs well. And in practice, that means I take notes in leadership meetings and I share those notes with the whole organization. And that is sometimes it includes candor around reflections on things that aren't going well or problems we need to solve. Sometimes it's just letting people know, "Here's what leadership's talking about so that they have a sense of what's top of mind." But it's a version of transparency that I feel strongly about, doesn't exist a lot of other places. I think it's a version of candor too in being able to share... I can't always share every detail of everything that we're talking about, but I do try to share things that probably push the boundary a little bit in the team, feeling like they understand what's happening across the company and what I'm thinking about.

(00:49:22):
And then there's a second example that comes to mind, which is, until two years ago, individual contributors didn't have levels at Netflix. So all engineers were just senior engineers, all data scientists were senior data scientists, and we did not have a leveling system. We introduced IC levels two years ago almost exactly. And it was a big, big, big shift because it was seen as something that was sort of sacred of it. A lot of people came to Netflix because we didn't have it. We didn't have process around promotions. This is probably part of why we never had performance reviews, because promotions really weren't at play. And it gave people a sense of freedom of not having to worry about that type of structure. But when you get to a scale of an organization, we needed some type of scaffolding to say, "We want to talk about how we compose teams. When do we need the person who has 30 years of experience? When do we want to have a new grad?" Because that's what the work requires. We didn't have a language for it.

(00:50:27):
So I introduced Levels a couple of years ago and we had quite a change rollercoaster is the only way I can describe how it went.

Lenny (00:50:38):
That's a good phrase.

Elizabeth Stone (00:50:40):
Yeah, it was sort of like being the tumble dry machine for a few months, and so really talking through it with the team. That's just context and backdrop. For an example of candor recently, which is, we had kind of a postmortem or a retro on how has it gone with IC levels. So it's kind of like wells, not wells. And I would normally think in a lot of cultures it would be like, "Well, we got past that change. We're living that change." Don't reflect on it. Because that kind of opened some of that early debate. And I felt differently about it. I think it's a good example of being candid about, this was a big change for us. It hasn't all gone perfectly. There's a lot that we can do better in how we implement levels at Netflix. And I would rather share that information than pretend it's all gone swimmingly and we achieved every objective. So I think that I try to build examples like that because I do think that level of candor and reflection helps build the sense of community and trust across the team.

Lenny (00:51:44):
That's an awesome example. Kind of along the lines of that, but also this category of freedom and responsibility, something Netflix innovated long ago, and I'm curious if this is still a thing, is this idea of Chaos Monkeys, which essentially are a program that runs on your infrastructure that just kills random processes and things and just to see what breaks and make sure things are stable when things actually start falling apart. Is Chaos Monkeys... Was that what it's called? And then is that still a thing? Is there still some Chaos Monkeys running around the servers?

Elizabeth Stone (00:52:19):
Not unbridled Chaos Monkeys. No.

Lenny (00:52:22):
Okay. Contains chaos and niche.

Elizabeth Stone (00:52:24):
Bur no, we carry too much responsibility, speaking of freedom and responsibility for the member experience to inject pain, though we do do a lot of experiments to test resilience, and that does probably mean injecting things that we're not quite sure whether A is better than B. And so that happens across engineering systems really at scale. But it is not for pure chaos, it's for intentional learning and so we can avoid making bigger mistakes. And then as we go into new efforts like cloud games, we have a beta that's out now, Live would be another example. We do try to come up with intentionally low profile examples where we can test the bounds of our systems in a way that's unlikely to damage the member experience. But that's less randomness, more by design. And so we're doing that in a few places that feels mostly good engineering practice so we can understand when it's really showtime and we're going to really test our systems, will they be able to perform like we want them to.

Lenny (00:53:42):
RIP Chaos Monkey.

Elizabeth Stone (00:53:45):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:53:47):
So kind of along these lines of data, so data itself has always been at the heart of Netflix. My understanding is the way the data team and the insights team is structured has been one of the reasons Netflix has been so successful. And that's the team you led before you moved into this new role. Can you just talk about how these teams are structured and why this structure is so effective?

Elizabeth Stone (00:54:14):
Yeah. I certainly like to think of it as being special. It's unusual. I can explain why. So the scale of company that Netflix now is very often data oriented teams are embedded in other parts of the business. So it could either be they're embedded in a business line like ads or games, or they are organized more functionally separating data engineers from data scientists, from analytics engineers, from consumer researchers. We've resisted that and kept a centralized team that is both functionally diverse. So across all those types of functions that I just described and works on nearly every area of the business from within the team. I sort of understand why a lot of companies move away from this because it really does require basically extraordinary partnership that we would have people working on data problems that don't report into the teams that are relying on them.

(00:55:30):
But the benefit we get is we get to think about our functional expertise. So are we really world's best data engineers, world's best data scientists? And how do we continue to be ever better from a functional and technical perspective? It gives people better career paths because there's more mobility across the teams. It feels like a team that has a functional expertise with a lot of different problems to solve. And so I think it enables more cross-pollination of ideas in a way.

(00:56:03):
It also allows us to be really objective. That is probably the most important thing, that our job is not to tell the story that someone wants to hear with the data or to solve the problem that someone thinks is most important. It's for us to have our own perspective about things. I think that that uplevels the whole organization because it means that we're able to be truth tellers or to be curious in a way that might not fit if we had a different organizational structure. We have to balance, that would be a good partner, deliver on the things we agreed were priorities, be flexible with how we're spending our time, but it gives us agency and responsibility beyond that. And I feel like the team takes that very seriously. So I've seen examples of that in how we bring data to a lot of spaces, including how we partner with engineering on data-related topics or how we partner with content that I'm not sure we would've gotten to if not for having that kernel that's sort of a center of excellence around it.

Lenny (00:57:10):
And it's Data and Insights, that was the team that you ran. Insights, is that describing user research or what does that have function actually?

Elizabeth Stone (00:57:19):
So part of Data and Insights is a Consumer Insights team that includes a lot of different flavors of research really. So in some ways, consumer is even a misnomer because there's parts of the team that do internal research, for example, on tools and products for our studio productions. So that's more of a user research-oriented versus consumer. And then the parts of that team that are consumer-oriented do things all the way from content screenings to make titles the best version of themselves before they're on the service to more traditional UX research to think about how can we deliver the best title discovery experience or how can we think about things that improve accessibility? And then that team has a global remit. So there's also teams that are more local or regional expertise in understanding consumer needs and entertainment.

(00:57:12):
So Consumer Insights and a team, formerly known as still kind of known as a shorthand, data science and engineering, combined together to create data and insights probably about two years ago. That's another piece that's unusual. It becomes truly a full-stack data and research expertise. And so we could tackle a problem like, what's the right way to think about recommendations and how best to surface them in a way that combines attitudinal research, qualitative and quantitative with behavioral research on more of the data science, data engineering analytics side.

Lenny (00:58:51):
It's super cool because I think it's really rare that what people think of user research is within the data org. And I think that might be a solution to some of the backlash a lot of user research teams get where they're like, I don't know, what are you guys doing all this anecdotal evidence if it's under the same org. I feel like that leads to a lot more credibility and avoids this like, "Oh, data's telling me this thing. This user research team is telling me this thing. What should we do?"

Elizabeth Stone (00:59:17):
Yeah, I mean, Consumer Insights is one of the newer teams for me; it wasn't in my background to lead a team like that and not in my individual training, but they are critical for making sure we keep a consumer orientation, a member orientation on things. I have loved to watch the teams collaborate on problems because we talk about it as a superpower internally in combining those skill sets. So I think the Consumer Insights team at Netflix has had a lot of credibility in a certain area of expertise and we took it to the next level by combining it with other functional expertise. So it's not required in every problem space. So we try not to overdo it and say we need to be collaborating everywhere because that just feels like the wrong expectation, but we try to make the most of it in spaces where we really benefit. So yeah, it's worked out really well.

Lenny (01:00:12):
Awesome. Okay. I want to ask two more questions before we get to our very exciting lightning around. And they're both skills that [inaudible 01:00:08] have told me you're very good at. One is that you are very intentional and thoughtful about staying close to individual teams and individuals within the company, even though you're higher and higher in the org. I'm curious how you do that, how you actually practice this skill of staying really close to teams at the bottom of the ladder and individuals that are working on things on the ground basically?

Elizabeth Stone (01:00:45):
A lot of it is how I spend my time and fighting to preserve opportunities to connect with people. So examples would be, I still have biweekly office hours, people sign up for slots. It can feel a little like speed dating for 20 minute slots, but I get to meet a whole bunch of people and hear about work, hear what's top of mind. People book them out many months ahead and it's just an opportunity to stay in touch. And then I do Ask Me Anything sessions with teams of different sizes depending on how intimate we want it to feel, but truly anything is fair game as a way to get to know me as a person, for me to hear questions, to try to be candid about what I can answer or can't answer. And so those things have helped me maintain connection, but both of those examples are about making the time for it.

(01:01:50):
So what I have found as my role has changed is that it just wouldn't happen if I didn't make it a priority. And then through those types of sessions, I do think I become or I hope to become more approachable so people know, "You can send me a Slack message, you can send me an email. Like I mentioned earlier, I'm going to respond to you as quickly as I can because I want to hold myself to that bar." And so that builds a flow of communication between me and the team that I really value... I don't think I would want to do my job if I didn't have those points of connection, so that helps too.

Lenny (01:02:24):
And you also send that email to everyone after every leadership meeting, so they're like, "Oh yeah, Elizabeth."

Elizabeth Stone (01:02:28):
Yeah, they hear from me. Yeah.

Lenny (01:02:31):
Kind of related to this, so we have a mutual friend, that's how we got connected. Ali Rao, she was a data scientist at Airbnb, now she's at Uber. She had a question that she wanted me to ask, and it's about how good you are at being present. So her question is something she's noticed about. "Something I've noticed about her is how 100% present she is no matter who she talks to. Do you have any advice for people to get better at this? Because it's so hard in the day of email and iPhones and Slack." Her questions like, "When does she respond to stuff if not sometimes in meetings?"

Elizabeth Stone (01:03:05):
I actually think I'm the most present when I'm having conversations like this one. I do preserve a lot of time to have one-on-one conversations where I'm genuinely curious about how someone's doing, how I can help them, what they're excited about that's authentic. And so while my EA would probably cringe at saying I like to spend time doing a lot of those one-on-ones, it is relatively easier for me to say the human connection is part of what I enjoy about this. I think that's true for a lot of people in what we get out of work and life, but I try to live that in those meetings. I'm probably not as good when we're talking about meetings of 30 people and I'm multitasking, so I'll admit to doing that for sure. But I think the one-on-one conversations I treat as being pretty sacred.

(01:04:09):
One of the things I've noticed that helps me continue to invest in that and maybe is helpful for other people is some of my greatest friends and connections, including people like Ali, are people I met along the way professionally. So I worked very closely with Ally's husband, Keith Henwood, at multiple places, both Analysis Group and at Lyft. And that means that it's created opportunities and it's been points of connection. And so you get back what you give basically.

(01:04:45):
There are people in my life who are part of my life because I worked with them or because I crossed paths. And I like to think that if I can make a positive mark on them, it'll come back and be at some point too. So I think to distill that is that I truly enjoy it. It's what I get out of especially work. And then it's my community. And that's served me really well over time. And so I have given people advice of, "This is a small community, think about what you're investing in other people because that will matter down the line for yourself too" and I try to live that myself.

Lenny (01:05:22):
Yeah, that's such good advice. There's kind of two things that come to mind there. One is treat people the way you want to be treated. Someone once said that maybe. And I think you've come back to this a couple times, this idea of just pay attention to what gives you energy and that you're good at and just almost double down on that. Just make that more and more of a superpower.

Elizabeth Stone (01:05:41):
Yeah, that last part resonates. It's been a big part of my personal and professional practice to reflect on how I'm feeling, what I'm excited about, what I'm enjoying. I do think it helps me be more grounded, which maybe helps me be more present or helps me be a better manager or leader. That might be part of the secret sauce too, but it is part of my practice.

Lenny (01:06:11):
I can't help but ask, is this an actual practice? Do you do this on a regular basis or is this just something you think about like, "I should reflect back"?

Elizabeth Stone (01:06:18):
I wish I was so advanced to say I meditate and I create all this structure. It's more that I think I mentioned maybe I'm an introvert, so I do spend some time alone. That's how I recharge. And early mornings, especially people who know me sometimes are horrified at the time of day I send emails, but early mornings are a quiet time for me where I do try to have a daily check-in of just how are things going, why am I feeling anxious, why am I feeling excited. And it's kind of a muscle you build. So while I don't write in a journal, I don't have a meditation practice, I do have a time of day when I try to keep it protected from other things so that I can think for a second.

Lenny (01:07:05):
What I think about there is Jeff Bezos has this approach in the morning. He just calls, he putters around. He has no meetings until I think 10:10 or something. He just wants to putter around, read the newspaper, see what's going on in email, which I'm trying to do. I really like that. That feels really good. I'm just going to putter around. I have no responsibilities in the morning.

Elizabeth Stone (01:07:22):
I've never heard that. I'm going to adopt that language.

Lenny (01:07:27):
I'm just puttering and puttering. Elizabeth, is there anything else you wanted to touch on or leave listeners with before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Elizabeth Stone (01:07:38):
No, I'm ready for the exciting lightning round.

Lenny (01:07:40):
Well, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Elizabeth Stone (01:07:50):
It's probably a little recency bias, but I've been recommending What I Talk About When I Talk About Running by Murakami, which talks about introspection about the similarities between running and writing as sort of flow states and very meditative things. So I had read some of his fiction books and the autobiographical reflection on these types of either professions or hobbies I think is very insightful. So that's one. And then one of my longtime favorite books is A Fine Balance by Mistry. And that is just a great story of human complexity and challenge and relationships. So I'm drawn to both books and TV and film that are about humans.

Lenny (01:08:43):
Speaking of TV and film, this is maybe a high stakes question for someone that works in Netflix, do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show?

Elizabeth Stone (01:08:52):
I'm not going to name all Netflix. That feels too much like an advertisement. Film, Triangle of Sadness is phenomenal if you haven't seen it. And then I'll go Netflix for TV, Beef was I thought hysterical. I'm an Ali Wong fan, but also just a pretty unique storyline.

Lenny (01:09:18):
And I think they just won a bunch of Emmys.

Elizabeth Stone (01:09:20):
They did.

Lenny (01:09:21):
Amazing. Good picks. Next question. Do you have a favorite interview question that you like to ask candidates that you are interviewing?

Elizabeth Stone (01:09:29):
High talent density. I'm usually looking for the person who would be better in my role than I am in my role. So I often ask people what would their priorities be, what would they do differently if they had my job.

Lenny (01:09:45):
Next question, do you have a favorite product that you recently discovered that you really like?

Elizabeth Stone (01:09:52):
So while I carry the CTO title, I live a pretty analog life. So my most recent product is a Fellow pour-over coffee maker, which is actually part of my morning ritual, which I'll now call puttering around, where I take great lengths in my coffee-making process because I find it calming. And then it's not a recent find, but I have to shout out that my Peloton is probably the favorite product I own.

Lenny (01:10:22):
The bike or the treadmill?

Elizabeth Stone (01:10:24):
Bike. I'm a recovering outdoor cyclist, so it's also kind of questionable if I can even admit to this, but that's why I would admit to I love the Peloton despite being ideally an outdoor cyclist.

Lenny (01:10:39):
I have questions about your cycling, but before that question, do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to or share with friends or family that you find useful either in work or in life?

Elizabeth Stone (01:10:50):
My mom said something to me that has stuck with me. I don't know if I live it very well, but the phrase was, "Something good happens every day." And the reason she said it was because she was encouraging me to be more mindful about enjoying the small things in the day-to-day rather than letting myself get caught up in the busyness.

Lenny (01:11:13):
Beautiful. Final question. You're a big biker and triathlete. I am curious what that sport and time has given you in your career or in life. What benefits have you found from spending so much time and energy, running, biking, being an athlete?

Elizabeth Stone (01:11:32):
Certainly by mental resilience. So while those sound like physical strength, I've found especially endurance sports are much more mental and how you go through the highs and lows and sustain and then coming back from challenge. So those sports have had their highs and lows and from the lows I've really learned how to recover and bounce back. So those feel like universally applicable skills.

Lenny (01:12:04):
You have such an interesting mix of athleticism and then Netflix, what a good balance for life. This is going to give me permission to go watch Netflix recording this on Friday afternoon. Elizabeth, you're awesome. Thank you so much for being here. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and maybe follow up on things? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Elizabeth Stone (01:12:24):
You can always find me on LinkedIn, so definitely reach out or ping me if you have questions or comments. I think the way the listeners can be useful to me is being maybe curious about how they can show up even better in their lives now that we've done this reflection on Netflix culture and how we show up for other people. I would like to ask listeners to pay that forward to people that they're working with and how they show up for them.

Lenny (01:13:02):
Amazing. I love that. If you end up doing this and you're listening, maybe leave a comment on YouTube or in Substack with something that you haven't covered about yourself. Elizabeth, thank you so much for being here.

Elizabeth Stone (01:13:16):
Thank you, Lenny. I hope you have a great weekend.

Lenny (01:13:18):
Same. Bye everyone.

(01:13:20):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.
Ethan Evans (00:00:00):
People think invention takes all this time, but you only need two hours once a month. The thing is, once you have one good idea, it often takes years to express that.

(00:00:09):
So you had the idea to have a newsletter. I know some of the history of your newsletter. You've been working on the expression of that idea for years now. Jeff and Amazon had ideas like, "Let's have Prime shipping." Prime is still getting better and still being worked on. It's a 20 some year old idea. The Kindle, a decades old idea now still getting better. The point here is you don't need very many good ideas to be seen as tremendously inventive.

Lenny (00:00:38):
Today my guest is Ethan Evans. Ethan is a former vice president at Amazon, executive coach, and course creator focused on helping leaders grow into executives. Ethan spent 15 years at Amazon, helped invent and run Prime Video, the Amazon Appstore, Prime Gaming, and Twitch Commerce, which alone is a billion-dollar business for Amazon. He led global teams of over 800, helped draft one of Amazon's 14 core leadership principles, holds over 70 patents, and currently spends his time executive coaching and running courses to help people advance in their career, build leadership skills, and succeed in senior roles.

(00:01:14):
In our conversation, Ethan shares an amazing story of when he failed on an important project for Jeff Bezos and what he learned from that experience. We spent some time on something called The Magic Loop, which is a very simple idea that I guarantee will help you get promoted and advance in your career. We also get into a bunch of other career advice, primarily for senior ICs, any managers. We get into advice for standing out in interviews, plus some of Amazon's most important and impactful leadership principles and much more. I learned a lot from Ethan and I'm excited to bring you this episode. With that, I bring you Ethan Evans after a short word from our sponsors. 

(00:01:50):
Let me tell you about our product called Sidebar. The best way to level up your career is to surround yourself with extraordinary peers. This gives you more than a leg up. It gives you a leap forward. This worked really well for me in my career and this is the Sidebar ethos. When you have a trusted group of peers, you can discuss challenges you're having, get career advice, and just gut check how you're thinking about your work, your career, and your life. This was a big trajectory changer for me, but it's hard to build this trusted group of peers. 

(00:02:20):
Sidebar is a private, highly vetted leadership program, where senior leaders are matched with peer groups to lean on for unbiased opinions, diverse perspectives, and raw feedback. Guided by world-class programming and facilitation, Sidebar enables you to get focused tactical feedback at every step of your career journey. 

(00:02:39):
If you're a listener of this podcast, you're already committed to growth. Sidebar is the missing piece that catalyze your career. 93% of members a sidebar helped them achieve a significant positive change in their career. Why spend a decade finding your people when you can meet them at Sidebar today? Join thousands of top senior leaders who have taken the first step to career growth from companies like Microsoft, Amazon, and Meta, by visiting sidebar.com/lenny. That's sidebar.com/lenny. 

(00:03:12):
Let me tell you about a product called Sprig. Next gen Product teams like Figma and Notion rely on Sprig to build products that people love. Sprig is an AI powered platform that enables you to collect relevant product experience insights from the right users so you can make product decisions quickly and confidently.

(00:03:32):
Here's how it works. It all starts with Sprig's precise targeting, which allows you to trigger in-app studies based on users' characteristics and actions taken in product. Then Sprig's AI is layered on top of all studies to instantly surface your product's biggest learnings. Sprig's surveys enables you to target specific users to get relevant and timely feedback. Sprig replays enables you to capture targeted session clips to see your product experience firsthand. 

(00:03:58):
Sprig's AI is a game changer for product teams. They're the only platform with product level AI, meaning it analyzes data across all of your studies to centralize the most important product opportunities, trends, and correlations in one real-time feed. Visit sprig.com/lenny to learn more and get 10% off. That's sprig.com/lenny. 

(00:04:26):
Ethan, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Ethan Evans (00:04:30):
Lenny, thank you a ton for having me. I'm super excited to talk about some of the things we have teed up today and to help people.

Lenny (00:04:37):
The first thing I thought we could chat about is The Magic Loop. So you wrote this guest post from my newsletter sometime earlier this year. It is, I don't know if you know this, but it's currently the sixth most popular post of all time on my newsletter across 300 plus posts. Did you expect this advice to resonate the way that it did, and why do you think it resonated as much as it did?

Ethan Evans (00:04:59):
So the competitive part of me really wants to analyze spots one to five and figure out, do they have an unfair advantage that they had more time? But I was very hopeful that the advice would resonate that way, because I put a lot of work into simplifying it and making it really easy to understand and follow. So I'm very pleased it has, but I was hopeful it would do so well.

Lenny (00:05:24):
Well, I will say sometimes they keep growing, so this isn't necessarily the terminal point for the post.

Ethan Evans (00:05:28):
The final position. Yeah.

Lenny (00:05:30):
Okay. So for people that haven't read this post, or maybe for folks that have and maybe could use a refresher, let's spend a little time here. Could you just briefly describe this idea of The Magic Loop that you wrote about?

Ethan Evans (00:05:40):
Yeah, absolutely. So The Magic Loop is how to grow your career in almost any circumstance, even with a somewhat difficult manager. It does assume that you're working in some environment, normally as an entrepreneur or with a boss. But the basic idea of The Magic Loop is five steps and they're very easy.

(00:06:01):
The first one is you have to be doing your current job well. It's not possible to really grow your career if you're not considered at least performing at a solid level. Now, it doesn't mean you have to be the star on the team at this point, but what you can't have is your boss wishing that you were different. Like, "Ethan's not very good." So you have to talk to your manager and find out how you're doing and address any problems. So step one is do your job well.

(00:06:31):
Then step two is ask your boss how you can help. Speaking as a manager, and I've talked to hundreds of managers, very few people go and ask their manager, "What can I do to help you? What do you need?" And so just asking sets you apart, and it begins to build a relationship that we're on the same team, that I'm here as a part of your organization to make you successful, not just myself. 

(00:06:53):
Step three is whatever they say, do it. So you dig a big hole. If you say, "What could I do to help you?" And they say, "Well, we really need someone to take out the tray sheets day," and you're like, "Oh, I didn't mean that. I wanted exciting work. I don't want to do sort of this maintenance work or whatever." So do what they ask, help out even if it's not your favorite work. 

(00:07:14):
Once you've done that though, and maybe you do that a couple times, the fourth step is where the magic comes in. You go back to your manager and say, "Hey, I'm really enjoying working with you. I'm wondering is there some way I could help you that would also help me reach my goal?" And whether that goal is to change roles or get a raise or get a promotion, you say, "My goal is I'd really like to learn this new skill. Is there something you need that would also help me learn this new skill?" And the reason this works is managers help those who help them. It's just human nature. We all do that.

(00:07:52):
Generally, they're very open to meeting you halfway and saying, "Sure, I need this. We can rearrange it. We can find a way to meet your goals over time." Now for step four to work, you do have to know what is your goal, so you have to be clear on what it is you want. Well, that part's up to you. 

(00:08:15):
And then step five is the easiest step of all. It's just repeat. So like lather, rinse, repeat with your shampoo. Step five is once you're working with your manager towards your goal and discussing where you're going, and you're helping each other, the magic of the loop is just go around and around.

Lenny (00:08:31):
I was going to ask you, why is it that you call it The Magic Loop? Also, we kind of dived right in, but what is the goal of this? I guess it's pretty clear maybe at this point of this helps you advance in your career, but whatever you want to share along those lines.

Ethan Evans (00:08:43):
Yeah, okay. Very fair. So I called it The Magic Loop because I pioneered it with my audience a few years ago. And it works so well, that people were writing back in and saying, "How do I turn this off? I'm in over my head now. My boss has asked me to do all these cool things, and I feel like I can't catch up, and I've already been promoted once and I need time to digest it." And it just seemed like it worked like magic. It worked in almost every circumstance. 

(00:09:15):
There are of course exceptions where you have very exploitative managers who are like, "Oh, it's great. You're working harder, keep doing that, and they won't do anything for you." But those are rare. And then the purpose, yeah, to help you get satisfaction in your career. A lot of people are unhappy with their jobs. Many people want to move up a level or get paid more. Not everyone. Some people want to change what they're doing, they're bored. This is a path to all of that, because it's forming a partnership with your leadership to say, "Look, I'll help you, but I need you also to help me." And most good managers are very open to that.

Lenny (00:09:52):
When we were working on this, one of the pieces of feedback I had was I feel like I could just tell my manager, "Hey, I want to grow my career. What can we work on to help me get there?" And your feedback was like, most managers are not that good and not that thoughtful about their employee's careers. Can you just talk a little bit about that? People may be hearing this and be like, "Why do I need to do this? This seems like a lot of work."

Ethan Evans (00:10:15):
If you have a great manager, you may not need to do nearly as much formality. They may have given you good feedback, so you don't need to ask for feedback. They may have offered you opportunities to step up, and you've said yes to some and maybe no to others. That's fantastic. I designed The Magic Loop for the people who either don't know what to do or their manager is either not that good or just very busy.

(00:10:37):
Remember, lots of managers have great intentions to help their employees, but they get busy with their own lives, their own work, all the things they're focused on, even also their own career. The manager is often busy thinking about their own needs, and so they mean to get to you next week, and next week drifts on for a year.

Lenny (00:11:00):
What has come up since this has come out that you would want to either add to, or tweak, or help people better understand? I imagine there's some criticism. I imagine there's a lot of, "Yes, yes, yes. This really works."

Ethan Evans (00:11:12):
Two things I'd love to clarify. The first is many people ask me, "Why do I have to do this? Shouldn't my manager notice what I'm doing? Shouldn't my manager help with my career? Shouldn't my manager be planning for me?" And what I say about that is what your manager should do and $4 will get you a cup of coffee at Starbucks. 

(00:11:36):
The point of this loop is it's in your control. It is true that a good manager would do all those things I just mentioned, but not all managers are good and some of them need some help. And the thing I would just say about The Magic Loop is it's in your control.

(00:11:52):
And so you can be upset that your manager isn't perfect, but move on from that and take control of your own situation. That's the first thing I'd say. The other big extension I would make is look, if you are a manager or a leader of any type, you can initiate The Magic Loop from your side, so you can talk to your employees and say, "Hey, what are your career goals? Would you like to form a partnership where you step up to new challenges and I help you get to your goals?"

(00:12:26):
I had a lot of success forming this kind of partnership with my employees, where as they saw growth and success, they really leaned in and like, "This system works. You're actually investing in me now. I'll work extra hard." And I'm like, "Yes, and we can grow your team or grow your opportunity," and it was very win-win.

Lenny (00:12:46):
To give people a little bit of social proof, you mentioned some of the folks you've worked with on this. Can you share some stories, or stats, or anything to help people understand how helpful this ended up being to folks you've worked with?

Ethan Evans (00:12:58):
Yeah, absolutely. I'll tell one story from each end of the spectrum. And what I mean there is entry-level people and then high level executive leaders. I had an entry-level person write me back and say, "Look, when I learned about The Magic Loop, I was at a company and not doing very well. I started applying it. They offered me a $30,000 raise and a bigger job. And I turned it down because I got hired at this other company that was offering me even more, and I went there. And they've promoted me also," and he was one of the people who wrote in and said, his exact words were, "A year ago I was made redundant." So he is in the UK, redundant is their word for laid off. "A year ago I was made redundant. I got this first job and I got an offer for an increased salary, and then I got the second job and I got an increase when I joined that was even bigger." And he was in that situation of, "Mow I need to sort of slow down and digest all of that."

(00:14:05):
On the complete other end, one of my best people I ever worked with joined my team at Amazon as what we would call an SDE II, which in Amazon is a level five employee. He grew with me kind of following this process to a senior engineer. Then he switched to management and ran a small team. Then he became a senior manager and he relocated with my organization. He opened a new office in another city, was eventually promoted to director running his own office of a couple hundred people. And this was over the course of about eight years. He went from a mid-level engineer to an executive with a team of 800 people. Now he was a very hard worker, but over this eight years we just saw all this progress.

(00:14:56):
And then eventually he moved on. He founded his own startup, sold that, and now works as an executive vice president at one of the major online banks. And so his career in some sense has exceeded mine, but during that eight year span, he just grew so much. And this is the process we followed.

Lenny (00:15:19):
Wow, those are excellent examples. What levels does this help you with? At what level is this most useful, and then does it kind of taper out it? I don't know if you get to VP level, do you still try using Magic Loop?

Ethan Evans (00:15:33):
So I think it works anywhere from the start of your career to pretty far into it. I think at my level, I finished my career as a vice president at Amazon. It does peter out in the sense of the active. And what I mean by that is you're still doing the same thing, but you don't have to talk about it. Your managers are expecting you to step up and recognize challenges. They're expecting you to ask for resources when you need them, and you don't sort of have this level of explicit conversation around, what can I help you with? They're expecting you to anticipate what's needed.

(00:16:09):
So in the newsletter we did together, I wrote about how over time, you go from asking your manager, "How can I help?" To suggesting to your manager, "These are some things I see that seem like they need to be done. Would you like me to do them?" To just seeing what needs to be done and sort of keeping your leader in the loop and saying, "Hey, I noticed that we have this problem. I fixed it. I noticed we have this opportunity. I've started program against it." I think at the executive level, it's much more you being proactive and just keeping your leader in the loop.

Lenny (00:16:44):
I think in the post, the way you described this step is this is advanced mode. Don't jump straight to this. Don't just start suggesting things, because you may get it wrong.

Ethan Evans (00:16:53):
Yeah, well, it's all a matter of rapport and trust. A huge part of career success is how much trust you have, mutual respect with your leadership. When they're confident that you're going to make the right decisions, they're confident to let you go. But yeah, when you're brand new or you're new to a manager, if you just jump in, you may either not work on the things they value or even find yourself working across purposes, and that isn't the right place to start.

Lenny (00:17:19):
Awesome. Okay. Just to close out this conversation. You touched on this, but why is it that you think this is so important and effective? Why do you think this works so well? People may not recognize, "I see this is the key to this."

Ethan Evans (00:17:31):
Well, I think it's two things. First, I mentioned how rare it is for managers to be offered help. If you're a manager, you'll recognize this. If not, feel free to talk to any manager, whether your own or somebody else. Ask them how much they worry and how much they feel overwhelmed and wish someone would give them a hand. Management can be a lonely job, because you feel like you're responsible for everything. So having an ally, it's just a huge weight off people's shoulders.

(00:18:01):
And then I think a lot about social engineering. The social engineering's here is just the simple, "You help me, I'll help you." It doesn't have to be exploitative, it's just we help those people who help us, and that's built into human survival. 

(00:18:18):
And I think this loop works so well because it's just leaning a little bit into that behavior. So many relationships with managers are oppositional. You tell me what to do, and I'm kind of like a kid in high school who's trying to figure out how do I skip as many classes as possible and turn in as little homework and still get by with a D? That relationship won't build your career.

(00:18:45):
Some people approach their jobs as my goal is to do the least I can and still collect my paycheck. That's an approach if you're okay with where you are. It's not what I coach though. I assume people want to grow.

Lenny (00:19:02):
Okay, so maybe it's just as a closing question, for people that are listening and want to start putting this into practice slash are stuck in their career and are just like, "Okay, I see. Here's something I can do." Could you just again summarize the loop briefly?

Ethan Evans (00:19:15):
Sure. Step one, make sure you're doing your current job well. The way I explain this is when you go to your manager and ask, "What could I do to help?" You don't want their answer, even if they don't say it quite so bluntly to be, "Do your F-ing job." You need to be doing that already. So be doing a good job.

(00:19:34):
And unfortunately, a good job is in the eyes of your manager in this case. You may think I'm doing great work, but if your manager doesn't, they're the ones you need to build as an ally here. 

(00:19:46):
Once you have that, go ask how you can help, do whatever you're asked, and then go back to your manager and suggest or ask, "I would like to meet this goal. Can I keep helping you? What could I take on that you need that would also help me meet this goal?" And that's where you start to try to bring your two sets of aims together. What do you need done, how can I get to my goal? And let's do those things together.

(00:20:11):
And then you just repeat this loop. You build trust, you build the relationship. And with all good managers, and even a lot of moderate managers, they appreciate the help so much, they really lean into that.

Lenny (00:20:23):
I think there's two really important elements of this that you haven't even mentioned necessarily, that I think are part of the reason this works so well. One is this forces you and your manager to identify the gaps that are keeping you from the next level, which it's often vague, and then you get to a performance review, and then your manager's like, "Ethan, you're still not good on this and this and that," and you're like, "You never told me that that's the things you're looking for for me to get promoted." So I think there's this implicit, here's what you need to work on to get to the next level, which I think is part of step four. 

(00:20:53):
And then you actually did touch on this that it's important to share your goal to your manager. Here's what I want. I want to get promoted. A lot of times they don't know that and you helping them understand, "Here's what I want, help me get there." It goes a long way. So there's a lot-

Ethan Evans (00:21:06):
Managers often fall into the trap. They chose to become managers, so they assume one of two things about you. They either assume that you want to keep doing exactly what you're doing forever, just maybe make a little more money.

(00:21:16):
So you're an artist, you want to keep drawing forever. You're a lawyer, you want to keep writing contracts forever. Or they assume that, "Hey, I became a manager. I'm very proud of my career. That must be what you want."

(00:21:29):
And these assumptions are natural, right? We tend to view by default that our path is great and everyone would want to be us. Now of course, some good managers don't do that. But if you clarify and express your goals, you remove that ambiguity.

Lenny (00:21:45):
I actually had a period in my career where I specifically did not want to get promoted. I was very happy where I was, and I just wanted to keep doing this awesome IC role. Is that something at all you see where people are just like, "I'm good. I don't need to get promoted," and then is this helpful in that in any way or is it not as big a deal?

Ethan Evans (00:22:02):
So first, I reached a point in my career where I was no longer pursuing promotion either, and I wanted to do other things. So I've lived that myself and I've used the same loop, but I used it to go do what I wanted to say, "This is now what I want, and how do we get there? How do we create a role where I'm adding value appropriate to my level, but I'm doing this other work that's fun?" I moved into gaming and I really wanted to do that.

(00:22:25):
Second, I think it is still helpful because there's something you want probably. Maybe you want to work on different kinds of projects or maybe you want to work with a different higher performance team. Or maybe you want to rebalance your life and say, "Hey, I love what I'm doing, but how can I be a star performer for you but within these boundaries?"

(00:22:47):
So if you truly have the perfect job just as it is, you may not need The Magic Loop. But I know so few people if you're like, "Nope, there's absolutely nothing I could improve about my role."

Lenny (00:23:00):
Yeah, I think that your point about your goal doesn't have to be promotion. It could be work on a different part of the org, try something totally... Maybe transition to a new function that could be part of your goal. Awesome. 

(00:23:09):
Okay, so along the same lines of career progression, you work with a lot of senior manager types, kind of the level of L7 and one M2-ish, and you share with me that one of the most frustrating parts of their job in that specific portion of their career is they get stuck at that level and they don't move up, and it becomes really annoying, and they're not sure how to break out of that. What advice you share with folks like that, that may be listening?

Ethan Evans (00:23:36):
Yeah, so it's common to get stuck there, and there are a few reasons for it. First, there are a lot of senior managers. If you think of your average director, they may have six to eight reports. How many more directors are needed? So there's a choke point.

(00:23:52):
Second, that choke point is worse in the current economy, and in the past maybe a lot of companies, Amazon, Google, apple, etc., were growing very rapidly. And so it wasn't just you were waiting for some other director to leave. The teams were getting bigger.

(00:24:07):
I experienced this at Amazon, where over a nine-year period I went from managing six people to 800. And so I went from a senior manager all the way to a vice president, and I described I was, in some sense just riding the elevator. The elevator was going up, and as long as I managed to stay on it, I was going to arrive at vice president.

(00:24:29):
But the other thing that causes people to get stuck is the difference between a senior manager and a director is how you lead and the work you're doing. And you can get as far as senior manager by being really strong in your function and being really good at getting things done. As a director, and as a VP beyond that, it becomes much more about influence, coordination with others, and letting go of being in all the details yourself. And so senior managers really have to change some behavior.

(00:25:03):
I often reference the book by Marshall Goldsmith, What Got You Here Won't Get You There. Not only because it's a great book classically on this problem, but because the title tells the story. All the great traits that got you to this one level won't get you to the next level where you're more expected to be thinking in strategic terms, thinking longer term.

Lenny (00:25:26):
So to someone that may be in that role today and they're not moving up, is there anything they can do? This point about just there's no roles for you, there's only so much you can do there, is the advice just wait until an opportunity arrives? Is it run this Magic Loop until something happens? Is there anything you can do?

Ethan Evans (00:25:42):
I would be honest with people and say some patience is required. At this level, there is some notion of, do we need a director? Do we need a vice president? Do we have a challenge at that level that needs that person? And so promotions at this level, I often teach have two components. The first component is can I eat and do that job? Am I qualified? Do I have the skills? But the second piece is, do we have such a job that needs that?

(00:26:09):
However, there is a lot you can do. A lot is in your control. And what is in your control is to start practicing those next level skills. Start working with your leadership on, where can I take on a strategic project? How can I become more of an inventor? I teach some about how to sort of systematically be inventive. It's not pure magic. Edison said it's 1% inspiration and 99% perspiration. You can learn the 99%, and the 1% isn't as hard then. So you start showing those next level traits. And as I describe it most succinctly, how do you make yourself the person who will be chosen out of the eight?

(00:26:51):
And you can be chosen, there are several ways to move up. Your boss can leave or be let go. They can be promoted to another role. But another way is I coach now, and I have several clients recently. I was just talking to a client yesterday, her two peers were let go. They were all the same level. Her two peers were let go and she was given their teams. And she expressed that her boss had been told, "You have too many senior managers for the size of your organization. We need to do some change in the organization, clean house, and put all your people under the folks who have potential."

(00:27:32):
Well, obviously she must be one of those people, because she still has her job and has more people and more to do. And unfortunately, her peers are shopping for new employment. So be that person, and that's where The Magic Loop comes in. Be that person.

Lenny (00:27:48):
I was just talking actually to a senior PM leader who pointed out that with this kind of lean environment of a lot of flattening of orgs and a lot of layoffs, that this is becoming increasingly hard. Exactly what you're describing. There's just less spots, because companies are running more lean, and so you just kind of have to wait. 

(00:28:06):
I think part of this advice you just shared, which is classic do the job before you have the job makes all the sense in the world. Because once people see that you can do it, obviously they'll feel a lot more comfortable putting you in that position.

Ethan Evans (00:28:18):
And they'll be looking. I always remind people, as a leader, I want the best people under me I can have. It's not that I don't wish to promote you. If you think about my job, this helps people, right? I have selfish motivation to promote you. A lot of people think, "The bosses there holding me down." Well, maybe some bosses are, but why wouldn't I want stronger, more capable direct reports? Why wouldn't I want people under me who can do more of my job? Frankly, that's the only way I can do less of my job.

Lenny (00:28:47):
Plus this pressure you're always getting from your reports. So like, "Hey, I'm ready to get promoted, because this time"... You mentioned this word inventiveness, and I was just listening to Jeff Bezos on Lex Fridman, and I don't know if you heard this, but Jeff Bezos described himself most as an inventor more than anything else that he does. Is that something that you think about? Is that influenced by Jeff Bezos any way, that idea of being an inventor as a leader?

Ethan Evans (00:29:13):
I'll say a couple things about that. First, I know you talked to my old boss, Bill Carr, who wrote Working Backwards. What I don't know is if he shared with you that after he published it, he actually realized there was a better title. He wishes that he had called the book The Invention Machine, because what Jeff was trying to do with Amazon was create the most inventive company, the company that would systematically out-invent others. And so while Working Backwards is a great title, Bill and Jeff think they should have called it the Invention Machine.

(00:29:47):
When I joined Amazon, I did not think of myself as an inventor, but I saw that we had these leadership principles think big and invent and simplify that pushed on that. And I said, "I'm in trouble. I don't know how to do this." And I sat down and thought about that. What am I going to do? It seems like that's required. And I figured out how to become systematically inventive. So I now hold over 70 patents as one benchmark of inventiveness, and they were all created during my 15 years at Amazon. 

(00:30:22):
And the way I did that, inventiveness actually isn't that hard. I teach about this. And to invent systematically, first you do need to be somewhat of an expert in whatever area you want to invent. So Lenny, if you and I say let's get together and we're going to invent cancer drugs, we have the problem that neither of us, as far as I know is a biologist, a doctor. We don't have the right background, we don't know what we're doing. So we would just be fumbling around I guess with a bathtub full of chemicals hoping. It's probably not going to work out that well. So you have to be something of a knowledgeable expert.

(00:30:56):
But then the second thing people don't do is they don't spend dedicated time actually thinking. They feel like, "Invention is just going to come to me." When I want to invent, I get away from all my devices. I go in a room with the problem I have, and I force myself to actually concentrate on what do I know and how can I invent? And the most straightforward way to invent is not to somehow come up with something completely new, but instead to put together two things that exist. 

(00:31:28):
And so my example of this, I have a patent I talk about a lot for a drone delivery for Amazon, but the drone doesn't fly from the warehouse. Instead, a truck with no top drives slowly around the neighborhood, and the drones go back and forth from the truck. As opposed to the driver stopping at every house, you can have four or six drones hitting everything in the neighborhood. 

(00:31:55):
And the way I came up with this idea is one day I was thinking about drones and delivery, but I loved military history. And so I was thinking also about an aircraft carrier and I was thinking, is there a way to have an aircraft carrier for drones? And from that, it was very quick for the light bulb to go on and say, well, what about a truck? 

(00:32:17):
And so I have this patent, and we haven't seen this become reality yet. I'm waiting for my idea to become part of Amazon's drone delivery system, but I think ultimately it will.

Lenny (00:32:32):
That is badass. I'm imagining returns come back to the truck. We're using that rope thing that just captures them with that little hook.

Ethan Evans (00:32:42):
Yeah. Well, there's no reason... Same thing. When you want to return something as opposed to taking it to the UPS Store or whatever, you just put it on your porch, and then on your phone, on your app, maybe you take a picture of it so that the drone can recognize the box or you put it in a designated spot, and you push a button and the drone takes your return away. Yes, there's no reason.

Lenny (00:33:03):
Can't wait for that. And it takes your dog backs in it sometimes, part of it.

Ethan Evans (00:33:09):
My dog's too heavy, thank you.

Lenny (00:33:11):
My dog's not. There's an owl in our backyard that we sometimes worry he is going to come grab our dog on. This idea of invention, this is really interesting. I didn't plan to talk about this, but for someone like say a PM on a team that wants to get better at invention, innovation, big thinking, is there a practice you find helpful here? Is it block off two hours, get a pen and paper, and just think about the specific two adjacent things working together?

Ethan Evans (00:33:34):
So that's part of the process, is put in dedicated time. The interesting thing I would say is you don't need that much time. Two hours is great, but you only need two hours once a month. People think invention takes all this time. The thing is once you have one good idea, it often takes years to express that.

(00:33:52):
So you had the idea to have a newsletter. I know some of the history of your newsletter. You've been working on the expression of that idea for years now. Jeff and Amazon had ideas like, "Let's have Prime shipping." Well, Prime is still getting better and still being worked on. It's a 20 some year old idea. The Kindle a decade's old idea now still getting better. 

(00:34:16):
So the point here is you don't need very many good ideas to be seen as tremendously inventive. Like Elon Musk, Tesla, he can kind of dust off his hands and be like, "I am now an Edison-like inventor." So he keeps doing it, but you don't need that many inventions.

Lenny (00:34:36):
This touches on something else Jeff Bezos shared on the podcast that most of his innovation and work is in the optimizing phase. It's not the here's the idea, it's the making it cheaper, and better, and faster. And that's where most of the good stuff comes from. In this point of Tesla, Elon had this idea, and now the hard work is actually making it scalable and cheap enough for people to use, not just an electric car.

Ethan Evans (00:34:59):
With the idea of Jeff saying that invention is really a lot of the incremental and optimization, I completely agree with that. To invent well, you need a base idea, but then there's so much of the work is making that idea real.

(00:35:15):
And again, Prime is a great example of this. The Amazon Prime program was a great example of, okay, we want fast free shipping. We want this program. That was a one-time idea that they did build, but now Prime has expanded. First it was two-day in the US, then one-day in the US, now it's same day in the US. But also they added Prime Video, Prime Music, Prime Gaming. There's actually something like 25 things you get free with Prime. Most people have no idea, because you get free photo storage and this ongoing list. And all of that is that incremental optimization to make it better, better, better, better. And of course Jeff's goal, which you probably heard him say, was to make Prime a no-brainer, to where you would be irresponsible really not to be a member.

Lenny (00:36:06):
I know you have an awesome Jeff Bezos story that I want to get to, but before we do that, one more question along this line of career advice and progression. So I read somewhere that you've interviewed over 2,500 people over the course of your career. And so kind of going back to the beginning of a career, or at least getting a job, what have you found is most helpful in standing out as a candidate when you're interviewing, and essentially getting hired? What advice do you have for people that may be going through an interview process right now?

Ethan Evans (00:36:33):
There's a lot of evidence that suggests that the number one and two factors in any interview are appearance and enthusiasm. And it doesn't mean you have to be beautiful, but show up somewhere looking like you're interested in the job, not in your pajamas. And most importantly, be enthusiastic. People want to work with people that want to work with them. So if you seem very judgmental of the company and like you have to sell me on it, you're going to turn them off. I look at every interview of whether or not I really want this job, I might've decided I don't want the job. I still want the offer.

(00:37:10):
And so I come to any interview I do leaned in and talking about how excited I am to be a part of this opportunity and what I know about the company. Beyond those cosmetics, the biggest thing I see particularly at higher levels is people talk about what they have done but not why it mattered. They don't talk about the impact.

(00:37:32):
See, a leader is not hiring someone to just do work. They're hiring someone because they have a problem or a need. And so if you can show them, "Look, here's the things I've done that have made a difference. Here's the things I've done that have helped my past employers where I've had an impact." So I didn't just do work. That makes you a worker. Someone who has an impact is more of a leader.

(00:37:57):
And leader doesn't need to mean people manager, just a higher level, that I have done something that solve the big problem, and here's how it changed the company or customer outlook. That's what I'm looking for in an interview, is are you bringing me an understanding of the business that shows you contributed to the business, or are you just telling me how hard you worked?

Lenny (00:38:19):
Awesome. On that first piece, now that most interviews I imagine over Zoom, in terms of enthusiasm and looking professional, is there anything you've found that people may not be thinking about in those two buckets?

Ethan Evans (00:38:33):
Yeah. Show the person full-time dedication. So unless you really don't have any choice, don't take an interview from a car, don't have your camera off. Eye contact is still a real thing. Body language is still a real thing. Gestures like I'm making now with my hands, they're part of your presentation.

(00:38:53):
So be fully present and try to project through the camera a little bit of I'm excited to be a part of this and I appreciate the opportunity. I often tell people the best way to prep for an interview might be a good night's sleep and a pot of coffee, that being fully engaged and energetic is a huge lever.

Lenny (00:39:18):
Awesome. And I think basically, the feedback there is don't over obsess with the content. There's a lot of value in just how you come across.

Ethan Evans (00:39:27):
Yeah, 100%.

Lenny (00:39:29):
Let me tell you about a product called Arcade. Arcade is an interactive demo platform that enables teams to create polished on-brand demos in minutes. Telling the story of your product is hard, and customers want you to show them your product, not just talk about it or gate it. That's why product four teams such as Atlassian, [inaudible 00:39:49], and Retool use Arcade to tell better stories within their homepages, product change logs, emails, and documentation.

(00:39:56):
But don't just take my word for it. Quantum Metric, the leading digital analytics platform created an interactive product tour library to drive more prospects. With Arcade, they achieved a 2x higher conversion rate for demos and saw five times more engagement than videos. On top of that, they built the demo 10 times faster than before.

(00:40:14):
Creating a product demo has never been easier. With browser-based recording, Arcade is the no-code solution for building personalized demos at scale. Arcade offers product customization options, designer approved editing tools, and rich insights about how your viewers engage every step of the way. Ready to tell more engaging product stories that drive results? Head to arcade.software/lenny and get 50% off your first three months. That's arcade.software/lenny.

(00:40:44):
Now let's take a little trip to failure corner. This is something that I do more and more on this podcast, talk about people's failures in their career and their learnings. And apparently you have a great story of failing the great Jeff Bezos and surviving to tell the tale. Could you share that story?

Ethan Evans (00:41:00):
I do. It's both a highlight and a low light. So I had been at Amazon about six years. I had become a director, and I was responsible for launching Amazon's app store.

(00:41:14):
And so we were building an Android-based app store to go on Google phones and eventually on the Kindle tablets. And we got to launch day. And at that time, Jeff used to write a letter introducing new products. He would write a letter that said, "Dear customers, today Amazon's proud to launch blah blah, blah, and it's got these great features and I hope you really enjoy it. Thanks Jeff." And we would take down all the sales stuff on www.amazon.com and that letter would fill the whole screen. 

(00:41:48):
And so he had written a Jeff letter, and this Jeff letter emphasized a particular feature of our product that he really liked. So that something that made it a little different.

(00:42:00):
And that specific thing was we had a button called test drive that you could click on and it would open the app in a simulator in your web browser, so you could check out the app and interact with it before putting it on your phone. So he thought this was really cool and he was all about it. 

(00:42:19):
Well, my team had built all this technology. We had test drive working. It was kind of a hard piece of technology if you think about simulating any of thousands of arbitrary apps. And we worked all night to launch it, and it wasn't quite working at 6:00 AM. We were still debugging.

(00:42:38):
Now you know engineers very well. And I'm sure most of your listeners know about engineers, even if that's not their discipline. We always think we're this close to finding the last bug. 

(00:42:49):
So about 6:15 AM, I get a message from Jeff that says, "Hey, I woke up, where's the letter?" Because it was supposed to go live at 6:00 AM, right after the markets in New York would've opened at 9:00 AM Eastern. And he says, "Where's the letter?" And I write him back and I say, "Well, we're working on a few problems." And what I'm thinking in my head is, "Get in the shower, get in the shower. I just need 20 minutes, get in the shower."

Lenny (00:43:18):
For Jeff to get in the shower.

Ethan Evans (00:43:20):
Yeah. And 30 seconds later, I have an email back that says, "What problems?" And at this point I have to start explaining, and I end up explaining that we're having a problem with a database, and we're debugging this database problem. And he's like, "Wait, there's a database in your design? We're trying to eliminate all Oracle databases and move to AWS. Why do you even have this?" And he is just getting more and more frustrated and angry.

(00:43:49):
And he starts copying in my boss, and my boss's boss who's with Jeff Wilke, the CEO of retail. And they start asking me questions. And it's just this snowballing, but 7:30 in the morning, Jeff is clearly angry. And there's this list of other people waking up and feeling like, "Well Jeff is angry, so my job is to be even more angry," and it's just raining in on me.

Lenny (00:44:14):
Oh man. 

Ethan Evans (00:44:15):
So what did I do? The interesting thing is what do you do when the future richest man in the world is mad at you? He wasn't quite richest man in the world yet, but he was headed there.

(00:44:26):
So the first thing I did was I owned it. I said, "Yes, it's not working. It's my fault. I will deal with it." I took ownership. And the second thing I did was start updating him very proactively and saying, "Here's where we are." 8:00 AM, "This is exactly where we are. This is what we're going to do and the next hour, and this is when you'll get your next update. I will update you again at 9:00 AM, so here's our plan."

(00:44:55):
And even though Jeff had sort of lost trust in me, like it's down, and it's not right, and I'm mad, given that he agreed with the plan, he was willing to give me 60 minutes. And then I would update him again and say, "Okay, this is what we've done and this is what we're going to do, and we'll update you again at 10:00 AM." So I was buying life one hour at a time.

(00:45:17):
Now the other thing I did, and this is a good thing about Amazon, as more and more leaders got copied into this angry thread, they started reaching out in back channel and saying, "We've all been under Jeff's Eye of Sauron, we know it's miserable. What can we do to help?" And essentially Andy Jassy's organization, which was AWS at that time, and his CTO, a guy named Werner Vogels said, "You're having a database problem, let's get you some principal engineers from the AWS database team." 

(00:45:54):
And these principal engineers showed up at 9:00 AM roughly, and they looked at our design. We had made some fundamental mistakes in our database usage and they said, "It's too complicated to fix this. We're just going to give you 500 AWS machines so that your crappy design will run anyway. That's the immediate fix." And I'm like, "Okay, well I guess if you have 500 databases lying around because you're AWS, it's a great solution," and that's what they did.

(00:46:27):
So the next step is we fixed the problem. A bunch of us worked together very hard to get the problem all fixed. Now it took all day, and Jeff was still frustrated because the opportunity to sort of control the messaging and the media by having his letter up had passed. People had noticed our launch and the articles had been written, and so Jeff was still very mad.

(00:46:52):
So we fixed the problem, but Jeff now had no trust in us. The weekend went by. He was using the system looking for bugs because he is like, "This team's not reliable now. Ethan's not reliable. I better check it myself." So you have the CEO checking on you.

(00:47:11):
And he found a problem and emailed me like Saturday night at 9:00 like, "I was doing this and it broke." And luckily I was able to tell him exactly what happened by 9:30. Anyway, the next part of the story is that following week, I had a meeting with him on another topic.

(00:47:32):
So I was part of this small group that was trying to figure out how to build a competing browser. You may not remember, but Amazon had a browser called Silk for a while. And I was invited to this meeting, but I wasn't a critical participant. So you may know this idea from Scrum where they say some people are pigs and some are chickens, and the chickens are sort of observers. I was a chicken in this meeting, and that turns out to be a great analogy because I was thinking, should I chicken out and not go? I could skip this meeting with the CEO who's angry at me. But when I had that thought, I realized if I can't face the CEO, I'd better pack my desk. That's the end. 

(00:48:13):
So I went to this meeting early, and Jeff always sat in the same chair, so I knew where he would sit when he came in. So I sat down right next to his chair and I thought, "I don't know, let's find out."

(00:48:24):
And so the meeting goes by, and of course in my mind Jeff is totally ignoring me, not even looking at me. But I think that's just me projecting, because remember I wasn't central to the meeting.

(00:48:35):
So at the end of the meeting, everybody gets up to leave. He turns and looks at me and says, "So how are you doing? I bet it's been a hard week." And I thought, "Oh, okay, we're going to talk." And I said, "Yeah," I just sort of answered him with, "Of course it's been hard, but here's what we're doing and here's what we're going to do in the future." And we had a very human conversation. And I didn't believe Jeff would've forgotten that I let him down, but it was clear he had forgiven it. 

(00:49:05):
So I was still going to have to, as it turns out, re-earn his trust. But the thing I did that's key for people to learn from is it's really easy to flame. He had been flaming me, writing angry emails. Angry emails are easy. Sitting three feet from someone and being angry with them face-to-face is hard. And when faced with, I can either start ranting at this person who reports to me, or I can say something nice, he chose to say something nice, and that rebuilt our relationship.

(00:49:42):
So the end of the story is two years later, I was promoted to vice president. So even though I had failed the CEO on this very public launch where he was very definitely mad at me, I re-earned the trust, I showed I had learned the lessons of how to launch more reliably without outages, and I was promoted.

(00:50:07):
And so I share that story because I think what I want people to understand is if I can get away with publicly failing one of the richest and most famous inventors on earth, and then get promoted and finish my career at Amazon very successfully, you can dig out of any hole. You just have to manage it right.

Lenny (00:50:30):
That is an amazing story. So there's a lot of lessons that I want to pull on here. One is just if you get caught in a situation like this where something completely fails, what I took down as you were talking, one is admit, yes, this is a huge problem, own it. This is like, don't try to deflect.

(00:50:47):
Two is the way I describe what you did here, is something I call prioritizing and communicating, where you prioritize, "Here's what we need to do," and then communicate. "Here's our priorities." And I love that you have this every hour, "Here's the latest, here's the latest." So make people understand you are on it and you'll continue to keep them updated. I imagine one of the worst fears is I have no idea what's happening here. I'm going to go in and start micromanaging.

Ethan Evans (00:51:11):
You're exactly right. I'm trying to hold off micromanagement. I'm trying to give them, "Okay, I believe with this and I can wait an hour," and then I can wait an another hour because that team seems to be on it. So I'm trying to rebuild trust one hour at a time, and avoid having three or four levels of management all come in and start helping.

Lenny (00:51:31):
Then I love this other piece of advice of meet them in person, try to take it offline essentially, which I know you did later. But that's such a good point that it's hard to be as mad, and angry, and flamey in person. People are just going to be like, "Okay, I get it. Let's try to figure this out." Amazing. Is there anything else? Those are the three that I took away. Just like if you're caught in that situation in the moment, is there anything else that you found to be really helpful?

Ethan Evans (00:51:55):
I mean, work hard and fast, right? You do have to fix the problem. My team had been up all night. I had to start sending people home to sleep in shifts. We had to pull in all this help. And so it was a very hard weekend.

(00:52:10):
When you have a mistake, it's on you to pull out the stops, even if it's uncomfortable to recover from it. And again, this is not the time to be like, "Well, it's the weekend now, and my team, we'll hit it Monday." I'd have been out the door so fast, I would've had the comic Wile E. Coyote skid marks as I bumped down the street. So I would say that's important. It's part of showing ownership.

Lenny (00:52:39):
The other part of this is something I went through for a while when I was starting to become a more senior leader is I had a lot of imposter syndrome, and this fear that if I messed up, everything would crumble. People would see that I don't actually know what I'm doing, and I'm not really ready for this level of seniority. And so there's this fear of one big mistake, it's over. Clearly this was an example of a huge mistake and it was not over for you. Is there any lessons there that you take away of you can mess up and still do well, even if it's this level of mistake?

Ethan Evans (00:53:11):
I think a lot of people in my position would've quit. They would've let the shame... I was just a little bit bullheaded where I'm like, "Yeah, I messed up. But I know I'm still a good person and a good worker. Yes, I made a mistake, but I'm going to move on." Part of the story I haven't told that you might enjoy is I mentioned that Jeff Wilke was Jeff's number two at that point. Jeff Bezos, number two person, and he was my skip level. 

(00:53:38):
Well, during this process, he came physically into our offices and he wanted to talk to me, and my manager who was vice president said, "Hey Jeff, this is my team. I own it. If you have any criticism, say it to me. You don't mean to talk to my team." And Jeff Wilke said to my boss, whose name was Paul, "Paul, that's excellent leadership. I really appreciate what you're doing. Please step out of the way. I want to talk to Ethan. You're doing a great job, Paul. Now step aside." And then he kind of read me the riot act.

(00:54:15):
And the rest of that funny story is I was so happy with how well my meeting with Jeff Bezos went, I patted myself on the back and like, "I'm going to go face Jeff Wilke now. I'm going to schedule a meeting with him and do the same thing. I've got this down."

(00:54:31):
So I go to meet with Jeff Wilke, figuring I'm going to run the same playbook. I'm going to look him in the eye and all will be forgiven. And Jeff Wilke looks at me and says, "Ethan, when you launched this, did you know you were gambling with the result? Did you know it might not work?" And I said, "Yes. We had a media commitment to launch on that day, and I thought shooting for the date was more important than perfect certainty."

(00:54:55):
And he said, "Well, two things. First, you were wrong. You were wrong to prioritize date over our reputation. You let Amazon down in public and that was a mistake." He said, "Second though, at least you knew you were gambling. If you hadn't known you were gambling, we'd be discussing your departure." And I'm like, "Okay." Here I thought I was rolling in this meeting like I'm going to run my relationship playbook. And he's evaluating whether or not to keep me.

(00:55:25):
The bullheadedness is even after he had told me he had been considering firing me, I'm like, "Well he isn't. So I'm just going to go forward." And a lot of that stubbornness of sure I made a mistake, but I'm not going to live in shame about it, I think is what people can take away. I think a lot of people feel they're more dead in the water than they are. 

(00:55:53):
Because everybody makes mistakes, right? I mean Jeff and Fire Phone, that'll be an albatross around his neck. Jeff and Fire Phone will be a phrase of anybody who knows Amazon for the rest of his life.

Lenny (00:56:08):
Yeah, we talked about it on the Working Backwards podcast, and why didn't Working Backwards work for the Fire Phone, we talked about it. I love that these quotes and lines are so seared in your brain. You can remember it like word for word exactly what-

Ethan Evans (00:56:20):
Well, I've relived that moment many times.

Lenny (00:56:26):
And then just along the lines of working your way out of the hole, is essentially what you did just succeed for two years and do great, and that was the key there?

Ethan Evans (00:56:34):
No, I think I did have to learn. I've always been sort of an operational cowboy, meaning I like to go fast and loose. I prioritize speed, and I really had to step back and say, "Okay, Amazon at this level and scale doesn't like that." So I've taught myself a new phrase which was fear the New York Times headline. Be aware that if Amazon is down, it goes up on every news website immediately. And so if Amazon has some kind of mistake, it's on Wall Street Journal and CNN.

(00:57:07):
And so as a leader, I had to think, is what I'm doing going to generate a New York Times headline? Because if it is, I'd better be really careful. And that's what I taught myself is you can't be paralyzed, but I taught my whole team, we don't want to be in the New York Times for the wrong thing. And that was the lesson

Lenny (00:57:32):
Along the lines of lessons, last question here, what's something that you took away from the way you approached it that you should have changed or should have done differently, that you've done differently since? Obviously don't... You mentioned this idea of don't promise a date that you're not that certain you're going to hit. I guess is there anything along those lines?

Ethan Evans (00:57:52):
I have two things here. First, Amazon loved in the past, they loved surprise launches. They love the idea of we're going to be quiet, quiet, quiet. Because basically it was a reaction I think to Microsoft where they felt Microsoft always talked about what was coming and then pushed the dates back. And so there was this whole thing about vaporware. And Amazon wanted to be the other way, which is we won't say anything and then it will just be there. The problem I came to say is the biggest thing I learned with surprise launches is that you're surprised by what doesn't work. 

(00:58:23):
And so I shifted the approach to let's do a lot of beta testing. We always, even if others don't agree quite and say, "You're right, we're not going to have a surprise launch." Some of our beta testers, even if they sign NDAs are going to leak. And that's a better outcome than launching something that doesn't work. That's one lesson.

(00:58:46):
The other lesson is this thing that broke in front of Jeff Bezos, ultimately it was a new college graduate engineer who wrote that code. And he had been left alone to write part of our user interface, but he had written it in such a way that it didn't scale. Now we didn't give him any help or oversight. We left him on his own, because we were busy focusing on other pieces of the problem.

(00:59:20):
And shortly after the disaster, he left the company. And the mistake I made was not reaching out to him and really reassuring him of, "Yes, you wrote the bug, but that's not on you. The system failed you and we don't see you. Bugs happen."

(00:59:38):
So the thing I regret in this whole thing is not realizing that even though no one in the team ever yelled at him or whatever, he knew it was his bug, and he obviously saw me and others sort of taking a beating. And so he left, and I wish he hadn't done that. And I wish more than that I had stepped in. I didn't realize what he was feeling.

Lenny (01:00:05):
It's interesting, the lesson there isn't catch that person sooner, and notice these links in the chain that may break. But it's more just be there for that human that have this challenge, that people may not be focusing on.

Ethan Evans (01:00:19):
Because we lost a good person, and he probably felt very bad about it. And we all feel bad when we make mistakes. That can't be prevented. But he felt undue responsibility I think, and that I really regret.

Lenny (01:00:35):
This is actually a really good example of ownership. You mentioned this term ownership and that connects to... Amazon has these leadership principles. I think there's 14 of them. One of them is around ownership. And apparently you helped craft the actual language for that principle, which I think is a huge deal with Amazon. I imagine very few people have a say over how to define, and describe, and say these principles. Could you just talk about this principle that you contributed to, how it came to be that you helped actually write it?

Ethan Evans (01:01:08):
Amazon is now kind of on its fourth version in my mind, maybe there's more. But its fourth major revision of its leadership principles over its 25 plus year history.

(01:01:18):
And when it was going from version one to version two, Jeff and his leadership team sat down together. And actually in version one, there were three different lists. They were leadership principles and core values, and something else I don't remember. And they were like, "Three lists is stupid. Let's make one list."

(01:01:36):
Well ownership, the term had been a part of one of those lists, but when they merged everything, they took it out. And this guy Jeff Wilke I mentioned, the number two and the leader of retail, he brought a bunch of us a bunch of his directors. He brought the proposed list to us in a meeting and said, "Hey, this is the proposed new version, do you have any comment?" And we all sat around and talked and said, "Where's ownership? Ownership is missing." So we told him, he said, "Look, ownership is missing. We think it should be there." And he said, "Well, why don't you propose a draft?"

(01:02:15):
And so about a half dozen of us sat around and roughed out a draft of how we felt ownership should be written. And I proposed these six words, which are, "An owner never says that's not my job." Maybe that's seven words.

(01:02:36):
So I propose this specific language as a part of it and we sent off this draft. And months go by, we hear nothing. And then one day the leadership principles are announced and ownership is back in. It's been modified, but that, "An owner never says that's not my job," is a part of the leadership principle, and it's remained to this debt. 

(01:02:58):
And what I love about that is because Amazon has one and a half million employees who live by these leadership principles, it's probably the most impactful thing I've ever written.

Lenny (01:03:11):
Wow. So those seven words are the most impactful thing you've ever written. I love that and I totally get that. I'm looking at the principles right now and it comes right at the end of that principle. We'll link to the 14 leadership principles. Is there another principle that you really love or one or two? I don't know. It's probably hard to pick your favorites.

Ethan Evans (01:03:28):
I'm a huge proponent of bias for action. Bias for action says speed matters in business and many decisions are reversible. And so it's important to go faster. 

(01:03:41):
And I think people don't understand that in a competitive environment, being right is good, but being quick is necessary. Because if there are 10 startups working on an idea, some of them will gamble, and they'll make bad gambles, and they'll go out of business. But some of them will gamble and make an early bet and be right. And if you are not moving quickly, you'll be beaten by the people who maybe got lucky. 

(01:04:05):
And so you've got to have a process that values speed, values, what can we do today? What can we commit to today? So I really like bias for action. Now that is what got me in trouble with Jeff, right? I was willing to gamble. So it has to be in balance, but that's my other favorite.

Lenny (01:04:25):
Again, the Jeff Bezos interview with Lex Fridman, he was talking about how with Blue Origin, with the way Amazon, he thought about Amazon is customer obsession. That was the core goal and differentiator of Amazon. With Blue Origin, he wants it to be decisiveness. It's basically leaning into this bias for action fully, which is really interesting.

Ethan Evans (01:04:44):
I saw that part of the interview and I thought, "Wow, that's exactly right." Because again, rockets blow up and they have people on them. You've got to get it right, but you also have to keep moving, because there's always one more thing you can safety test. So how do you balance it?

Lenny (01:05:04):
Yeah, it's interesting. With rockets, that's the one that you pick. It's pretty bold to be all move forward kind of thing. So this principle, again, going back to ownership, so you basically suggested this phrase, "You didn't hear anything," and all of a sudden it becomes part of the whole thing. Did that feel weird that they never told you, or I don't know if they gave you credit for that, or it's like, no, it's great?

Ethan Evans (01:05:24):
Yeah, I wouldn't even claim credit for it, except I kept a copy of the email that says, "Ethan thinks it should say blah." I have the written proof. Because it's not about the credit. I'm very happy and proud that those words were kept. But in Amazon, I doubt if Jeff knows I wrote those words. It's not like I've ever told him, "Hey, do you know you kept my words?" That's not appropriate. It's just a fun anecdote.

(01:05:55):
And it does show, I guess something people can learn from that though, you can influence way up in a company if your ideas are good. And also, when we challenged, Jeff Wilke was a strong opinionated leader who didn't necessarily always love being challenged.

(01:06:15):
And so when we first told him, "Well, we think you're missing ownership," he was like, "You're staying that the whole S team can't get its leadership principles right?" I mean it wasn't exactly that way, but he was very much like, "Well, is this really necessary? Why do you think it's necessary?" And his challenge to us to write it was kind of framed as, "Well if you're so sure it's good, show us." But again, I'm stubborn and I'm like, "All right, let's write it." And we did.

Lenny (01:06:47):
That's funny. That's not a great example of leadership where he is like, "Hey guys, I need your feedback on this thing. But no, don't actually tell me anything's wrong."

Ethan Evans (01:06:57):
Well, yeah. I mean for a bunch of directors to kind of critique the work of people two levels higher, he wanted it, but then he's sort of naturally resistant to it if we're kind of poking at his baby.

Lenny (01:07:14):
It's unlikely that there's something huge missing and it turns out there was.

Ethan Evans (01:07:18):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:07:19):
And I guess just on these principles, people may not know this, but this is where disagree and commit comes from. It's actually have backbone, disagree, and commit. We talked about this on the podcast about working backwards. I also love leaders are right a lot. That comes up a lot and I love that, to be successful, you need to be right. You can't just project confidence. You can't just be in a bunch of meetings and ship things. You need to be right to be successful.

Ethan Evans (01:07:42):
And that one's been rewritten to carefully say, it's always interesting what is the history of the edits, which you wish you could see the edit history on these. That one got modified to say something about leaders actively work to disconfirm their beliefs.

(01:07:58):
And the key there is it was trying to get at the idea that you've got to be very open and always be questioning, "Yes, I think I'm right, but what's the new evidence? What am I learning? What's changing?" And in fact, it also says they seek diverse perspectives.

(01:08:20):
And that was a way of getting at what's called DEI, diversity, equity, and inclusion. That's a subtle nod towards if everyone in the room is a 50-year-old white man, you may not really be making the right overall decision for Amazon's customer base. You may be making the one for 50-year-old white suburban Seattleites. And so it's just some of these, every word in those has been studied as an individual word inside the company.

Lenny (01:08:52):
Amazing. Okay. Let's move on to the final area I wanted to spend a little time on, and this is called contrarian corner. I'm curious if you have any contrarian opinions about things basically that other people believe that you don't believe, something you see that many people don't see. Is there anything that comes to mind?

Ethan Evans (01:09:11):
Yeah, I think a place where I'm currently very contrarian is the return to office movement. Many leaders at my level appear or publicly favor the need to get back into the office potentially full-time. 

(01:09:27):
And I'm contrarian on this because of innovation. Specifically, I looked it up, you can check my facts on Wikipedia. The first purpose-built office, the first building ever built to be an office was built in 1726 in London. And so we're about 300 years into learning how to use offices well.

(01:09:51):
And what that means is offices aren't going to get much better. What's the last major thing you can think of that got better in offices? You might say well open offices, but a lot of people would say that's not even a good idea. These big rows of desks and loud pits.

(01:10:06):
With working from home, we've only been doing that for a few years since the pandemic began and at all since the internet started 20 years ago. Which one is likely to have more opportunity for improvement? There's so many things we haven't explored with remote work. And I think the people who say, "Back to the office, it's because we know it works," well we know what it is, but I have so much more faith in the opportunity to improve the remote experience. And so I think long-term, it's going to triumph.

(01:10:40):
The one other place where I'm a huge contrarian is doing business on a handshake. I understand companies need lawyers, and I have an attorney for certain things. But I coach people. Most of the people I coach, there's no NDA in place. There's no contract in place. They pay me through PayPal and I do good coaching for them.

(01:11:01):
I think too much of the world is contract driven, and we've lost the idea of your word being your bond, and you can actually trust me to follow through on my commitments. And I'm a contrarian there.

(01:11:14):
I realize I will occasionally get burnt. Someone will behave in a way, they'll let me down. But I think when we're always suspicious of people, that's a high cost. And the other place I'm contrarian is just doing business on faith.

Lenny (01:11:32):
That reminds me, Sam Altman has a similar philosophy of just trust people and assume it'll all be okay. Sometimes you'll get burned, but on balance, it'll end up being much better for you and for everyone around you. 

Ethan Evans (01:11:42):
I didn't know that Sam had said that, but I strongly agree with it.

Lenny (01:11:45):
Yeah, although he had some challenges recently. I don't know if it's working great, but it ended upgrade for him. So anyway, okay. We've actually reached our very exciting lightning round. Before we get there, is there anything else you wanted to touch on, or share, or leave listeners with?

Ethan Evans (01:12:01):
No, I've really enjoyed this conversation. I could talk about careers forever and I love doing that, but I think we've covered a ton today that will really help people. So I'm good. Let's hit the lightning round.

Lenny (01:12:14):
All right. With that, we reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Ethan Evans (01:12:19):
I'm ready.

Lenny (01:12:20):
Ethan, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Ethan Evans (01:12:25):
Two or three books. My number one recommendation is a book called Decisive. It's by Chip and Dan Heath, and it's about the science of making better decisions. The reason I recommend it so much is it will make your career better because leaders are decision makers, but also your personal life. So I apply it at least as much in my personal life as I do in my professional life. 

(01:12:47):
My second most recommended book is Leadership and Self Deception, much less known than Decisive, a little bit harder to approach. It's by a group, a research group called the Arbinger Institute, and it's about, the self-deception is we cause a lot of our interpersonal problems while blaming them on others. And it walks through how are you part of the problem you're having with somebody else and what can you do about it?

(01:13:14):
The third and final book was recently brought to me by someone I work with that you know, Jason [inaudible 01:13:21]. That book is The Almanack Of Naval Ravikant. And Naval Ravikant is an angel investor responsible for AngelList. 

(01:13:30):
But what I love about that book is he has a recipe. He really boils down how to be successful while loving what you do. And he says, "No one can be a better version of you." Don't try to copy me and be, "I'm going to be like Ethan, or I'm going to be like Lenny." Instead, figure out what you uniquely do best that you love, because no one can copy you being you. And that's your defensible sort of career value. And I really like that mental model.

Lenny (01:14:03):
Yeah, Naval has so many insightful messages, and you can read all these on his Twitter. We'll link to his Twitter, and someone just made a book out of his tweets basically. He's such an interesting dude.

Ethan Evans (01:14:13):
Yes, that's right.

Lenny (01:14:14):
Awesome. What is a favorite recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Ethan Evans (01:14:19):
So I grew up on a farm, and so all the Taylor Sheridan, 1923, and Yellowstone, and all of those series, we've watched everything he's put out. We do kind of laugh like, wow. Are you familiar with Yellowstone at all?

Lenny (01:14:37):
Absolutely. A lot of death.

Ethan Evans (01:14:39):
Yeah. At one point my wife and I were watching it, we would start betting. So the episode is starting, how many people will die in this episode? This ranch in Montana, but yet somehow they're always killing people. How does this work?

Lenny (01:14:55):
That's what your life was like, is what I'm hearing. Favorite interview question that you like to ask candidates?

Ethan Evans (01:15:03):
I think my favorite interview question is, "Tell me about a time where you needed to disagree with your management, where you needed to stand up or fight for a position against higher leadership or people in power." Because I think that's really hard to do. I'm normally interviewing leaders, and I think having a bunch of people who just say yes isn't helpful. You need people to have, as you said, have backbone, disagree and commit. So that's what I'm normally looking for.

Lenny (01:15:33):
Awesome. Is there favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love?

Ethan Evans (01:15:38):
It's silly, but my favorite product that I've discovered recently is the Chuckit!, which you use to whip a ball for your dog a quarter mile. It basically extends your arm. And it's just fun to send a ball soaring way further than you could ever throw it. And you feel like, "Wow, look at me. I'm a major league pitcher." Because I have this three foot lever arm and I understand physics. If we look at tech products, there's so many I love. It's too easy to say ChatGPT and stuff, so I won't go there.

Lenny (01:16:16):
Awesome. My dog does not love chasing balls, so I haven't had a reason to buy that, but I've never thought about just the joy of flicking a ball really far. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to, share with folks, find useful in work or in life?

Ethan Evans (01:16:31):
I happen to be a Christian, and the motto that I think about the most is, "To whom much has been given, from him much will be required." And so I think a lot about what is my social responsibility. 

(01:16:44):
I've been very lucky. I grew up on a farm in Ohio now. I wasn't a farm boy, my father was a chemist. But I grew up in upper middle class settings, and I've ended up being extremely successful, able to retire from my job at 50 to kind of coach and teach. What do I owe to pay forward? So those words are obviously ancient spiritual texts, but they're the ones I take away and think the most about. What's my responsibility?

Lenny (01:17:11):
As an example of someone that to whom much has been given, but because he's worked so hard, Jeff Bezos is starting a space business as you know. If you had the chance to go to space, would you go?

Ethan Evans (01:17:22):
Well, I of course saw his interview where he talked about how he thought about the safety and the conversation he had to have with his mother. I would like to go to space. I'm not willing to pay what I think the current tickets are, but I would take the risk. So what's the risk of that ride? One in a hundred, one in 50, even more that you won't come back. I would probably take the gamble.

Lenny (01:17:46):
So you'd be an early adopter? Where along that curve would you be, an early adopter, laggard?

Ethan Evans (01:17:50):
Well, I'm old enough that I remember when the Challenger space shuttle exploded, and I said I would get on the next one and I said, "They're never going to be more careful than the next one, so I'll get on the next one."

(01:18:04):
So I think I would get on any one I was offered because of the chance. Unlike Jeff who claims he wasn't scared, I would probably be really terrified, at least at liftoff. While you're up there, it's great. Everything either goes wrong going up or coming down. It's not the middle.

Lenny (01:18:25):
Ethan, I think we're going to help a lot of people with their career. I think we're going to help them work through failure, become better owners. Thank you so much for being here. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out? Also, just share what you do now in case people could use that help. And then how can listeners useful to you?

Ethan Evans (01:18:42):
So the best place to find me online, I do all my writing on LinkedIn. It's where the professional community is. So Ethan Evans on LinkedIn. My actual handle there is Ethan Evans VP for my history as a vice president. That's the best place to find me. I do have a Substack newsletter. I do teach through the Maven platform, but all of those are linked off LinkedIn.

(01:19:02):
And really, how readers help me, they comment on what I write, because I miss things. I am one person's perspective. And so I actually have a process where I take in all the comments people write, all the different perspectives, all the different exceptions, or special cases, or examples, and that's how I improve my own thinking is I read every comment and think, "Okay, what did I miss? What could I have said better? How can I incorporate this if I ever talk about this again?"

Lenny (01:19:31):
Just to give you another opportunity to plug the stuff you do now, what do you help people with in case people could value could you use the stuff that you offer? You said you coach, you have a course. What sort of stuff?

Ethan Evans (01:19:40):
I focus on two topics, career development. So how do you row in your career, the whole Magic Loop, and how do you attain promotion or attain a new role raise if that's your goal? And then leadership specifically. I teach a course that's been very popular called Stuck at Senior Manager - Breaking Through To Executive, which is how to get out of that sort of stuck, "I'm working really hard, I'm pretty good. I'm managing 25 or 50 people, but how do I get to the big chair? How do I get to the division level leadership and what do I need to change?" It's that whole what got you here won't get you there. And I love to see people succeed at that. People write me back and say, "I did get a job. I did get promoted, I did get a raise," and that's my fulfillment.

Lenny (01:20:25):
Amazing. Ethan, thank you so much for being here.

Ethan Evans (01:20:29):
Thank you, Lenny. And I got to say, you are very good at this. You're so smooth and you just do a great job interviewing. It's been really been a pleasure.

Lenny (01:20:37):
I really appreciate that, and so are you. Thank you. Bye everyone.

Ethan Evans (01:20:42):
Bye everyone.

Lenny (01:20:44):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny (00:00:00):
I sometimes wonder how someone like go Gokul Rajaram can exist. He has an intense full-time job at DoorDash where he leads a significant part of the product in business. He also served as a board member at the Trade Desk, Coinbase and Pinterest, all public companies. He's also a prolific investor and seemingly on the cap table. Every successful startup that I come across and at the same time, he's one of the most humble and nicest people you'll ever meet. If you look him up, you'll notice he always just calls himself a startup helper and I know that he makes a lot of time to mentor and help a lot of founders. We cover a lot of ground in our conversation, including picking where to work, how to do product development startups, structuring your product teams, hiring and angel investing. I hope that you enjoy our chat.

(00:00:47):
This episode is brought to you by Amplitude. The number one product analytics solution. Amplitude helps product teams, growth teams, marketing and data teams build winning products faster and turn products into revenue. Amplitude has everything you need, including an integrated CDP, self-service analytics, and even an experimentation platform to help you better understand your users, drive conversions and increase engagement, growth and revenue. Amplitude is built for teams that want to learn as fast as they ship and ship as fast as they learn. Get your vanity metrics, rest your data, work smarter and grow your business. With over 1,700 customers like Atlassian, Instacart, and HBO, amplitude is helping companies build better products. Try Amplitude for free. Visit amplitude.com to get started.

(00:01:35):
This episode is brought to you by Flat File. Think the last time to imported a spreadsheet. Did it work the first time? Chances are it did not. You probably got some weird error and had to try a bunch of things like removing the blank title rows above your column headers or Googling, "How to save with UTF eight and coding." What even is UTF? Who cares? You're just trying to get your file where it needs to go so you can do your actual job. Your customers are running to the same issues when it matters most, right after signing up for your product.

(00:02:02):
Enter Flat File. Flat File is the data onboarding platform, built to take the acute pain out of importing customer data into your product so they can see the magic that you promised them. Flat File is SOC Type one and two certified, GDPR compliant and even HIPAA compliant. Ensuring your customers, no matter where in the world they're located, are sharing their data securely in compliance every step of the way. No more emailing files back and forth. No more help articles that just don't land. Just clean data on day one. When it matters most. Get started importing millions of rows of customer data in minutes, at flatfile.com, slash, Lenny.

(00:02:46):
Gokul, thank you so much for doing this. I know that you're an intensely busy human and I really appreciate you being here.

Gokul Rajaram (00:02:53):
Thank you Lenny. It's awesome to be here. Thanks for having me.

Lenny (00:02:54):
It's absolutely my pleasure. You're on the boards of Coinbase and Pinterest, you're a really big deal at DoorDash. You're even bigger deal at Caviar. You worked at Square, at Facebook, at Google. Plus you're an incredibly prolific investor. I'd probably put you in the top 1% of investors based on what I've seen. And so I'm just curious kind of just to set context, how did you get into tech and product originally? And then just what was your journey like to becoming this luminary of tech?

Gokul Rajaram (00:03:24):
First of all, let's not start use the word luminary. I think it's people like Elon and Mark who are luminaries, I think. I've just been lucky to work at good companies and observe the creation and growth of these companies. I'll give you an interesting story. Crazily enough, I joined Google as a PM after I applied to Cisco. This was in 2003, and I wanted to be a hardcore networking product manager in the layer three, layer two of networking. I was like, layer seven software is for wimps. I'm going to go hardcore.

(00:03:50):
Cisco had a... In 2001, 2002 right after the bust, the first dot com bust. Then Cisco actually rescinded my offer. They made me an offer, they rescinded it, and then basically that's how I ended up at Google. Was my second choice after Cisco. So literally you can see some of these decisions. You're just saved from yourself by [inaudible 00:04:08], and otherwise I would have been in networking, probably. Maybe still at Cisco. But at Google I got put on something called syndication, which is taking Google searches results and ads and then syndicating it to other properties like AOL back in the day, Yahoo, et cetera.

(00:04:21):
And I was working on that product and at about 6:00 PM... We had offices then, back then at Google, 2002, 2003, people would go home and some people would stay back. I'd just walk around and a few doors from me, I basically found a group of engineers in an office and they were working on something. I was like, "What are you working on? They said, "Well," Serge Brin, the co-founder had given them a project of essentially reversing what Google had done with search. You type in a phrase, set of keywords and then Google identifies the webpages that are most relevant to the set of keywords. So we have an index that matches keywords and webpages, so why don't we extract those keywords for any given webpage and basically see if we can target ads based on that? So that seemed interesting. Google's AdWords product, which was such, ads had just started scaling up and I was like, "Hey, do you have any PMs working with you?"

(00:05:09):
They said, no. "Can I be your PM?" They said, "Aren't you working on syndication?" I said, "Yeah, but I can do this nights and weekends." So I basically became a part-time PM for them and help them talk to customers, even did presentations with them. And while my full-time job was this other thing. And essentially within three months this thing grew big enough and fast enough and became a product that my boss saw this and she moved me over to full-time work on this, and that became Google AdSense. So a lesson for me I realized is that it's very important to do a core job really well at any company, but it's equally important to have curiosity and be open to serendipity. I think Zoom makes it harder, but it's very important to understand what else is going on at the company, what else people are working on, and just keep talking to people and build relationship with the company, because those are what will lead to the next set of opportunities.

(00:05:57):
I think many opportunities don't come linearly just working in your job and making sure you get promoted. That's not how I think great careers are built. I think great careers are built by knowing a lot of people doing great work so they know and want you on their teams, and just waiting for serendipity and then seizing it and jumping. Another example is I had advised a company which was acquired by Square, and the fundraiser in Google. And Jack, the CEO of Square, asked the founder who was one of the best product people he knows. My name was mentioned. So then they reached out to me and I would never have really... I mean, informal advising. I didn't have any equity of something in the company. I just helped them out because they reached out to me because it was a former colleague and I said, "Sure, I'll help you out."

(00:06:38):
And then that resulted in him saying good things about me and that led to the inbound from Square. So I think you got to prioritize this stuff. I mean you got to be careful it doesn't take up your life, but I think it's very important to be curious and open to serendipity. I realize in today's world there are lots of crazy serendipity things that happen. If you take inbounds from smart people and you just chat with them and you help them out.

(00:06:58):
Paying it forward is the other thing, paying it forward. Lenny, you're a great example to this, you pay it forward so much. Your articles, stuff you write, good things happen in ways that you don't even realize. You build up a reservoir of goodwill that comes back to help you in different ways.

Lenny (00:07:12):
I love this advice. I don't know if you know this already, but I actually did a TEDx talk once about serendipity. It's called Losing Your Serendipity. It's out there on the internet, in case people want to-

Gokul Rajaram (00:07:21):
I'm going to check it out. Wow.

Lenny (00:07:22):
Long time ago. But I love, love that concept and it's such a good story. Just kind of pulling that thread a little bit, I'm curious, when you're looking for opportunities, would you suggest people focus on things they're excited about and passion that's pulling them in?

(00:07:36):
Or more, I just think there's a big opportunity and maybe I'm not so excited about doing the work, but I'm just going to follow it because it may lead somewhere. Or some, right in the middle? How do you think about that?

Gokul Rajaram (00:07:46):
I think you got to think about the day to day. In many cases I feel people don't realize whether they're passionate about something or not until they actually start doing the work. I could never ever imagine that I could be passionate about payments ever in a million years, but the environment of the company Square was so infectious and great and the culture was so good that we even made working on payments... And you're serving these small businesses. I always think of, not what you're working on but what problem you're solving. In many cases, I get more energy from the problem I'm solving and who I'm solving it for and I realize that I get much more energy from personally solving problems that affected a small business or basically people or small business that I can relate to. It is harder for me to get energy solving problems of big enterprise and companies.

(00:08:28):
So I've always somehow ended up working at companies like DoorDash or Square or even Facebook, building ad product for small businesses, Google AdSense for small publishers. And so consumers for small businesses is what I've seen. And so I think it's important to know what kind of problems you get energy from and really think about the problem versus the customer segment. Maybe even more than the problem because I've saw different kinds of problems, but I realize that it's those kinds of customers I enjoy because you can meet them in the day to day. You can see them on the street or you read their articles. A small blogger for example, I remember I used to go to a lot of blog conferences when I was a PM for AdSense. It was great to meet these bloggers. They would be hundreds of thousands of them back then.

(00:09:10):
It's probably different, Medium and so on, now, Substack, but back then it was blogger. I think the word doesn't even exist today, but it's amazing to meet them and they literally... Till today I have people emailing me, "Gokul, I know you right? We used to make a hundred thousand dollars a year based on purely AdSense, and that was our living and that's how we built this other company on that." So big companies, you don't ever get to hear something like that. So I got energy from things like that. The other one is founder. I think, Lenny, it's very important if you think... Talking about company, is to have a founder, when you talk to them, you don't get the sense that they're in it for the money. I think it's very important for founders to really live and breathe the mission themselves in an authentic way.

(00:09:48):
And if people are smart, and I think you've got to really honestly think if this person is constantly talking about revenue and trying to convince you that you're going to get wealthy or they're going to get... Whatever the case is, that's not the kind of founder that's going build a really large company. And so if you look at everyone, whether it's... You've worked with Brian Chesky, I'm sure he embodies that. Jack at Square, Tony at DoorDash, Larry at Google, all of these folks embody that mission. Mark at Facebook. That they care about winning. They will win and money will come, but it's a side product. It's not the main thing they're aiming for.

Lenny (00:10:18):
That's a good segue. A question I wanted to talk about is when someone's looking for a company to join, knowing that you've worked at a lot of really successful companies, what else should people look for when they're trying to decide where to go? So what we've talked about so far is, a founder that really wants to win and is really driven, and then a problem that you want to solve? Is there anything else?

Gokul Rajaram (00:10:35):
I think those are the two things. One thing to look at, I would say, is that it is important to see if this company can become the number one player in its segment. I'll give you an example. I convinced someone who's going to take a very senior role, let's just say a tier two or tier three e-commerce company, to become a, not... So, basically take one step down at different company, which is at Coinbase, basically. I sat on the board of Coinbase, and I think that person still thanks me because I think they were focused too much on the title, that they were going to be the super senior person at this company on the management team, et cetera. But I said, "Ultimately you don't realize this, but the value of working at a leader in any space, the quality of talent you work with, the brand, the network effect, so many things accrue to you. I would much rather be the number two or number three person."

(00:11:25):
If you think of it that way, and the leader in a space, than the top person. Say Google versus Yahoo. I saw even if you're the VP of product at Yahoo or the head of product at Yahoo versus a ICPM at Google, you probably want to be the ICPM at Google. I bet you all day long, all day long. Yahoo is a great company, but Google is just a different caliber and different class. So I think it's very important to try to work at, obviously you don't know who the winner is, but if you think that's that something is a winner in a space, in large space, so many benefits that recruit from working at winners. You get unfair brand halo because you worked at a winner. People attribute a lot of the... "Oh yeah, you worked at a winner. Hence, you must be a winner." Probably not the case, but you can... I'll take it.

Lenny (00:12:07):
So along those lines and kind of touching on your investor experience, what should folks look for to think about, is this going to be a winner? Or should they maybe join when it's like a series B, series C when it's kind of clear that it's doing well? Do you have any thoughts? Maybe for either a new person joining the workforce, maybe PM, let's say, or even later?

Gokul Rajaram (00:12:25):
Personally, I feel like Hunter Walk wrote a very good post on it. He said that people who are joining the workforce new should generally join mid-stage companies because mid-stage companies you get some mentorship and it's not just basically whatever needs to be done and ultimately you don't build any deep skills. So mid-stage company I would define as something that is a multi hundred person company, but not maybe a thousand person company.

(00:12:46):
Somewhere from 300 to 500 people that has not just reached product market fit, but product market, channel fit. And the first product ideally is, the current product is on the way to becoming almost bulletproof. It's going to be a very, very strong product. And then it's really a path to becoming a platform beyond a product, where the company's thinking about, "How do I become a platform?" They have multiple products that serve the same customer, different problems, and they all complement and interlock with each other.

(00:13:12):
So because, looking back on a career, always without really thinking about it, as employee number six, seven or 800 at Google, employee number, few hundreds at Facebook, employee number seven, 800 at Square. DoorDash was slightly later because just through an acquisition. So it was like I think 1,500 or something like all around. But DoorDash also, I think, yeah, but I think that's basically, at least for me, has worked.

(00:13:35):
And this is even when I was not a newbie, as I was in my career. So it's really a good spot I feel if you're joining a company. For many reasons.

Lenny (00:13:43):
And this advice is for, you're saying new people but also maybe people further along in their career?

Gokul Rajaram (00:13:48):
I think unless you know the founders very, very, very well, joining a very early stage company is, especially now for the next one or two years, it's going to be a brutal market out there. So you've got to be really careful. There's going to be the days of raising around, few weeks after raising your prior round, of couple of months without much movement, without much company progress have... Are probably gone for most companies. And we all have seen now companies that have raised round at crazy valuations, deflate or die quickly. And so that's happened very quickly. You might just join and your company could die a week from now. So I think the other one is to really look at the financials and really understand that better.

Lenny (00:14:29):
Awesome. That's really helpful advice. You mentioned Brian Armstrong, Brian Chesky and some of the other folks that you have worked with and gotten to know. I'm curious, of the companies you've worked at, say now Coinbase, on the board, Google, Facebook, Square, DoorDash, what are some things that have kind of stuck with you?

(00:14:46):
Things you've taken away about how to run a company, build a product? Or anything else that's just taught you a lesson about how to do what you're doing?

Gokul Rajaram (00:14:54):
One of the most interesting things I've realized is there are multiple paths to greatness. What I mean by that is if I were to look at one word to describe each of the companies I have actually worked at. Google would be technical. It is very, very technical, technology focused, because Google believe, if you build great technology, they will come. Facebook was very growth focused. Very much, here's a goal, we want to hit 1 billion MAUs, let's work backwards from there. Square was very design focused. Let's build the cleanest minimalistic design, the most well designed product, then good things happen. DoorDash by nature is more operational, probably the right word to use where product and operational intertwined. Uber probably is the same word. So I think there are multiple paths to greatness, but I think the founder and market fit in terms of even the type of company that's needed is very strong.

(00:15:46):
In other words, I think founders have to be authentic to themselves. The other thing I saw is that each founder, whether it's Tony Shoe at DoorDash or Jack, they all had their distinctive styles but they didn't try to change their style. In some ways the company was built almost in their image in some ways and that was fine. I think if you try to build a company that's inauthentic to who you are as a founder, that's not going to work. So ultimately you want to... If Jack tried to build a company that sold enterprise software, I don't think that would've worked. That's not who he is. And so you want a founder and a company culture that are essentially synonymous and founders to be authentic. And I think finally the one other thing that I've seen is, the product itself ideally needs to have some remarkability.

(00:16:33):
What I mean by that is, it needs to be better than anything else that solves that pain point along a few dimensions that really matter, even if it's worse along other dimensions. So I think every great product, it needs to have a lot of word of mouth. I think especially nowadays, I'm seeing a lot of consumer companies challenged because they relied on Facebook or paid media to drive customer acquisition, and bunch of young companies are coming to me saying, "What do we do now?"

(00:17:01):
I'm like, "Look, the biggest thing you did wrong initially was you didn't pay enough attention to organic growth. Basically, was this product compelling enough that people talk about it and bring other people along? And you completely relied on paid and that's coming back to bite you."

(00:17:16):
So a good metric is that 40 to 50% of your new customers should ideally come from organic channels and 50% from paid. If 90% come from paid, that means at some point that the music is going to stop.

Lenny (00:17:27):
Unless you've got some magical insight or someone that's just killing it.

Gokul Rajaram (00:17:31):
A growth pack, right? Everyone's looking at this growth tag, but there is no... There's nothing like the silver growth tag bullet.

Lenny (00:17:37):
It's interesting, there are a couple companies I'm an investor in that are actually still working really well through paid. And so it's definitely possible but incredibly hard.

Gokul Rajaram (00:17:45):
Yeah, those are exceptions that prove the rule.

Lenny (00:17:48):
What I think of when you talk about this is that something Seth Godin shared a while ago that I always come back to you, this idea that your product has to be remarkable where people want to remark on it, for it to have a chance, especially in consumer, because that's how things start to grow. People just can't help but talk about it.

Gokul Rajaram (00:18:04):
Exactly. Very well said.

Lenny (00:18:06):
Easier said than done. Okay, so getting a little tactical. I'm curious to get your take on just the product development process at companies. How do you think about founders setting up a product development process? What do you recommend usually? And then maybe further down the line, when they get to like 25 people, maybe 50 people, how do you advise founders think about their product development process in the early stages and then as they evolve?

Gokul Rajaram (00:18:30):
I think first of all, the planning period is different at the very early stage. At the very early stage, it needs to be a weekly plan, where while as you grow the granularity, you still need weekly plans, but you also need quarterly plans that wrap around that. You start with quarterly goals. In fact, I was talking to a series A company and they were just starting the first several quarterly plan. They just did series A round, so they need to plan at a quarterly level and then it translates back into the weekly level. When you're very young, you're literally going week to week. And then once you become much bigger, you get to annual planning, which then leads to quarterly goals and so on. So the granularity is different. The second thing is the tools you actually use. I think initially you just have a very simple spreadsheet.

(00:19:13):
I am a big believer that you can have all these fancy project management tools. Whenever I've been a leader in a product team, I've never imposed a certain tool because I feel different PMs and teams find the right tool for them. It's about keeping it super simple. If you have too many complex tools, people don't know how to use them. Engineering teams typically use something like Jira, and as a product person you don't want another complex tool for them to use to figure out things. So a simple spreadsheet, and your founder that you update with things to do and people who are going to do it. And then that's basically it. I think as you grow, you start wanting to write a little bit more surviving, the first thing you start doing. And then as a very young company, you don't have a separate product strategy from a company strategy.

(00:19:55):
The product and company strategy are the same. As you start growing, you have a go-to market strategy, product strategy, et cetera, et cetera. So you start more clearly separating out the company strategy from the product strategy. The first thing you start seeing is when a product manager joins... So I think of course what happens is that the 25 person status, you have a PM who sometimes joins the company. I think the right time for PMs to join the company is about eight to 10 engineers or so. Anywhere between five and 10. But 10 engineers is... Unless the founder themselves wants to be the PM, but that's when you start seeing a professional PM join and the PM typically wants to clearly articulate. Good PMs want to articulate what the product strategy is based on company strategy. So you start seeing the emergence of a separate product strategy doc that is written at the 20, 23 person stage, and the product strategy then makes choices. What customers are we serving? More clearly articulates what have been implicit hopefully earlier.

(00:20:51):
And then that guides product development. And then I think when you get really large, you have essentially multiple interlocking products that there are multiple product strategy docs. And then you get into more cross functional strategy docs, into product strategy doc, et cetera. But I think at the very core of it, there are two things. One, the team still needs to meet on a daily basis. There is a standup cadence, and that atomic team of six, seven people, which is engineers, product person, designer, hopefully an analyst, they are the product development team. And they still review the tasks on a weekly basis, but where it emanates from when you're young, it doesn't have any roots. It's literally, they're just living and dying on a week by week basis, trying different things till they get product market fit.

(00:21:38):
As you go bigger and you have product market fit, you start building plans around that. And these iterations, these sprints then emanate working back from the goals that you set on a quarterly basis.

Lenny (00:21:49):
Wow. So much good advice. There's a couple things I want to follow up on there. What are some common pitfalls you've seen in startups trying to set up product development processes or the way they build product? What do you find are some of the more common mistakes that founders make? That early teams make?

Gokul Rajaram (00:22:04):
The biggest one I think is, the founder becomes too tactical and disempowers their team. I think the founder thinks they know what customers want. I think they don't empower their teams enough and they basically just tell the engineers what to build. And I think that leads to teams that are basically tactically just shaping feature after feature without truly solving problems. And I think that then creeps into when you hire a PM, they see this is how the company's working and they then also start working the same way. I think the best founders early on trust their engineering teams and product development teams to solve problems and more clearly present a problem to them and help them. And this is true for PMs also. They help them brainstorm solutions and try to work with the team to understand why we chose a certain solution versus another solution. And then the team feels empowered to go build it versus it dictating them.

(00:23:00):
Why should we build an iOS app, while the actual problem to solve is we want to increase the percentage of people using a service to five times a week versus two times a week. And building an iOS app is one tactic, but there are many other tactics. Which is improving our web experience, et cetera. So decision making and transparency of decisions around how products change customer behavior is probably the... And that leads to the culture of what is called a feature factory, where product teams basically are very proud of shaping feature after feature without truly knowing how much impact the feature has. If a feature is shipped, but it doesn't change customer behavior at all, is it really a feature or no? It's like a tree falling in the forest.

Lenny (00:23:41):
Oh my god, I love that. And I've definitely seen these teams that you're talking about and that only becomes worse once they hire a PM. I like your rule of thumb of hiring a PM when you've gotten eight to 10 engineers. What points to it's time to hire a PM, other than that? Is there other things you've seen of just like, "Oh my god, this team really needs a PM," or they should wait longer? What have you seen there?

Gokul Rajaram (00:24:04):
I always feel that you should hire to solve a problem you're facing. You should never hire... Or you feel you're going to face. But especially I think just over-hiring, especially... You want to be efficient and smaller teams are always good. Smaller companies are always good, part of the problem. So there are many teams. First of all, the question is if the founder is able to play the role, someone needs to play the role of a product manager. If the founder is able to and willing to play the role of product manager. The problem is with eight to 10 engineers, if the founder is doing other things besides playing the role of a product manager, then the eight to 10 person engineering team is not being cared for and fed.

(00:24:39):
Engineers are by far the most expensive resources in the company. By far, right? I mean if you look at the composition of engineers versus... And PMs versus any other function, it's two to three, equity, cash, everything.

(00:24:52):
And if you think of it that way, then if you're not caring and feeding and not leveraging this amazing most expensive resource, well, that's a crime. That's a crime. In some ways you got to think about yourself. Am I, as the founder, is this 10 person team or 8 person team being leveraged? Are they solving the right problems? Do they know how to brainstorm? Do they know how to solve problems? Do I have the bandwidth to sit with them and present the right problems, talk to customers, figure out the right sequencing, the right prioritization of problems to work on, et cetera?

(00:25:25):
And if you're not able to do that, you've got to have someone who can do that full time. And it might be someone from the team. I mean there are two... We can talk about how to hire your first PM and there are many, many-

Lenny (00:25:36):
Yeah, let's do it. I definitely wanted to ask that. I know you wrote a great post about this, just how to actually hire your great PM and you have a strong opinion about that.

Gokul Rajaram (00:25:43):
Yeah, I have a strong opinion and it might be just based on every single company I've been at. The first PM at every company has been someone who's either been an analyst or an engineer or a designer who's worked there already and they just move from their role to being a PM. Why? Because many cases, the role of the PM is actually to be the liaison between the founder, founders and the engineering team. And so it needs to be someone that the founders trust and the engineering team trusts and also they know how the founders and the engineering team work.

(00:26:16):
And many times if you bring a PM from the outside with a completely different process, many times the organ can be rejected by the body. And so they may not be the best PM you could get in terms of just functional skills, but they would be the best PM from a cultural assimilation. And getting the engineers just to understand the value of a PM and getting the founders to be comfortable, slowly being more hands off. Was it true of Airbnb, also? Was Joe not the first PM?

Lenny (00:26:46):
He was. And he was actually an engineer when he joined, so that's exactly how you describe. So say that you hire, or you transition someone from PM into their... Being the first PM. What are some signs that maybe they're not doing too well and things aren't going well and maybe you should go in a different direction?

Gokul Rajaram (00:27:03):
I think the biggest one is I always feel with PMs it's actually two or three things you can look at. One is, you can actually just ask the engineers themselves. Engineers are fairly blunt. And when I manage PMs, I've seen that they always tell me... Engineering managers in particular, they're very, very quick to tell you, "Look, this person is not working, they're not being effective."

(00:27:27):
What value are they adding? And I think just number one thing you have to do is you have to, just because you hire a PM doesn't... You can't abdicate that responsibility of understanding how the team is doing. It's not gone. You've got to talk to the engineers and designers constantly to see, is the product manager adding value? Second, if you see the PM, the newly anointed PM still get too much into the how to build the product, which is really the domain of the engineers and designers.

(00:27:53):
See? That's the other failure case where you've got to... And this is something through coaching comes. Obviously they just were an engineer or designer two weeks ago and now they are a PM. There's a immediate impulse to start going back into their comfort zone. And the key is to really push them to go more strongly biased towards customers and push them more towards talking to customers, understanding customer problems. And I think every PM, we all know this, all of us as PMs, there was no class to be a PM. So there are some people who joined APM programs directly out of school, but most of us are engineers, marketers, analysts, designers. And we became PMs after that. So we all come with inherent biases and ways of doing things and it's only a function of how long it takes us to shed... Or at least to not be that persona, but to actually take on a PM persona.

(00:28:45):
And so I personally believe in the growth mindset a lot. The reason that hopefully this person was chosen to be the PM is the founder saw that this person has the characteristics, traits, which is curiosity, the customer centricity, communication skills, being able to facilitate discussion, all of those things that a PM should have. Problem solving skills. And so hopefully those are things they didn't just pick a random engineer out of the 10, but they picked the right engineer, the right designer. And I think if you do that and you surround them with some good mentors, I think in six months they'll make good PMs.

Lenny (00:29:21):
I love that. Maybe just try randomly. You never know.

Gokul Rajaram (00:29:21):
Good work.

Lenny (00:29:25):
Just to close the loop on the idea of when it's time to hire a PM, somebody may be listening to this and feeling like, "Oh, we got to get a PM in ASAP." What are some signs or reasons to wait a little bit longer before you hire your first PM?

Gokul Rajaram (00:29:39):
If everything is going well? In other words, if your product team is clicking, if they're empowered and if you feel that they can take problems that you're giving them, not just tactics, but they're able to take a problem. Hey, we need to improve new user acquisition and the product team, the whatever, your product development team, which is just engineers able to take that and essentially act on it and suggest three different ways to improve user acquisition.

(00:30:04):
For example, choose the one that has the best ROI, how you measure it, and then execute on that and then run a test to say, "Look, it did improve user acquisition?" That's a well defined product team. So I think you need an empowered product team that takes ownership and can take a problem, figure out all the options to solve the problem and then prioritize them. And so if you feel that's happening, you don't need a PM. But I've seen that it's hard as engineering teams grow. To engineers, I think they do need that partner. They really that partner to help facilitate that for the most part.

Lenny (00:30:39):
That's awesome advice. And yeah, I think that's going to be-

Gokul Rajaram (00:30:42):
I think infrastructure is a great example. I think Stripe for example, is famous for not hiring PMs because I think when your audience is developers, they know their audience really well. And so I think many dev ops and developer facing companies, they don't have that many PMs. The PM to engineering ratio is very small. Even in Stripe today I bet it's much smaller than other companies. So those are exceptions that engineers truly understand the domain better. So the machine learning companies, infrastructure companies generally I think need fewer PMs. And this is true for any consumer product company. I bet Airbnb's infrastructure team had zero PMs, or very few PMs because they are serving other engineers. So I think those products, I think you need much fewer PMs than consumer facing products.

Lenny (00:31:27):
This episode is brought to you by Productboard. Product leaders trust Productboard to help their teams build product that matter. From startups to industry titans, over 6,000 companies rely on Productboard to get the right products to market faster, including companies like Zoom, Volkswagen, UI Path and Vanguard. Productboard can help you create a scalable, transparent and standardized process so your PMs understand what their customers really need and then prioritize the right features to build next.

(00:31:56):
Stakeholders feel the love too with an easy to view roadmap that automatically updates so everyone knows what you're building and why. Make data driven product decisions that result in higher revenue and user adoption and empower your product teams to create delightful customer experiences. Visit Productboard dot com to learn more.

(00:32:15):
Yeah, I have a post where I have a whole table of how long companies waited before they got their first PM. I think Snapchat had like 200 people also, but I think it's because their designers basically played the role of a PM.

Gokul Rajaram (00:32:27):
There we go, that's right. The designers played the role of the PM.

Lenny (00:32:30):
Somebody's got to be doing the job, right? Hopefully they enjoy it, sometimes they don't.

Gokul Rajaram (00:32:35):
That's right.

Lenny (00:32:36):
Okay. So say you've hired your first PM, you're building a product team. Something I wanted to get your take on is, as PM teams grow, sometimes they end up changing who they're reporting to. Sometimes it ends up being a CPO, sometimes a GM, sometimes like even a CTO in some cases. Do you have any thoughts on when it makes sense for product teams to report to say a GM versus a chief product officer or something else? Do you have any advice there?

Gokul Rajaram (00:33:03):
Yeah, I've worked at companies where it's both functional, products orgs are functional. Where all the PMs report into the head of product, reports to a CEO, as well as a GM structure where PMs report into a GM, as do an engineering leader and a design leader and even a sales leader, marketing leader, et cetera. So both can work, but ultimately you want, I do think once you have three to four PMs, you do want those three to four PMs to report to a functional product leader just because I feel they want a mentor, first of all. They want a coach. And you want to build a product culture and hopefully discipline across those four or five PMs because the leverage you get. Someone said this, I think a few years ago, I remember this, engineers are obviously very important to hire, but a bad PM... You can get incredible errors from a good PM, but a bad PM can really screw up, can screw up the work of 10 engineers.

(00:34:01):
So it's much more important to hire good PM than it is to hire a good engineer. Any good one. Because there's so few PMs for every engineer, that one good or bad PM can really screw up everything, compared to the impact of one good or bad engineer. So what that means for me is that if you have four or five PMs, and the one way to up level them is to actually make sure the four together are sharing best practices, learning, hopefully building a culture. And I think it's hard for a GM who's also managing other functions to do that.

(00:34:32):
So I would say yes, maybe one or two PMs could report into a CEO or a GM or someone else, but once you get into a four or five PM team, they probably should report to a dedicated of product manager whose job is to be a mentor, be a coach, attract strong new folks to the team, hire, build a strong culture, et cetera, et cetera.

(00:34:57):
That product manager, I think they could report to the CTO, they could report to the CEO, they could report to the GM. I don't think that matters. But the ICPMs is what I'm more worried about. Who do they report into? I think they should report into a dedicated manager once it gets a certain size.

Lenny (00:35:12):
Awesome. I could not agree more. Another thing I've seen, as a lot of companies go one direction, they go GM models, then they go back to something else where it's completely business unit oriented and functional reporting and then they go back. So I found it, just try something. See if that works. You can always change it in the future. That's super common.

(00:35:30):
I wanted to transition to hiring, talk about hiring. You recently had this incredible thread on Twitter about how to hire a leader and I think maybe just a product leader, maybe broadly, leader. And so for folks that haven't seen that or have time to go on Twitter, I'd love to just hear your advice on how to hire a leader for a company.

Gokul Rajaram (00:35:49):
That post actually was triggered by, that morning, one of my company CEO messaged me that, "Wow, I hired someone from this company. How'd you know this person was available from this company?" I was like, "I didn't know about this person, I just knew this company was really good at sales. And so that's why I recommended the company." And he said, "This is the third time I hired based on advice you gave and these are all senior leaders here. How did you do that?" I'm like, "Actually, thinking about it, you're right."

(00:36:19):
When companies ask me... Because the number one, if you ever ask a company, "What's the thing that's keeping you up at night?" They'll always say one of the things always that's keeping them at night, "I want to hire a leader for X, Y, Z function." And I never respond with, here's a person. I'll always say, "Well, you're in this space selling to this kind of customer or serving this kind of customer. Let's think about the best in class companies, who's also, who's very good at functionally the thing you're hiring for, serving the similar type of customer."

(00:36:48):
And so basically that was the origin of the post. And really what it says is, in order to hire, if you want to have a playbook for hiring good leaders or strong leaders for any function, look at best of class companies or companies that are best of class at that function in the similar space. Not your competitors, but you've got to look beyond your competitors. You've got to look at folks who are serving SMBs or enterprises or whatever this... Or consumers. And then say, "Okay, I want to hire a head of marketing." Great. This is the hardest thing. Go to find the top three or four companies who are excellent at marketing to consumers. If that's what you're... Then you don't hire the person, the head of marketing at these companies.

(00:37:31):
You hire the person who's reporting to them, the lieutenant. And actually, Adam Zamos, who was the head of people at Square chimed into say, "At Square, early days we used to go..." He used to run people, the people team at Square. "We used to go and hire the up and coming lieutenants of the lieutenants." And so I think you basically have to build almost an org chart and it's not that hard. You just have to spend time on LinkedIn, to say who are all the people in the org? Who reports to? And you can ask some of your friends who work at a company to better construct the org chart and you just literally go through that company and pick out the people. And I saw this in practice because once Square went public, we were the only public finTech in 2015, one of the very few public fintechs.

(00:38:16):
And so my goodness, our teams were raided. The next two years, I literally saw the full team, a huge chunk of a team in different parts of payments, compliance, risk, just being raided by other fintechs. And I saw that this was being followed. Because you say, "Okay, who's the company who's best in being in compliance? Square." And I'm sure there are other companies also, but Square was well known because it was public and it was large, they had done it at scale, et cetera. They didn't go after our head, they went after the lieutenant and the lieutenant of the lieutenant, et cetera.

Lenny (00:38:46):
I see. So you saw this happening to you and then you've weaponized it in reverse. I love it. Great advice. I've never heard this advice before and it sounds incredibly good. And so thank you for sharing all that. Thank you. On the front of hiring, how much time do you think founders and leaders should spend on hiring? What percentage of their time have you seen the best founders and leaders spend?

Gokul Rajaram (00:39:07):
Obviously you've got to always be hiring. Even today, I think Tony and DoorDash, if you have good strong people, you'll always say, "Please make the intro if you have some amazing people," because you never know what you learn from these people, even if you don't end up hiring them. So, always want to meet great people. But I think in general a founder of a young company should spend I think two hours a day hiring and you should do it during the time. I think the challenge in hiring is, you've got to build a process first of all, and that takes a lot of heavy metal work, the right process for you to make sure you do reach out. And again, there are two parts of hiring, there's a lot of reaching out to people and then there's actually talking to people. So I would suggest spending one hour a day doing the reach outs and there it should almost be busy work because you almost figure out the process.

(00:39:56):
So you should do it during the time of day where you don't have to put a lot of mental... Like, you don't need to be fresh because you need the fresh work for your actual company that you're running. But you need some time, fresh time to come up with the right process. How do you do LinkedIn reach out? Or whatever tools you use to reach out to. Who are the types of profiles, what roles you want to prioritize. So you need to find the right hour to do that in. The second hour should be devoted to actually meeting one or two people on a daily basis, and that's two half an hour conversations.

(00:40:26):
So I think if you just do that, you'll actually, over even 30 days, think about it, you'll meet with 60 people. And you'll do 30 hours of LinkedIn's, just two hours out of say 10 hours a day. And let's say 20 hours, 20 days. So instead of 30. Because of weekday, that's still a lot of time. So I think two hours. Use Calendar. Calendar is your best friend there, use calendar. And I think that's more than enough to do really well on recruiting.

Lenny (00:40:50):
I'm guessing that you can see a pretty big difference between the founders that you work with that do this sort of process and put in the time, and don't?

Gokul Rajaram (00:40:57):
One hundred percent. I think putting in the process upfront is really important because you can flounder around, and then just spending a few, four, five hours upfront, talking to a few folks, coming with a good process can massively improve the because they say, right, it's all about once you aim the strategy or the direction you're going is much more important than the speed you go in.

(00:41:18):
If you go in the wrong direction, it doesn't matter how fast you go, you're screwed. But if you go in the right direction, even if you go slightly slower, you're going to get there. So I think it's very important to set the direction of hiring, how exactly are you going to hire, what the process is, what your messaging is going to be, and really make sure you nail that before you do stuff.

Lenny (00:41:38):
Once you've hired someone, you give them a title. I know you have some strong opinions about titles and how to think about titles at startups and I'd love to hear your take on that.

Gokul Rajaram (00:41:48):
Yeah, I think on titles, I personally feel that if you're young, you have a unique opportunity as a founder to set a culture in place where people care about scope and impact much more than they would titles. The titles I'm most opposed to, to be honest, I'm not opposed to titles. I think, tweeted about this and people interpret to think no one should have any titles. Titles, people... You want someone to be called a software engineer so you know what they're doing. But the titles I'm most against are director and VP titles. Director, senior director. Because those are the titles that lead to the most contention in the company, that lead to the most conflict, that lead to the most disgruntlement and heartache and managers having to constantly... And people basically staying on for the title, to put it bluntly, versus because their scope and impact.

(00:42:39):
But I'm also against giving titles too early in a company. For example, I think the general counsel is a good title. I think Wall Street cares about it. It's important to hear who general counsel is, but I was meeting with a 25 person company today and that CEO told me... I was like, I always talk about what keeps you up at night? And this company's in somewhat of a legal heavy space. He is like, "I need to hire a general counsel instantly." I said, "Listen, yes, I know you need to hire a lead lawyer, whatever you call them. Or head of legal, but do not give the general counsel title at a 25 person company because the person at a 250 person company, hopefully you're going to be that in two, three years. It's going to be very different than the GC now. And you might, you still want to retain this person most likely because they're good.

(00:43:22):
You just don't want them to be the general counsel. She's over and over again. And so, there are certain times you only can give once and if you give it to early, you can't then... That's the reason to avoid title as long as possible. If you give the VP engineering title at 25 people, how the heck are you ever going to have upgrade that person, upgrade that role? You have to basically let them go because you can't then say, "This VP of engineering, now you're going to be made director of engineering or something," et cetera. It's very challenging.

Lenny (00:43:50):
When I look at your LinkedIn, it's always funny because I think you're just like, "Startup helper," or when you were running Caviar, I think it was like, "Someone at Caviar," or something very vague. Clearly you live that yourself.

Gokul Rajaram (00:44:01):
And I saw the impact of it. I saw at, Square I think was the company, and I think Jack came up with this because he saw that Twitter titles were weaponized in different ways. And so he started this at square and that's where I truly saw the impact and never had a single discussion at Square with my team about what the title should be. And that was amazing. At other companies, always, "I want to be promoted director. I want to be promoted to senior director." It's always, during promotion time. If you ask person what their goal is, even personal goals, sometimes they'll even write, I want to be promoted to director, but never had that.

(00:44:37):
Had stuff of course around scope, impact, compensation, that's great. I want to have conversation about that, but title? No.

Lenny (00:44:45):
And just to summarize your advice there, what's kind of the role of thumb of titles if someone hasn't read that post?

Gokul Rajaram (00:44:51):
Delay it as long as possible and try to avoid granting director and VP level titles as long as possible, in particular.

Lenny (00:45:00):
Easy. And then delay it, meaning have-

Gokul Rajaram (00:45:02):
Very simple. [inaudible 00:45:05]

Lenny (00:45:04):
And delaying titles, meaning like anything other than just software engineer, product management?

Gokul Rajaram (00:45:08):
Software engineer, lead. The word lead, or head of are both good, because the head of very clearly describes what they do or lead also very clearly describes what they do. So my title was Caviar Lead and then the people who reported to me were Caviar product lead, Caviar engineering lead, Caviar strategy and operations lead, Caviar sales lead, et cetera. And so the more words that are in the title, the more focused their role is. In fact, you can look at Jack's new title, it's Block Head, so it's literally not senior anymore.

(00:45:40):
It's head of block, a block leader I would say probably should be more appropriate. He's a leader block, and then so on, it premieres down.

Lenny (00:45:48):
Amazing. That's incredibly valuable advice and thank you for getting into the details there. I'd love to transition in to talk about investing a little bit before we get to our exciting lightning round. And so you spent a lot of your time angel investing, investing in a bunch of different ways. What's been your trajectory from just starting to angel invest early on to the scale you're at now?

Gokul Rajaram (00:46:09):
I started angel investing in 2007, 15 years ago. And like many people, I started because my friends and colleagues were leaving to start companies. This is when I was at Google and they were leaving to start companies. So I literally, without going much, I just wanted to support them because I'd worked with them. And so I just put a small check into their companies and some failed, some did really well. But ultimately I realized that for me, investing is all about supporting people much more so than companies themselves. The company itself, it's about the entrepreneur and the person. So till today, I think I have enjoyed the most and I've really come to believe in myself that I am a founder centric. I believe in the founder much more than I do the market. I think there are market centric investors. [inaudible 00:46:56] is amazing and they are very much believe in a big market.

(00:46:59):
I strongly believe that great founders, and Airbnb's a great example. They create new markets themselves, or they pivot. I mean, if they realize that a certain market is not good, they'll figure out a way to move. And I'm basically, with my check, the biggest mistakes I made early on were after a few checks I said, "Oh, I'm going to be much more selective. I'm not just going to write checks with all my friends. I'm going to look to see what the market they're in."

(00:47:25):
So I basically just started making these assumptions, "Oh, well, I should not invest in this company." And turns out, almost all of them were sins of omission. I much more care about sins of omission because you can only lose one X your money. But for me, the relationship with the person, a person I know and respect and good friends with, and I'm not investing in them, I don't want to lose that.

(00:47:48):
And it's an optionality for me to invest in not just this company, but in every other company they start. Because one of the most interesting patterns I see is, folks who are unsuccessful the first time around, but then use those learnings to start a company in the same or similar space and then succeed. And I'm seeing this more and more happen and I want to have, if you don't invest in their first company, even though you thought they were great because the marketers are great, they won't probably come back to you for the second company either.

(00:48:16):
So very, very founder centric style of investing, almost like YC, I would say. Closer to YC than anything else because YC invest in just founders at this point, they don't care about the idea. They just care that you're a builder and that you can pivot fast. And if you're a team of builders who can pivot fast, they will invest because they know within three weeks, if you don't have product market fit, they'll get you to pivot three times, and under that excitement, you'll find your product market fit four times. I see this again and again.

Lenny (00:48:41):
I love that advice and it's the way I think about it too. The only downside is if you have worked at an awesome company or two or three, it becomes a very expensive hobby because you end up knowing a lot of awesome people that are doing great things. So you have to be a little bit careful.

Gokul Rajaram (00:48:55):
You've got to really make sure what the motivation. That's what I really want to understand. You don't want folks, there are awesome people, but I do want to make sure they're doing it for the right reason. In other words, they're doing it to solve a problem that they've experienced themselves, or seen. So I really try to get into why they're starting the company and I want to make sure the reason for starting the company is authentic, in that it's a problem that they have observed deeply.

(00:49:18):
Versus, it's something they read about in Tech Crunch or it's a new US Web three or crypto thing or NFT thing. So I think that's how I suss out. So I don't invest in people, even if they're awesome, when I feel their idea for... The reason they're starting the company is mercenary and they're doing it, because they haven't immersed themselves in the space. Famously, I think the Collison Brothers bought a book, I think on payments, very old book or something I think... Or paper maybe, and read it to fully understand why you want people who really immerse themselves in an industry and live and breathe it before they tackle it.

Lenny (00:49:50):
Are there other things like that, that you look for? That are just like, "Oh wow, I really need to invest in this."

Gokul Rajaram (00:49:55):
The ability to hire talent before even you have... Or ability that, if you can show me that you have this set of amazing people lined up to join you or that you have commitments, or even your founders. I mean, the other thing I look for is definitely two person founding team. At least two is the ideal. I've seen solo founders I'm very nervous about because I think no one person has all the skills you need to start a company. And it's also a lot of things to do.

(00:50:18):
So I do like to see a really good mix of basically a builder and a seller or a hustler and a hacker, whatever you call them. And I think that two person, I really feel comfortable, however good the one person is, I just feel it's... There are obviously one person founding teams that have worked well, but I think the two or three person founding teams, I feel much. Two is the ideal number. So I look for the two person founding team, complementary skills.

Lenny (00:50:43):
These are really, really handy rules of thumb that everybody could use. How do you find time to do this? So you have a full time job, I imagine it's extremely demanding, and then you're also doing a lot of investing for folks that are thinking about doing this on the side. How do you time box this and keep it sustainable and not just to go crazy and burn yourself out?

Gokul Rajaram (00:51:00):
Time boxing. Exactly what you said, Lenny, it's time boxing. Most of the time ironically is spent on DoorDash and... Not ironically. Logically is spent on DoorDash even though it may not appear it. So I spend on DoorDash and what I do is a small percent of my time, I basically... I keep looking at my calendar to see, am I spending more than I've worked, say 10 hours a day? Am I spending more than two to three hours, maximum three, ideally two hours a day on things that are needed to do my work?

(00:51:25):
And three hours actually is a lot. If you think about half an hour meetings with people, that's six meetings you can do a day, out of 10. And I also do two hours each on both Saturday and Sunday so that I can do four meetings each. So if you think about it, six times five is 30, or four times five is 20, plus another four, plus 4... 28 meetings, that's a lot of meetings you can do with people, et cetera, et cetera. Yeah, so I think it's really time boxing and knowing... I think it is knowing what matters. Because if you find yourself doing the opposite, where 70% of time is investing, then you should actually become a full-time investor.

Lenny (00:51:59):
That's amazing. I don't know how you keep your brain capacity focused on so many things. Meeting with that many founders, even outside the time, is a lot of mental load.

Gokul Rajaram (00:52:08):
I enjoy it. I think the thing is, I enjoy it because I have been a founder myself, not a very successful one. So one of the things I love hearing, I always start with, "Tell me your founding story." And every founder likes to tell the founding story. And that's where I listen closely for authenticity, to understand how they met each other, the two founders or multiple founders, how they knew each other, and how they came up with this idea that they're going after. Versus what problem they're tackling.

(00:52:36):
I have a standard set of questions I ask so that way I can spend my time not thinking of questions to ask but just listening and just learning. And then I also have a good ability to forget instantly. I take notes and then I just forget and go into the next meeting. So compartmentalizing well.

Lenny (00:52:52):
Have you thought about publishing these questions that you ask? Or do you think that would hurt your chats?

Gokul Rajaram (00:52:56):
No, I think it seems... Yeah, it seems too formulaic then. I think there's questions that then change based on what the answer. So it's not exactly a set of questions, but it always starts with, "Tell me about your founding story of the company." I introduce myself and then asked them for their founding story. They're all nervous, pitching, et cetera when they pitch someone who could be an investor. We ask them to tell stories. It's the same for customer interviews, right? You never ask customers, "Tell me your top three problems."

(00:53:23):
No one knows what they are. But, "Tell me the last time you used a food delivery service. Tell me the last time you used a payment service. How was it? Tell me the last time you took a payment, credit card payment. Tell me about your last customer." People love telling stories about themselves. Everyone likes talking about how they did something.

Lenny (00:53:40):
For somebody that's thinking about getting into angel investing, other than having capital and finding capital, what advice would you give folks?

Gokul Rajaram (00:53:49):
See, the number one thing you need is, I think, besides... Number one thing is capital. Number zero thing. Number one thing is then you need to have deal flow, as they call it, or companies that you're meeting with and deciding. And then you need to know how to pick these companies. So you need to meet companies, you need to know how pick them. As an angel is generally easy. So I think you need to figure out how to get deal flow. And there are three ways to get deal flow to companies. One, you build your own brand. You can be like Lenny, who's built an incredible brand, or none of us can be like Lenny, but you can try to, we can all publish. The reality is, I used to tell every single person, "You can build your brand on the internet. You can build your brand, social media channels."

(00:54:29):
There's so many channels. And you have the person here who can teach the masterclass in that. You can build your brand. And just by doing that, you'll get people coming to you. Second, you have a lot of... Anyone in technology has other people they know who are angel investors. So it's just tell them, "Hey, I'd love to help companies. If they're investing in a company, please let we know." And the more people you tell, the more likely it is, they'll remember you. And every time you meet them, reinforce that. And third, investors. If you do know venture capitals or investors, many of them are looking to bring on... There's typically a round when they lead companies around, there's typically an allocation for angels. But for all of those, the first and most important thing is you need to understand, how are you going to add value to these companies?

(00:55:13):
What is your differentiation? What do you stand for? Why should a company take your money? The best companies have much more than... As Lenny and I both know, their rounds are over subscribed. It is hard enough to get even $1 into their round, let alone a hundred thousand dollars or $5,000. So why would they take your money? And so that's the thing, you have to really figure out. What is your unique differentiation? What do you bring to these companies that no one else can? And I know that's hard, that's painful to figure out, but that is the introspection each of us needs to do.

(00:55:44):
The way you do that is by just sharing your non-obvious insights. And don't just like... Basically just write. That's why I think writing is so powerful because it shows the world. My rule of thumb is when they do a search for you on Google, if your LinkedIn profile is the first thing that comes up, you've probably done something wrong.

(00:56:02):
What should come up is an article you wrote. Is a tweet you published. Is someone mentioning you on something else, et cetera. Because that's when, clicking on it, they know what you stand for by that content about you, by you, et cetera. Yes, Mike Morritz can get away with LinkedIn because no one needs to know what he has done. But for the rest of us, we need to build our brand, what we stand for. And it'll change over time. I used to basically believe I should just think about product development, how to lead product teams, engineering teams. For over the last five years, since I've led broader teams, I now share stuff which is much broader than that. And so what I stand for and what value I add has changed and evolved and hopefully increased over time. The same will happen. But you've got to take ownership of your brand on the internet.

(00:56:46):
No one else can. No one else can. It's not your company. You've got to transcend the companies you work for. If your identity is X, Y, Z, worker drone at A, B, C company, that's not enough. You've got to be X, Y, Z expert in A. Or whatever that A is, even if it's a niche thing, that's okay. Every company leads... So many companies come to me, "I want a payments expert." And then I'll find someone who's a payments expert for them because they're trying to build a fintech practice or something. So be an expert in payments, if that's what you know. Write about non obvious insights on payments. Doesn't need to be a functional discipline like, Lenny and I are doing product or something. Can be a domain. Risk, payments, crypto. Think about crypto, right? The people who got into crypto, and I just read a post by this guy, Richard Chen, he graduated from Stanford.

(00:57:33):
I don't know him, but I read incredible post. He runs this firm fund called One Confirmation, which is a top fund. He graduated from undergrad four years ago. That's all he did. I mean, he was head of Stanford Blockchain. He wrote, he writes amazing stuff. He's built a brand for himself. Kudos to him. 25 years old, probably.

(00:57:50):
Never met the guy, but I was like, this guy knows what he's doing. Watch his LinkedIn. Oh my God, he's never worked at a company. He's basically been out of school for four years, but he has incredible insights.

Lenny (00:58:00):
Wait till he hears this podcast. He's like, "Holy shit, they're talking about me."

Gokul Rajaram (00:58:04):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:58:06):
I hope he's a listener and if not, we got to find him. Okay, we are now at the lightning round. And so what I'm going to do, I'm going to ask you a bunch of questions real quick. Whatever comes to mind, let me know. If nothing comes to mind, that's also cool. And then we will wrap up. Are you ready?

Gokul Rajaram (00:58:21):
Perfect. Ready.

Lenny (00:58:22):
Okay. What's a book that you've recommended most to other product leaders?

Gokul Rajaram (00:58:27):
Playing to Win: How Strategy Really Works. It's a book called Playing to Win and the subtitle is How Strategy Really Works. Very good book.

Lenny (00:58:34):
Amazing. I have not read that. I will check that out. What's a company that you recommend to people that are looking for new gigs? Maybe product managers, maybe any other function?

Gokul Rajaram (00:58:44):
DoorDash. Incredible operational excellence. And what you learn here, I have myself learned a lot in the two years I've been here, about new ways of the attention to detail. Operational excellence, unparalleled.

Lenny (00:58:56):
I usually include, you can't mention the company you're working at now. Is there another company by any chance? And if not, you can have that.

Gokul Rajaram (00:59:02):
I would say Coinbase, if you're interested in crypto. I am technically a board member. I truly believe. I think if you are interested in crypto, Coinbase has such a diverse set of things that they work on that it is literally, you can work on almost any part of crypto, from NFTs to wallets to custody to infrastructure. They have a company they called Bison Trails, which does infrastructure. So you can truly, it's like Google, worked on everything. You could work in YouTube, you can work in search. Coinbase, I think the same thing. You can work in 10 different products and within two years or three years, learn the complete spectrum, crypto ecosystem.

Lenny (00:59:37):
Also an Airbnb alumni founder.

Gokul Rajaram (00:59:39):
That's right.

Lenny (00:59:40):
What's your favorite app right now?

Gokul Rajaram (00:59:42):
Over the last few weeks it has been Coinbase wallet. I've been playing around. I just was a hoarder. I basically just had held Bitcoin Ether for many, many years, but then over the last couple of months I just said, got to just... In the Coinbase board meetings, you listen to all of these things. I'm like... Got to now diverse and beyond and actually got to start staking stuff, going on distributed exchanges, or decentralized exchanges and just basically playing around with Coinbase wallet because earlier I wasn't using wallet. I was just using Coinbase dot com where you can't do any of this stuff. And then DoorDash is the other one. I think I truly use it to order food every day. But Coinbase wallet is one I'm using a lot now.

Lenny (01:00:24):
Awesome. I got to check that out. I just got access to the Coinbase NFT stuff, and so yes, it'll pull me into the Coinbase ecosystem. Okay, a couple more questions. Who is a favorite person to follow on Twitter or Instagram? Especially these days?

Gokul Rajaram (01:00:38):
Exactly. [inaudible 01:00:40].

Lenny (01:00:39):
Easy choice. All right. Who's a favorite manager that you've had over the years?

Gokul Rajaram (01:00:44):
All of them. I've learned different things through them. So no easy choice there.

Lenny (01:00:49):
No favorites. All right. Taking the easy way out. And then what's a favorite interview question that you like to ask in interviews? Not with founders, but with hiring.

Gokul Rajaram (01:00:56):
What are you most proud of? The interview question is a good one. Tell me about something that you're most proud of. What is the accomplishment, career accomplishment you're most proud of? Because it tells you how they measure their impact. Tells you a lot about what they care about, how they measure their impact. If they say, "As a PM I launched X, Y, Z feature," they're talking about the impact and the kind they value it. Something about that. Or if they talk too much about them versus the team, et cetera. So you get a lot from that question. It's a loaded question.

Lenny (01:01:24):
Amazing. I love that question. Okay. Where can folks find you online and how can people listening be helpful to you?

Gokul Rajaram (01:01:31):
I am on Twitter, G-O-K-U-L-R at GokulR on Twitter. And I always say the best way to help me, just help the broader ecosystem. Pay it forward, and if you pay it forward, at some point, whoever you paid forward helps me at some point. But if all of us paid it forward, the world would be a better place. Pay it forward. And then, like I said at the very beginning, believe in the power of serendipity, and I need to listen to Lenny's TED talk on that.

Lenny (01:01:58):
Oh boy.

Gokul Rajaram (01:01:59):
Serendipity, paying it forward.

Lenny (01:02:01):
Amazing. What a great way to wrap it up. Thank you so much for being here. Gokul.

Gokul Rajaram (01:02:05):
Thank you, Lenny. Thanks for having me.

Lenny (01:02:06):
That was awesome. Thank you for listening. If you enjoyed the chat, don't forget to subscribe to the podcast. You could also learn more at Lenny's podcast dot com. I'll see you in the next episode.

Heidi Helfand (00:00:00):
Reteaming is hard. Reorgs are hard. You can't lump them all into one thing with oh, it's all great all the time. No, it's not. If we could just build the software, deliver to the customer, get the product market fit, hey, have we delighted them or not? If only it could be that easy. No, we have the people layer, so let's focus there too.

Lenny (00:00:25):
Today my guest is Heidi Helfand. After two decades in the tech industry, Heidi became fascinated with how teams are organized, how org structures change and how to set teams up for success through that change. She now teaches workshops and runs courses and consults on how to effectively reorganize your teams. And in her book Dynamic Reteaming, Heidi delves deep into why change is actually good for your teams, why you're better off not having super stable teams, how to effectively execute reorgs, and through that, how to reduce attrition, stagnation, and knowledge silos. In our conversation, Heidi shares the five types of reteaming, anti-patterns to avoid when making org changes, what sort of team structure is most conducive to creating totally new products, why being transparent about your reorg plans is definitely worth considering. Also, how Heidi became such a great listener with a lot of really interesting insights and advice there and so much more. Huge thank you to John Cutler for introducing me to Heidi. With that, I bring you Heidi Helfand after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:01:29):
This episode is brought to you by productroadmap.ai and Ignition. Productroadmap.ai is the first AI roadmapping suite. It helps ensure roadmaps drive revenue by instantly aligning product with your sales and marketing teams to capture upsell opportunities. Built by early leaders from Rippling and Craft, it automatically identifies feature gaps from your CRM data and your customer conversations, adds them to shareable roadmaps easily prioritized by revenue impact, and then seamlessly closes the loop with sales reps via targeted notifications when feature gaps are closed. As part of Ignition's broader go-to-market operating system, productroadmap.ai can also help create better handoffs and collaboration with product marketing teams by giving both teams the tools to research, plan, orchestrate and measure the process of building products and going to market. Packed with integrations, AI automation and communication tools, it's truly a one-stop shop for product and marketing to bring things from concept to launch. To sign up, go to productroadmap.ai and use promo code Lenny to get 75% off your first year.

(00:02:36):
This episode is brought to you by Hex. If you're a data person, you probably have to jump between different tools to run queries, build visualizations, write Python, and send around a lot of screenshots and CSV files. Hex brings everything together. Its powerful notebook UI lets you analyze data in SQL, Python, or no-code in any combination and work together with live multiplayer and version control. And now Hex's AI tools can generate queries and code, create visualizations, and even kickstart a whole analysis for you all from natural language prompts. It's like having an analytics copilot built right into where you're already doing your work. Then when you're ready to share, you can use Hex's drag and drop app builder to configure beautiful reports or dashboards that anyone can use. Join the hundreds of data teams like Notion, AllTrails, Loom, Mixpanel and Algolia using Hex every day to make their work more impactful. Sign up today at hex.tech/lenny to get a 60-day free trial of the Hex team plan. That's hex.tech/lenny.

(00:03:41):
Heidi, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Heidi Helfand (00:03:45):
Thanks, Lenny. Great to be here.

Lenny (00:03:47):
It's great to have you here. So I had this colleague at Airbnb, her name was Jana, and she always had this joke that she shared that if it's been six months and she hasn't switched teams or hasn't moved desks, she knew there was this reorg coming, there's something happening, something was coming to change everything. And you wrote a whole book about this general idea of teams changing, reorgs, you call reteaming. I have the book right here. It's called Dynamic Reteaming: The Art and Wisdom of Changing Teams. I feel like just people underestimate the opportunities and benefits of change, and I think that we see it as a scary thing. So I'm really excited to spend time with you and chat about this topic. Before we get into the meat of it, I'm just curious why you decided to spend so much of your time researching this area of team change, reorgs, reteaming.

Heidi Helfand (00:04:35):
Yeah, that's a good question. It wasn't necessarily planned. I had been working in a variety of different fast-growing startups for most of my career in 20 years in software-as-a-service companies in particular. And I read a lot of books to try to get better at my work and what we're doing in our teams. I have a lot right over there as you can see, and a lot of the books I would read on teams and the advice that I would get from people would be, you really want to keep your teams the same. You want to go for that forming, storming, norming, performing kind of thing. And I had thought about that and I was like, wait, well it wasn't really possible for us when I was at a startup and I was the 10th employee and we grew to 900 people and now thousands of people, our team's kind of morphed and changed.

(00:05:28):
So I feel like if you're in a fast-growing company or a shrinking company, look there, don't look at trying to fight the natural evolution. I was just trying to prove a point and to illustrate that teams change. And I was also curious to see, well, was that just my experience and the experience of my colleagues in Southern California? What is it like for other people? So I was just curious.

Lenny (00:05:56):
You have this code in your book where you say something like, sure, we deliver software on time, we make products people love and want to buy, but there's this people layer that happens that people may not be thinking enough about. Is there anything more you can say to that?

Heidi Helfand (00:06:11):
Yeah, I think a lot of the things that I would read about teams just are naturally focused on, well, you want to build things that customers love. You want it to be an enjoyable experience, you want to deliver on time. There's a reason we're there as a business, but there's also a lot of company building that happens in building the people structures and just when you go from one to many to a multitude, there's a lot of work that goes into it. This is enablement type work and it's where I focused a lot of my time and my career helping make teams and organizations successful. So there is this people layer, however, I've thought about this a lot over the years and I think it would be highly convenient if we could just focus on building products that people love and getting product market fit, talking to customers.

(00:07:06):
It would be great if it could only be that, but the reality is we're humans together and there's a lot of opportunity to build companies that delight people where they're excited to be included in decision-making about how the organization grows and changes or shrinks. So yeah, there's this whole kind of other area of work that I think just doesn't get enough attention and I guess that's where I live and breathe.

Lenny (00:07:38):
Awesome. Okay, so I definitely want to get into the five types of reteaming as you described, but before we get there, what I find with reorgs and change is that it often leads to the biggest career opportunities because there's new roles to be filled. If things aren't changing, there's not going to be all of a sudden, "Hey, we have this new role that we want for you." I don't know. A lot of the leaders that move up quickly are the ones that seem to take advantage of change and think ahead and get involved and position themselves in a way where like, "Okay, cool, there's a new position. Oh, clearly it's going to be Heidi." Is there anything you can share there? Any advice for people that maybe see reorgs coming and what they can do to help themselves in that pending change?

Heidi Helfand (00:08:21):
I really like it when there's transparency in reorgs. There's a story in my book from Christian Lima at Spotify about how they reorged a large infrastructure team. They visualized it on whiteboards and brought people over to the whiteboards to see the future team structure that the leaders wanted and they got input into the design. We did this at Procore as well inspired by Christian and his story and we had... I think there were 80 people involved in this platform organization that was splitting from two large clusters of teams into three. And I remember when we rolled out the whiteboards from a back office where we were talking about this change for a few weeks and it was scary to roll these whiteboards out because it impacts people's day to day. It's like when somebody is suggesting that maybe you do something different or that something different happens, sometimes it can be kind of triggering. You want to know what's going on. So anyway, but we had courage together.

(00:09:31):
So we rolled these whiteboards out and it had the team structure with everyone's names on it. It had the name of the team, the mission of the team, how many open slots for hiring across all of these different teams, and then people's names in their existing team positions. And people were invited to look, give feedback. They identified mistakes that we had in the design, "Oh, this team might be better over here and here's why." And people had the opportunity to see opportunities within their own company that they might say, "Hey, I'm interested in this, might I be considered for this?" And then they could have their discussion. So I really liked that the opportunities were shared and presented, so it wasn't some sort of thing that happened in some kind of back room for the whole time. We unearthed the beginning of a plan.

(00:10:31):
I think sometimes when you convene people for a meeting to talk about anything, it's good to have a starting point. So we had this starting point, we had a variety of different things and I call it whiteboard reteaming in my book and I write about that. And there's even structures that are more open than that. Redgate Software in Cambridge UK. Chris Smith is a colleague of mine and they do regular open self-selection reteaming activities when they're changing their strategic priorities. He talks about this globally very interesting space and it's even more open than putting the names on the whiteboards. They have teams give pitches and this is what they're looking for and they have a whole method for enabling people to say, "Hey, I'm interested in this." I think that really helps because sometimes you might think, "Oh, no one's going to want to work on this." But people can be delighted by working on things that another person doesn't think are particularly interesting.

(00:11:38):
So giving choice is important. And again, there are different grades of transparency. We weren't up for doing this kind of open reteaming self-selection event, but we were open to the whiteboard variant.

Lenny (00:11:56):
I imagine individual employees hearing this of just being involved in the reorg strategy sounds amazing. Executives and leaders hearing this are probably really afraid and feel like there's no way this can work well. And so what I want to understand is how do you actually set this up for success? What I'm imagining when you do this is many people disagree. There's teams people want to join, there's teams people don't want to join. It seems like there's a consensus challenge where do you wait for everyone to agree? Does someone end up making a decision? Does it distract everyone from the work they're doing when you're kind of involving everyone in the reorg? Versus what typically happens, it secretly is planned amongst executives. No one knows it's coming. And I think the reason they do that is because they don't want to distract anyone and they don't want anyone to start freaking out until it's like, "Here's the final plan. Here's what we're doing." So what other advice do you have for people that want to practice this way of reteaming and reorging where they involve the actual team in the plan?

Heidi Helfand (00:12:58):
There's a book by William Bridges called Transitions: Managing Life's Changes. I have it right here. Making Sense of Life's Changes. He talks about endings, neutral zone, and new beginning. Ending: you're going through a change, your team is changing. Neutral zone: the period of kind of liminality where you're like, "Gosh, I don't know how this is going to go." You're not quite comfortable. You're not quite in that new reality yet. You're still thinking about what it was like before. And once you're in that new reality and leaders can paint the vision and picture about the benefits of the new reality and the purpose and why we're here and anchor to that to try to raise positivity. But once I learned about that transition framework, going through any subsequent changes myself became a lot easier to grasp and it really kind of makes changes in any part of your life. I mean, his book is not written about software development or product development.

(00:14:00):
Sometimes we're going to have a say, we're going to be able to participate, sometimes we're not. And being clear on who the decision maker is in a change is really important.

(00:14:11):
There's another framework that I really like. I don't think it's in my book, but I've written about it in my new book, but it's called RIDE. And we had a chief people officer at Procore and she's now at UKG, Pat Wadors. She taught us the RIDE framework for decision making clarity and it's who's requesting the change, who can give input to the change, who's the decider on the change, and who's going to execute on the change? So it's like R-I-D-E. And I googled this for a while; I couldn't find anything on it. I encouraged her to write about it and I credit her to that, Pat Wadors. She's awesome.

(00:14:53):
So a lot of the times it's like, what's the problem you're going to solve? You have a current state and a future state and that future state might be up to discussion, but maybe it's not depending on what it is. You're getting acquired, you're probably not going to have a standup meeting and talk about should we get acquired or not? No, you're not part of that decision. And then how's the change going to get rolled out or how are we going to do it?

(00:15:22):
In other cases at the team level, maybe you have a retrospective and you determine, "Hey, I think we'd be a bit more effective and we'd be able to deliver at a better cadence if we were two teams instead of one team." And if teams have the ability to talk about that and impact and have some agency into how their part of the org evolves and change, I think that could be really cool. I think that could be really empowering. I think that could help us feel more ownership in that company that we're in. It doesn't always have to be like decision making equals hierarchy or the person at the top. It doesn't have to be like that.

(00:16:01):
But again, reteaming is hard. Reorgs are hard. You can't lump them all into one thing with, oh, it's all great all the time. No, it's not. It's not. But anyway, we need to focus there. We got to focus on this people layer because reteaming is inevitable. We might as well get better at it because we're going to have to deal with it. If we could just build the software, deliver to the customer, get the product market fit, hey, have we delighted them or not? If only it could be that easy. No, we have the people layer. So let's focus there too.

Lenny (00:16:37):
On this transparent collaborative reteaming, final question here is just would you recommend time boxing this so that it doesn't suck up everyone's brain power for weeks and weeks and weeks? Or is it very dependent?

Heidi Helfand (00:16:48):
Yeah, you got to time box it.

Lenny (00:16:52):
Okay. Is there advice you have on how long?

Heidi Helfand (00:16:53):
Make a schedule biased towards shorter as opposed to longer. You don't want to deliberate on this forever, because especially as you include more people, it can be distracting. So you want to proceed as expediently as you can.

Lenny (00:17:10):
Okay, let's talk about the types of reteaming. This is kind of the core of your book and we haven't even gotten there yet. So you've identified there's five ways teams change. Can you just walk through them, help people understand what they are. And then also, we use this term reorg a lot in this conversation. I think that's the way most people think about change. After we go through this list, what does reorg refer to when it's maybe from the perspective of these five ways of teams changing?

Heidi Helfand (00:17:32):
Sure. Okay, so the five patterns of reteaming. One by one, someone joins your company or someone leaves your company, grow and split. It's a growth pattern. Teams grow bigger and then they split into two or more teams. Opposite of grow and split is merging. Sometimes two or more teams merge together. It's more of a shrinking pattern. We might be seeing more of this these days as companies downsize. Things merge together and consolidate. Isolation is, or innovation by isolation. Start a new team off to the side, a beneficial silo, give that team process freedom, great for catalyzing new product lines within your existing company. Also great for emergencies and they just happen anyway if we have incidents and people have to come together, solve an incident and then go back to their teams. And switching. So switching is moving from one team to another team. You can do this at a variety of cadences, short term, long term.

(00:18:36):
And then difference between a reteaming and a reorg. I think reorg is a word that has very traditional baggage and connotations. And when I was writing Dynamic Reteaming, it just didn't feel like an appropriate word to use for, well, Sue is looking to learn a little bit about how our web operations work, she's going to move to that team. It didn't feel appropriate to call that a reorg because Sue's moving and switching from one team to the next. I think reorg again... Reorganization is a traditional word. It implies on the large, it implies top-down changes that you have say no. It's something different than what I consider reteaming, which is these five patterns that happen at different levels.

Lenny (00:19:30):
Awesome. So let me just repeat back these five. So one by one, basically people joining your team, leaving your team, something very natural. People do all the time.

Heidi Helfand (00:19:37):
Your company.

Lenny (00:19:39):
Or your company, yeah. Growing, splitting a team gets really large and then it's like, okay, let's just split this into two, focus them on specific things instead of this one team trying to cover too much. Merging teams, the opposite of that. Isolation. I want to chat about that one a little more where you just have a team off to the side and they're just dedicated to something that you find really important. So with isolation, you have this awesome story of your time at a company called Expertcity, which turned into something people know most likely and ended up being a great outcome because of this reteaming into an isolation team. Could you talk about that?

Heidi Helfand (00:20:14):
Yeah, so I've been at different startups that have grown bigger and one of them, I was the 15th employee. I started as a web editor and became an interaction designer. And we were going to change the world and it was very exciting. We were in Santa Barbara, California. So the company's called Expertcity. And we were working on our first product, which was a marketplace for tech support. So imagine you have a problem on your computer, you can go to our website and then you can select an expert to see and control your screen to help you solve your tech support challenge. And so we had the screen sharing technology that we were inventing in the company. We had the web-based software to manage the interaction between the customer and the expert. We had the experts. We had in-house experts and then the vision was global worldwide experts. You were going to be like this marketplace, this eBay of services is what we talked about in the early days. I was really into this.

(00:21:17):
This was my first job in tech and I became an interaction designer working on kind of front-end UI flows with engineers. It's actually before the word interaction designer, my title was navigation designer. We made this up. So I was very into... It was before the words like UX and other things. People were talking about information architecture and other sub-genres of design. And we had individual offices. I had all the interaction flows on my walls. I was really into the words and one day I was in there and we were working on a new flow. We had all these hopes and dreams for this product and the CEO came into my office and he said, "Heidi, stop working on the marketplace. We're not going to do that product anymore. We're killing it because nobody's buying it and made six bucks or something last month." And he said, "Go to the beach." We were by Santa Barbara. I'm like, "What do you mean go to the beach?" He's like, "Well, I don't want you to start any work that you're going to have to maintain later as we figure out our next step." And I was like, "Okay."

(00:22:29):
I remember that day and I'm looking around my office and all these flows on the walls. So really these were domains like domain-driven design. It was all these web domains and which user interactions were going to happen and all these hopes and dreams and it was the first time in my career where we were told not to work on something. It wasn't paused. Some people say, "Oh, we're going to pause this," and then they never get back to it. This thing was like [inaudible 00:22:59]. And I didn't get it. I just didn't get it. I cried, I acted out, I sent this email like, "How can we kill the marketplace? It must live." It was quite an experience.

(00:23:14):
But then, and I don't know what the timing was, I was invited to be on this team off to the side and there was market validation going on. Our founders and product and others became students of market validation, Four Steps to the Epiphany. So we had built this thing, we spent all this time on this marketplace, but nobody would buy it. And so it was like do or die. We had to shift. This was before lean startup. So Four Steps to the Epiphany was the book, it was the manual, it was guiding the way. And so there were people that had a ton of conversations with potential customers about this new thing that we were going to build.

(00:23:58):
And so I was invited to be at this team off to the side and there was a small team and we didn't have to do waterfall software development. We were freed from that. We were liberated from that. We got to work in other ways. And I remember working with an engineer and we were figuring out how to create a forgot password flow because none of these patterns existed back then and we got to do this stuff. We got to deploy more frequently and the product was called GoToMyPC where you could see and operate someone's computer from a distance. And that was essentially the pivot that I feel like saved the company. Later we went on, we got folded back into the teams and we built GoToMeeting and GoToWebinar as a technical project manager at that time. So taking a team off to the side, giving that team process freedom. They didn't want us distracted from the drag.

(00:24:58):
When you're working on an existing product line, you get this cadence and it can become a mature cadence. Maybe people work in two weeks or one week now, but when you're working on something new, you need faster iteration loops. And our founders knew that need. So it was a privilege and I was delighted to be part of this other team and it was really, really exciting. So then looking back over the years, I was like, yeah, isolated teams, beneficial silos. Again, it's going against green of what some of these books say, oh, you want to desilo everything? No, sometimes there's a reason why you have a problem. You want to solve the problem. This was like, I mean, was this company going to go under? I didn't think of those kind of things at the time because I was just super into the work and very passionate and motivated about what we were building. But yeah, isolation pattern came up and we used it at another startup as well ever since.

(00:25:59):
So yeah, that's the story of Expertcity and from my perspective. Ask different people at different vantage points, but that... If we would've stayed within our teams and we would've had to develop with pixel-perfect mockups done in Photoshop like, "Here you go," I don't think we would've been fast enough. That was not good for the innovation that we needed. So it's also like innovation by isolation. It's good for emergencies. I was at another startup, we had performance issues with our first product. People left teams, brought a consultant in, went into a conference room for a couple of weeks, figured out some major changes that needed to happen, solve them, went back to the teams. This is not a new concept. The Chicken McNugget was saved by an isolated team, SWAT team.

(00:26:57):
There's a book called Teamwork. It's an old book from, I think the '70s, I have in my bookshelf here, and there's a story of the Chicken McNugget that you can read about where they brought in a consultant and had a very small team who worked in a different... They didn't work in their same plant where they were developing the product. They worked in a different plant. They reported straight up to one of the executives at McDonald's. And yeah, the Chicken McNugget lived on because it was like having challenges in the test marketplace in Indianapolis. So we didn't make this up. It's just like some of these things are kind of like, "Oh, it's like a noticing," and then you're like, "Oh, that's pattern." So it's collection.

Lenny (00:27:39):
There's this idea of a startup within a big company. Everyone's like, "Oh, it's just like the startup within a big company. We have all the resources that we need. There's no less risk, but we can innovate and try new things." Rarely does it feel like it work out. You're sharing stories where it does. Is there anything you found or any advice for how to actually be successful in this idea of having a team off to the side doing something innovative and different?

Heidi Helfand (00:28:00):
At AppFolio we did this. So there's a company called SecureDocs; it branched off into its own company and it was just acquired, I believe in 2022. When SecureDocs was happening, I was not on that team. I was on the other teams and I was watching, and again, same pattern. A team was created off to the side and they were given process freedom. They worked in more of a daily sprint style as opposed to the two-week sprint style that our other teams were doing at the time at early AppFolio. And so, one, isolate the team or put them in a different area. We could still see them. We were in this big open room, but it was their team area. I mean we had these impermanent walls between some of the teams. It was their region and they claimed it and they named themselves.

(00:28:58):
And so, one, separate location. There's another story in the book about a team that incubated a product idea within Citrix and they were in a garage of all places, so they were really isolated. But just put the team in a different region, make it that area. That's number one.

(00:29:17):
Number two, tell other people not to disturb this team. That's key. And hearing it from a leader is really, really important. No, you're not going to pull them into something else. They're working on this other thing. So people need to shed their skin of the other things that they're working on. If you take a bigger picture, kind of forest through the trees picture, you want people pairing and switching pairs so they're not single owners of the system. So when they have an opportunity to do something that could be really important to the company beyond one of these isolated teams, they can fade out and not be the only owner that has to transfer knowledge and then field questions for two years on how that system works. You want to build this redundancy in your teams. So that's like if you really want to plan ahead, do that first. Have that as part of how you operate, building this team redundancy and switching, because then it frees people to not be the only owner of a system and chained to a system.

(00:30:15):
And so isolate them. Tell people not to bother them. Do pairing and have shared ownership so it's easier for somebody to switch into something like this. Process freedom. Again, they can do things differently. Ideally they report up to someone that really has decision-making authority and decisions won't get reversed. Or they have to go through some complex web of like, "Is it okay if we do this?" No, you need a clear decision-making structure. They saw that at the McDonald's case study as well, which is not in my book, but it's in [inaudible 00:30:52] book called Teamwork.

(00:30:53):
And then that group, having that senior leader that they report into, getting the clear lines of communication there is also really important. So not having this heavyweight bureaucracy of, I don't know, quarterly business updates where everybody's making a slide deck for two years before they go to that meeting, trying to relieve the team of things like that and make it lighter.

(00:31:25):
And some of these teams, like SecureDocs became another product at AppFolio that was very, very successful. At one point, I think it was before we went public, it branched off into its own separate entity. I think maybe they shared a board member or something. I don't know how that worked, but it became its own entity. SecureDocs became separate and then it grew from there. And then it became this wonderful successful product that was recently acquired. People come and go at companies and companies grow and change and morph, and that was one case of departures that it's like bitter, sweet. You're happy for your friends and colleagues say, "Oh, he's going to be a CTO. He's going to be the CTO."

(00:32:14):
There's this entity. I remember visiting their office in Santa Barbara. It's great to see your friends succeed and thrive. And we developed other companies in that way.

Lenny (00:32:28):
Awesome. I think it's really nice to hear there's many success stories of this idea of a mini little startup within a company, and these are really good tips.

(00:32:37):
This episode is brought to you by Ahrefs. Many of you already know Ahrefs as one of the top tools for search engine optimization. It's used by thousands of SEOs and companies like IBM, Adidas and eBay. What you may not know is that there's a free version that was made with small website owners in mind. It's called Ahrefs Webmaster Tools. It's free and it can help you bring more traffic to your website. Ahrefs Webmaster Tools will show you keywords that you rank for and back links that you can get. It also performs automated site audits to find what issues prevent your website from ranking higher on Google. Every detected issue comes with a detailed explanation and advice on how to fix it. Visit ahrefs.com/awt, set up a free account, connect your website and start improving it. That's A-H-R-E-F-S.com/awt.

(00:33:27):
I feel like to me one of the most important ones you've talked to. And this is having an executive essentially sponsoring this team and supporting and protecting it versus some managers just like, now we're going to go do this off to the side, because otherwise no one's going to really take that seriously.

Heidi Helfand (00:33:43):
Yeah, I think that's really, really important. I'll also say that things don't always succeed a hundred percent. I've seen isolated teams within companies where someone has the opportunity to sell something, they talk to their friends who are the engineers who build the feature for them, but then it leaves something for other people to maintain later and they weren't involved in the decisions. And it can be a big mess for all of these patterns there. It's like kind of like balconies and basements. You can screw it up too. It's not all stuff is hard. That's why I like to lean into it and I've written about it. Things take effort. The tree is going to drop the leaves and you got to sweep them up. Everything takes work and effort.

Lenny (00:34:33):
We've talked about the isolation pattern. I thought it'd be good to talk through the rest of the patterns real quick and share maybe one or two tips for how to be successful or make it work well or better.

Heidi Helfand (00:34:45):
Sure.

Lenny (00:34:46):
Before you start, actually, I think I missed a nuance and you corrected me, but I think I missed it, which is for the one-on-one pattern, it's actually describing joining the company specifically not joining a team. Is that right?

Heidi Helfand (00:34:56):
Yeah. And in the book it might be a little blurred because this is like some of the... Switching and one by one sound very similar, and they do have some Venn diagram overlaps, but I'll distinguish them as I talk about them.

Lenny (00:35:11):
Cool.

Heidi Helfand (00:35:12):
So one by one, someone joins your company or they leave your company. So the tip with one by one is when someone joins, help them feel a sense of belonging, and you can do that through not having their first day be them sitting over there alone. You could have someone have a first pair. There's a chapter in my book about onboarding. This is in the space of onboarding. Also with one by one, when people join, you also need to pay attention to the people who are already there and it's good for them to know when someone is joining the company; that it shouldn't be a surprise. So visualizing the hiring and the opportunities is something that I think is a really good idea. It could be challenging for someone if somebody joins and they become their manager, but what if that person wanted to be the manager and then they brought in someone from the outside to become the manager?

(00:36:08):
So you need to pay attention to the new hires that are joining, help them feel a sense of belonging, get them to talk about themselves, which is said to increase their sense of connection and retention. There's some research in the book The Culture Code by Daniel Coyle, which talks about that. But then it's also important to coach the people through change that are already at the company, especially if they weren't involved in the particular decision, bringing on this new leader that comes in and brings in all their people. So you got to pay attention to different people.

(00:36:45):
Grow and split is a natural thing that happens when you're like startup scale up and growing bigger and bigger. The first team probably grows bigger and then splits into two or three. So when the team gets bigger, facilitation and communication tends to break down. So some signals that teams might bring up when they feel like a change might be helpful is the meetings are taking longer. You're in that case where it's harder to make decisions. It was easier when there were like five of us, but now they're 13. The work becomes divergent. They're working on this one thing, they're working on something else. No one's paying attention in the standup so much anymore because this work has diverged. And those are a few of the signals. And then someone typically brings it up. If you normalize the idea that it's okay for teams to have input into their future structures, maybe they'll bring it up and decide that, "Hey, it might be better if we split."

(00:37:52):
Sometimes splitting though can create dependencies that weren't there when you were together as one team. So you inherit other problems or you might inherit challenges like, all right, the team decides it's far effective if they split into two or three, but we just have one product manager, we just have one designer. We just have one person who helps us anticipate quality challenges. So it's a lot of problem trading when you do a lot of this stuff. Like anything, you have a challenge, how might we solve it? Well, there's option A, option B and option C. So that's grow and split and it's very common I think when your company is growing and changing, kind of like that.

(00:38:37):
Merging is the opposite of grow and split. Two or more teams combine together. Or at a higher level, a company acquires another company and then there's a merging that happens. So merging I think is related to when companies downsize or shrink, things consolidate, come together, or again, when at the company level companies combine, one acquires another, gets acquired. How that goes down varies, but there's this concept called panarchy that I write about in my book that a lot of these changes is changes at the individual level, the team level, the team of teams level, department level, the company level. So yeah, merging. So there's a business decision that the companies merge together and then changes might ensue.

(00:39:28):
So maybe the company wants to get ahead on building and having another vertical in their SaaS company. We acquired a company at AppFolio to bring us faster into workflow software for law firms. So we acquired a company based in San Diego, and that got us a couple of years ahead. I remember one of the leaders saying that. So again, we weren't involved... I wasn't involved in this decision as an IC at the time. So it could be a business decision for merging at that level. It could be that people leave, there are departures and teams and responsibilities consolidate together. That's merging. So it could be that kind of shrinking that we're seeing. It could be that the company is having one leader instead of three and there's a consolidation and the teams kind of merge together. So it's the opposite of grow and split.

(00:40:23):
One activity I do like to do with teams that merge is called story of our team. That's in chapter 13 of the second edition. So with story of our team, each team makes a timeline of... They stand in order of when they joined their team and they make a timeline with milestones of when they joined their team, when people left, and significant events and things they created that they're excited about and that they're proud of. And that they branch together with their newly merged team, and then it's good to get a shared sense of history. So you have these teams or companies that come together, they make shared timelines, they share their milestones and things that they built that they're proud of. They tell each other about it and then they have a sense of like, "Wow, we didn't know that. Oh, I didn't know that you had built a system like that. We did too." Or, "We've never built anything like that. That is so cool. What did you learn from that?" We get to learn about each other and then we're together. We're like, "All right, we're this merged entity now. What's next?" Looking out to the future so we have the same shared vision. So I love doing that. There's different tactics you can do before, during, and after each of these patterns. Yeah, that's merging.

(00:41:46):
Isolation we talked about before. Put the team up to the side, give them process freedom, have them report up to a decision maker, tell the other teams not to bother them. Let them work at the cadence that they want to work at. That makes it easier. If you are doing a short-term thing, you got to work it out with the larger entity so you don't create something in isolation that other people have to maintain. There's ways that this can be messed up.

(00:42:15):
And then switching. Switching pattern is really tied to learning and development and fulfillment. It could be that you want to work with other people. Like forming, storming, norming, performing, Tuckman's model, he forgot the phase called stagnating. Sometimes it feels like we're in a team for too long. We're tired of working with these people. We want a little variety. We want to work with that person over there. Or maybe we want to work on a new system. We don't have the opportunity to do that in our current team, but what if we could work on that system over there with those people? It could totally refresh us. It could be like having a new job within our same company. It could extend the lifespan of the amazing employee in your company. So switching is tied to that kind of fulfillment, which is one of the reasons why I made it separate from one by one and tied that to the company.

(00:43:11):
The other thing with switching is that you could create safety nets in your company through switching. I just wrote a newsletter post about this yesterday because maybe we're going to have some more changes this year. Maybe companies are going to be hiring less. I don't like the thought of companies downsizing or having layoffs or anything like that, but I think to myself, well, have multiple owners of a system. So not only one person is that tower of knowledge that owns that one system. There's some stories in my book where I interviewed Richard Sheridan, who is the chief storyteller and co-founder of a wonderful company called Menlo Innovations in Ann Arbor, Michigan. They built their company Menlo to have people work in pairs. Not just the software engineers; team members work in pairs and they switch pairs at a regular cadence. And you know that when you're joining the company because you're involved in some kind of pairing. So there's parity from when you're interviewing to when you're at the company.

(00:44:14):
But switching also helps build that knowledge redundancy in your company. A little more about tolerance. So if someone leaves, they don't leave with all the information in their head. We had that. At that first startup Expertcity, we had some single owners of systems and when they left, it just becomes a challenge and a setback. And at AppFolio we shared a founder between the first startup and the second startup. Many of their early engineers from that first startup went to the second startup.

(00:44:50):
I was 10th at AppFolio. I was 15th at Expertcity. So we wanted to work together. So it was that global idea of switching one by one or similar. But anyway, at the second startup we had the chance to do things differently. So we had pairing and switching pairs and test-driven development. We had help to do that, but this kind of redundancy built safety into our systems, especially when AppFolio is processing a lot of rent payments. There's a lot of money. There's ACH going through. Those are critical systems and it's very important that things are safe and secure. You don't want to haphazardly switch people around. You can screw this up, again, that balconies and basements concept. You don't want somebody over here, they will switch every two weeks and have no say in their team. There's ways to screw all of this up, but there's other ways to do it well.

(00:45:48):
I remember when we were at our first team at AppFolio and we did a grow and split. It grew and it split into two or three teams. I remember there was a loss for some of the engineers who wanted to pair program with some of the other engineers, and they started a regular rotation themselves from one team to the next, and that brought fulfillment. It brought joy. I mean they would see each other in the workspace every day, but they wanted to work together. It brought them learning joy and fulfillment, and I love that. For those who are like keep the team stable and the same forever, I'm like, "Well, what about that?" It brings me satisfaction and joy when I see my colleagues. It's like autonomy, mastery, purpose, like Dan Pink's book Drive, when people are really given some agency and the opportunity to work a little bit differently than maybe that traditional boxed version you might see on my bookshelf. You can really create not only products that people love, but companies that people love and want to be at.

Lenny (00:47:03):
All these stories of team changes and reorg, it made me think about a quote that one of my managers always used to say about reorging and changing teams is that there's no perfect org structure. There's only the best idea you have at the time for what the org could be. And then there's the issues with that org that you identify as you're putting in place and then set up processes and systems around to try to catch that dependencies, as you said, or overlap of ownership. Is there anything along those lines that comes up of just things you found of just like, there's never going to be the perfect way to do it. This is just our best idea at the time and here's how we deal with the downsides of this approach?

Heidi Helfand (00:47:41):
Yeah, I think there's a lot of wisdom to what your manager said and your colleague there because yeah, I mean as time goes on, conditions change. We evolve and change. We're subject to different influences. COVID happens. We weren't dealing with that 10 years ago. We grow and adapt and morph. We try to get together and make the best decisions that we can when we're faced with challenges, and a lot of it is problem trading. We have this challenge today. We decide, oh, there's a few ways we could handle this. Pros and cons of each solution. It's like the Toyota Kata, like grasp the current condition. You'll experience you have challenges. What's the next evolution or the next target condition? How might you get there? And then you're there and you're like, okay, grasp the current target condition. What's it like? What are you experiencing? Oh, we might try this. We're always transforming from the current state to the future state.

(00:48:54):
So to that, I would ask people, well, how do you want that to be? And how do you want to show up and be as a leader? You want to just be like, "All right, I've got to get this done. The reorg is done by an email and we're just sending it out, or this small team change. And here it is; it's done. Goodbye." Or is it a little bit where you get people's input? And that in itself, you got to weigh what you're dealing with, again. But I like to think about that. What kind of leader do you want to be? Leaders need patience. It's hard to be a leader. It's challenging, but what kind of an environment or vibe do you want to cultivate in your teams and what do you want the people to be like?

(00:49:42):
I have a degree in teaching English and applied linguistics, and I remember studying Paulo Freire and other educational problem-posing methods of education. We have these teams that solve these complex problems and challenges and build these really cool things for customers. Let's involve them in some of the org decisions that are going to be part of their daily life. Really, you like that idea. Again, it's not perfect. You can't involve people on everything, especially if they're wide-scale changes that you just can't.

Lenny (00:50:19):
Along these lines of doing things badly sometimes, you have this whole section on anti-patterns of reteaming. I think there's about five of them. I don't know if you have these all top of mind, but if you do, I'd love to hear some anti-patterns.

Heidi Helfand (00:50:34):
Yeah. Well, one of them is people always think that reteaming is, you have a pool of people and you're assigning them to a bunch of different projects like, "Okay, you'll work 10% on this one, 5% on this one, 20% on this one. We are going to allocate the resources from our component-based teams into these different projects." We did that in Waterfall like many years ago, but that doesn't really work. A lot of the times the percentages don't add up. It's very hard for people to multitask and be involved in multiple efforts at once. It's hard for the brain with all the context switching that needs to happen in that case. So I call that the percentage anti-pattern.

(00:51:15):
There's also, I probably wrote about it like, poof, they're gone or suddenly they're here. Reteaming or having people suddenly show up and you weren't expecting them or suddenly they're gone and there's no communication around it whatsoever, that's another anti-pattern.

Lenny (00:51:32):
One of the ones I love is this idea of spreading high performers. This idea of we're going to spread the high performers across other teams.

Heidi Helfand (00:51:38):
That's an AppFolio story. Jon Walker was telling me back in the day that... I mean, he did this experiment. He had this thought that many of... There's one team that was like, I guess they were delivering at this cadence that they loved and they were building this stuff and there's this energy and you can almost feel it. Like let's just spread the people from that team across the other ones and then we'll have that. And it didn't work. He didn't have that. It didn't happen. And that was a visceral learning for him that it doesn't essentially work. And people are like, what does it take to be a high performing team? What does it take to have that magical team experience where there's that chemistry and the people are together? And there's stories in the book. Damon Valenzona was telling me one about how it's like's a band and we're with off each other. We're creating this music together. So John felt like he essentially destroyed that when he split up that team. So that's the story that inspired that anti-pattern.

Lenny (00:52:49):
The reason people are worried about reteams and reorgs is this... A lot of times it's exact reason that you just shared, which is our team is amazing. I don't want it to change. I don't want to split. I don't want to add anyone. I don't want to remove anyone. I guess is there anything else along those lines to help people feel better about, no, this is actually going to be okay and/or it's inevitable. It's not going to last.

Heidi Helfand (00:53:13):
I think sometimes you have that awesome team situation. It's an enjoyable experience. People are learning. You're looking forward to it every day. You're delivering the stuff that people love. You're telling people what's going on. You have that matched expectation where people aren't breathing down your neck because it's late or something. Sometimes you want to keep that team together. You don't want to destroy that dynamic. But the thing is, maybe that's a small startup that grows and you need to grow because you have a bigger vision and it needs to be more than these 10 people. And so there is sometimes this feeling of loss, like, "This is our company. This is my experience at this company of 10 people, but suddenly we're 20 people. It doesn't feel the same like it did anymore and it feels different."

(00:54:05):
And people, they always ask the question, "How do we maintain our culture? It feels different than it was before." The thing is, it is different, and our companies go through stages. The company of today is not the company it was a year ago. The people turn over and change, what we work on turns over and change. The whole world and industry and global events change and put different pressures on us, and we got to live in this global context. So nothing lasts. Sometimes I have a picture of myself holding an ice cream cone that's melting. Not to be a total downer, but appreciate it when you're on a team and you love it and it's amazing because these are our lives and we have to have gratitude and appreciate what we have because naturally things evolve and change. It's just inevitable. So we appreciate what we have.

(00:55:07):
A lot of us can look back on our careers and remember those times when we were, in my case, skipping through the halls because I was so happy. And I was like I couldn't even tell you. Well, why was I skipping through the halls at that moment? What was it? Well, it was the people and the conditions and what we were doing and the time, the era almost because yeah, it does change.

(00:55:30):
There's a book by Ichak Adizes called Managing Corporate Lifecycles. It's one that many of us read for years at AppFolio, maybe the previous company as well. The Adizes Institute influenced some of our leaders and they influenced us with this. And it talks about the different stages of companies from birth. There's go-go stage, maturity, death of companies. These are like lifecycles. The company grows and changes and morphs and changes. The people in the teams do that as well. I have an ecocycle in my book where I talk about that kind of aging and changing. Then there's a disruption and you have a new beginning. We're part of these stories that are in progress. This is not an unchanging, unmoving entity that we work in. So just be kind to each other, enjoy your experiences and learn as much as you can.

Lenny (00:56:30):
It reminds me of advice Sheryl Sandberg shared when she came to the Airbnb offices. Someone asked her: "What advice do you have to deal with all this constant change?" Like the quote I shared at the top of the episode of every six months, there's a massive reorg. Our culture's changing. Teams keep changing. It's constant flux. What is your advice to deal with that? And her advice was: That is good. The fact that you're growing so fast and having to change is the best case scenario because the alternative is you are not growing and it's much harder and much more painful because the changes are much harder. People get let go. Your business may go away. So her advice is just, this is good. Change means things are... And growth leads to change, especially hypergrowth, and that you should appreciate this time versus be afraid of it and think that it's a negative.

Heidi Helfand (00:57:23):
And it seems like she had such a wide vantage point and could see the forest through the trees of the fact that, well, this company's doing well and this is why we're growing and changing. And I remember one of my leaders, CTO Jon Walker, AppFolio, he told me that once too. He was like... I'd be having a problem or something and I'd come to him and he'd always say to me, "It's always great to be at a successful company, Heidi." And it's like, well, yeah, sometimes you don't think about the finances when you're in your day to day and you have a problem with another person or they come to you and they have a problem with this other person. But in the grand scheme of it, how is the company doing? It's really a critical vantage point that we need to remind ourselves of. But yeah, I wouldn't say all change is always good. Your mileage may vary there, but the general idea that the company is doing well, you're growing and changing, you're trying to make things happen, I think is definitely the space I'd rather be in than the opposite.

Lenny (00:58:31):
And I think it's especially true for people that haven't worked at a company that didn't work out where they think this sucks when really this is pretty good compared to all the things that could be happening.

Heidi Helfand (00:58:42):
Yeah, yeah, definitely. So we coach and help each other as we go along.

Lenny (00:58:48):
Final question before we get to a very exciting lightning round. Used to work with John Cutler, who was a previous guest on this podcast, and he had a question that he wanted me to ask you. He said that, "Heidi is one of the best listeners I've ever worked with." And so the question is, what's your secret to being a good listener?

Heidi Helfand (00:59:07):
Well, listening is a muscle to build and to always work on. You got to put your attention out. Focus on the other person. Sometimes if I'm looking down, maybe I reconnect and look at them. You got to read body language and other things. I'm trained as a co-active coach, which involves different levels of listening. So you have level one, which is internal listening. Like if you and I are talking, but I'm thinking about what am I going to have for lunch? I'm in level one. I've got to redirect it out to you and focus on you. So when I focus on you is I'm in level two listening. I'm putting my attention out and I'm really anchoring towards you. It's a coaching skill.

(00:59:47):
And then level three is global listening, environmental listening. If a marching band suddenly walked behind you, I'm going to point that out because it's in my field. I'm not going to ignore that. I'm going to bring that up. So we pay attention to the vibe and the feel in the room and where we're at. But then also if you're talking about something and suddenly you go like this or you have this kind of sudden pain in your neck when you're talking about this one thing, I might notice that you're doing this and touching your neck because that's information. That's a kind of listening, and so I might ask you about that. Or if the face turns red or you look down or away, it's another kind of listening. So Co-Active Training Institute, coactive.com is my co-active coaching training, so I learned it from them, Henry Kimsey-House and-

Lenny (01:00:48):
Wow, that is an awesome answer. There's a lot of depth there. So coactive.com, I'm going to check that out. So you actually got trained in this skill. Okay, that's great. That'll make people feel better. They're like, okay, amazing. I'm going to check this out. I'm going to try to be a better listener through the rest of this podcast episode from these tips.

Heidi Helfand (01:01:08):
I will say that sometimes I'm not a good listener though.

Lenny (01:01:13):
Yeah, so it goes. Heidi, is there anything else you wanted to touch on or share before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Heidi Helfand (01:01:22):
I don't think so. I really appreciate your questions and talking with you.

Lenny (01:01:28):
Well, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Heidi Helfand (01:01:33):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:01:34):
All right. First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Heidi Helfand (01:01:39):
Leading Intelligent Teams is one, Liberating Structures is another one, and of course, Transitions by William Bridges. I also like the Leader's Guide to Participatory Decision-Making.

Lenny (01:01:53):
Is there a favorite recent movie or TV show that you really enjoyed?

Heidi Helfand (01:01:57):
I did like The Bear, the cooking-related show, the restaurant-related show, and gets into the hospitality industry. I really like that. Movies, there isn't really one that stands out. I always look forward to being on an airplane to see what movies are playing, but no movie for you.

Lenny (01:02:21):
What is a favorite interview question that you like to ask people that you are interviewing?

Heidi Helfand (01:02:27):
I always like to ask people, "Well, why do you want to join our company? What is it about working with us that would be exciting for you? Why our company as opposed to another one?"

Lenny (01:02:39):
What do you look for in their answer that is a good sign?

Heidi Helfand (01:02:43):
They have some knowledge about what we do, what we build. Maybe they bring up that they've noticed something on one of the websites or a product launch that we just announced, just that maybe it's part of their story in their career. They're going in this direction, and they heard about us and they thought, "Wow, I would love to work on that."

Lenny (01:03:08):
Is there a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love?

Heidi Helfand (01:03:11):
I'm very into vintage clothing and specifically real wool cashmere, not synthetic blends. I also like vintage blazers. A lot of the times where I'm giving a talk, I'm wearing a vintage blazer. I really like the clothing and design, and I kind of really, really love unusual vintage pieces that I could find, but they do need to... A lot of the fast fashion that's out there today is a lot of these blends with these materials that you've never heard of, but there's something special about vintage cashmere, for example.

Lenny (01:03:56):
Do you have a source for some good stuff? Is it like eBay? Is it stores locally? Is there a site? Is there somewhere you're finding some good stuff?

Heidi Helfand (01:04:03):
I travel around the world and I give talks on reteaming. I do workshops. And usually I go to vintage and antique stores. I was just in Berlin. I was doing that. I was doing it in London. And yeah, I love thrifting, Salvation Army, Goodwill, any of these places that we have in many of the US cities, the Humana line of stores that I've been to in Europe and other places. I try to find the small, unusual antique places as well. My aunt's an antique dealer in Michigan, and she doesn't specialize in vintage clothing, but I just love that idea of discovering unique and unusual things that maybe they remind you of times in the past. Maybe you find that, "Oh my gosh, we had that mug back in the '80s or whatever, or in the '90s." Things can kind of remind people of other times. So I like that. I think there's information stored in unique items.

Lenny (01:05:12):
Beautiful. I bet Berlin has some really cool vintage stuff, really wacky stuff.

Heidi Helfand (01:05:16):
Yeah, there's a lot of really interesting places to explore, and I think it's just so much more interesting than some of the brand new kind of stuff.

Lenny (01:05:30):
Agreed. Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often find yourself coming back to or sharing with friends or family, either in work or in life?

Heidi Helfand (01:05:41):
I like asking people how can you be kind to yourself?

Lenny (01:05:47):
Say more.

Heidi Helfand (01:05:48):
I ask myself that too. I used to run a lot in Santa Barbara at Ellwood, which is a beautiful trail that you can go down to the ocean, you come back up. It's like More Mesa in Santa Barbara, and I would run and then I'd be like, "God, this is so hard." And then I would walk for a little while and I'd think to myself, "Well, how can I be kind to myself? I mean, what am I doing here? Does it have to be fast? No. I am here to decompress and enjoy, so how can I be kind to myself?" I think sometimes I get hard on myself or have very high expectations kind of achiever mentality, and I've learned through the years that it's okay to slow down. It's okay to not go, go, go the whole time. So I would ask other people that as well, especially if they're going through a challenge or burning midnight oil or whatever. It's like, "What about self-care? How can you be kind to yourself?"

Lenny (01:06:56):
Beautiful. Final question. I was scouring your LinkedIn and I saw a quote from the CTO of AppFolio in his endorsement of you. Said that you were the unofficial director of fun at AppFolio. Is there a story that comes to mind of something that you did at AppFolio that created a lot of joy and fun for the team?

Heidi Helfand (01:07:15):
We had these hack days, and I think they do that to this day. So twice a year we'd bring people together and we copied and learned from Atlassian. I remember we had calls with some coaches from Atlassian for how did they do their ShipIt Day, or they originally called it FedEx Day, changed it to ShipIt Day. We followed their model and we'd had this two o'clock on Thursday at two o'clock on Friday where we'd build whatever we wanted and we'd have a theme, and then we'd have goofy prizes at the end that were like traveling trophies. One of them was like a clickety-clack keyboard that we spray-painted gold by the railroad tracks, but people could work on anything. There were teams that formed... We did it with a self-selection marketplace. People formed their topics and teams, and one team hid geocaches throughout Santa Barbara. They're there to this day because we registered them with the Geocaching website. Another team built a vintage video game machine, and it was in the dev room. Another one they catapulted. They built this... Is it a trebuchet?

Lenny (01:07:16):
Yeah.

Heidi Helfand (01:08:27):
That catapult this fruit in the parking lot. I don't know how we got away with that, but we were in the early days. We did a lot of fun stuff like that, and you could work with different people, build these larger relationships, which later makes it easier for reteaming, because then later if you reteam, you're not strangers with people, so you want to cultivate the community. So we had this department of fun. We would plan the fun in a variety of other ways as well.

Lenny (01:08:56):
So fun. Heidi, you're awesome. I think we've helped a lot of people feel better about the endless change that they're probably going through right now. Two final questions. Where can folks find your book, find you online if they want to reach out, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Heidi Helfand (01:09:10):
You can go to heidihelfand.com or Google my name and I come up. Heidi@dynamicreteaming.com, heidi.helfand@gmail.com you can find me. I'm out there. And yeah, I love to work with companies and teams going through change, and I do that in a variety of ways. Teach workshops, do talks. So if any of this is interesting, reach out.

Lenny (01:09:33):
And then do you also consult and work with individual companies or not?

Heidi Helfand (01:09:37):
I do. Yeah. I do that now. I like to work on a retainer basis or I'll even join a team, so looking for the-

Lenny (01:09:37):
All right.

Heidi Helfand (01:09:45):
... next one.

Lenny (01:09:47):
Amazing. And we'll link to all this stuff in the show notes. Heidi, thank you again so much for being here.

Heidi Helfand (01:09:53):
Thanks so much, Lenny.

Lenny (01:09:54):
Bye everyone.

(01:09:57):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Jason Fried (00:00:00):
The reason I think it's great for entrepreneurs to start bootstrapping is because they just have more practice making money, and they get better, and better, and better at the fundamental skill you need to have ultimately to run a successful business, which is to make money. Hopefully, I don't come off as encouraging everyone to be like me. I'm not saying that at all. What I'm saying is, this is a way to be. It's an alternative to what you're often hearing in our industry, which is, "Go big or go home. Raise a bunch of money and get huge, and unicorn status," and the whole thing. That's a way. Just know though that basically almost nobody makes it that way. Really, almost nobody really makes it that way, and there's a lot more room to make it, and to build a successful business, if you throw out that outlier and look at all the other places you can land as a business.

Lenny (00:00:49):
Today, my guest is Jason Fried. Jason is the Co-Founder and CEO of 37signals, which makes Basecamp and HEY, and soon a few more products including a competitor to Slack. 37signals is a very different type of company. They have no investors, no board. They have no plans to go public. They never want to sell their business. They've made a profit for 24 years in a row. They have over 100,000 customers and make tens of millions of dollars in profit each year, which most VC-backed companies never make a dollar of. All of this profit filters down to the founders and employees because they have no investors. Most founders, by default, will go down the venture route raising money from VCs and Angels. For many types of companies, that is necessary. But it's also important to know that there is a different option available, and it can be much more fulfilling and fun, and even much more lucrative, by bootstrapping your idea.

(00:01:43):
In my conversation with Jason, we get into why constraints like small teams and less cash often lead to better outcomes. Why gut and instinct is underappreciated as a decision-making tool. Why planning long-term is often a mistake. Why work doesn't have to feel like war. Why we should focus on playing infinite games. When it makes sense to consider raising venture capital versus bootstrapping. How to actually bootstrap your startup, so much more. Jason is fascinating, and he's got a lot of wisdom to share. I'm excited to be able to bring you this conversation. With that, I bring you Jason Fried, after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:20):
This episode is brought to you by Coda. You've heard me talk about how Coda is the doc that brings it all together, and how can help your team run smoother and be more efficient. I know this firsthand because Coda does that for me. I use Coda every day to wrangle my newsletter content calendar, my interview notes for podcasts, and to coordinate my sponsors. More recently, I actually wrote a whole post on how Coda's product team operates. Within that post, they shared a dozen templates that they use internally to run their product team, including managing the roadmap, their OKR process, getting internal feedback. Essentially their whole product development process is done within Coda.

(00:02:58):
If your team's work is spread out across different documents and spreadsheets, and a stack of workflow tools, that's why you need Coda. Coda puts data in one centralized location, regardless of format, eliminating roadblocks that can slow your team down. Coda allows your team to operate on the same information and collaborate in one place. Take advantage of this special limited time offer just for startups. Sign up today at coda.io/lenny and get $1,000 startup credit on your first statement. That's C-O-D-A dot I-O slash Lenny, to sign up and get a startup credit of $1,000. Coda.io/Lenny.

(00:03:37):
This episode is brought to you by Sidebar. Are you looking to land your next big career move or start your own thing? One of the most effective ways to create a big leap in your career, and something that worked really well for me a few years ago, is to create a personal board of directors, a trusted peer group where you can discuss challenges you're having, get career advice, and just gut check how you're thinking about your work, your career, and your life. This has been a big trajectory changer for me, but it's hard to build this trusted group. With Sidebar, senior leaders are matched with highly vetted, private, supportive peer groups to lean on for unbiased opinions, diverse perspectives, and raw feedback.

(00:04:15):
Everyone has their own zone of genius, so together we're better prepared to navigate professional pitfalls, leading to more responsibility, faster promotions, and bigger impact. Guided by world-class programming and facilitation, Sidebar enables you to get focused, tactical feedback at every step of your journey. If you're a listener of this podcast, you're likely already driven and committed to growth. A Sidebar personal board of directors is the missing piece to catalyze that journey. Why spend a decade finding your people when you can meet them at Sidebar today? Jump the growing waitlist of thousands of leaders from top tech companies by visiting Sidebar.com/Lenny to learn more. That's Sidebar.com/ Lenny.

(00:04:59):
Jason, thank you so much for being here, and welcome to the podcast.

Jason Fried (00:05:03):
Thanks, Lenny. It's good to be here.

Lenny (00:05:04):
It's really good to have you on. I have this new segment on the podcast that I call Contrarian Corner, and I have this feeling like this entire episode is going to be Contrarian Corner. I'm excited to dig into all kinds of stuff. I have so many questions I want to ask you. I thought it'd be good to just start with giving people who aren't that familiar with your story and 37signals, a sense of just how successful the business has been. I think people don't quite get the business you've built, and the scale you've built. So whatever you can share in terms of customers, profits, anything you are comfortable sharing, I'd love to give people... Especially things that might surprise people, just a sense of like, "Wow, this business is not what I imagined."

Jason Fried (00:05:44):
We don't talk about things that don't really matter so much, like revenues don't really matter 'cause you can go broke generating a lot of money. But, we talk about profits. Historically, let's say over the past 10 years or so, we've been profitable every year for 24 years. But let's say over the last 10 years, we've been doing double-digit million dollar profits on an annual basis, which is really nice. We have about a 100,000 plus paying customers, so that's a rough number, and we've about currently 75 or so employees.

(00:06:12):
So, a relatively small business in terms of the number of people who work here, big customer base, big profits, and that's how we like to keep it, and that's something that we've always focused on, versus a lot of these other metrics that I hear a lot, and usually there's acronyms attached to them, and of don't even know what they are, and I don't really care about them so much. We just want to make more money than we spend, have good healthy margins which allow us to experiment, and play, and not be afraid to do things that may not work, and just enjoy ourselves. So that's what we've been doing for almost 25 years. Next year will be our 25th year in business.

Lenny (00:06:47):
Just following the same thread, the bet that companies are making, obviously going down the venture route, they're going to lose money for a long time so that they can make much, much more money in the future. So the idea there is, grow as fast as possible, as big as possible, and then we'll make money. You're a big advocate of not raising venture and bootstrapping. So what's your advice to founders for when raising money makes sense? I actually wrote this article, one's called, Your Startup Is Probably Not Venture-Scale, just trying to convince people, you may have a really good idea, but it doesn't mean it's a venture-scale business. I feel like we're aligned on this. What's your advice to founders there?

Jason Fried (00:07:25):
Obviously, if you're building cars, or you need a factory, or you're opening a restaurant and there's actual things you need to buy like ovens, and you need to hire people right off the bat, and you need to pay rent, you need capital. It could come from you. It could come from friends and family. It could come from an investor. It can come from a bank loan. There's lots of places to get it, but you'd need it. Software businesses though, and businesses like ours, we just make software, and a lot of people in our industry are like us in that respect. They need a couple laptops and a couple people, and it's pretty cheap. It's really pretty cheap to get going, and the margins are incredibly healthy in software, or they should be.

(00:08:06):
What's interesting is that Silicon Valley has found a way to make the most profitable style of business the least profitable. Software, there's no physical costs. The margin should be close to 80 or 90%. It turns out that they're barely even, most of them positive in the end, or they're just sliding by basically. I don't understand how that... Well, I do. They have too many people and they spend too much money on customer acquisition, and all that. But, it blows me away. Most businesses in the world would love to have Silicon Valley style economics, make something that doesn't cost much to make and then sell it for high prices.

(00:08:50):
But everyone, the corner store, the pizza shop, they wish they could do this, and they can't because they have physical products that they have to sell, and they have to buy goods, and they have to get raw materials and convert that into a pizza, and there's just costs involved with that. They can't sell it for too much because the other place down the street sells it for less. So again, I'm getting off track, but if you're going to start a business that really truly requires cash, typically capital expenditures, expensive things, hardware, whatever, of course you need that. But, I don't think you do otherwise.

(00:09:20):
I think it actually hurts you if you go out and think that you do, because there really is only one outcome for venture-backed companies, which is go huge. If you think about all of the space between a small business and a massive, huge unicorn-y business, there's so much room there that you could normally find your own way, and slide into a slot or a place that makes sense for you. But if you're venture-backed, you just don't even have the opportunity. You blow right past those, or they want you to blow right past those. If you don't, you wither on the vine and die essentially, and it's just too bad.

Lenny (00:09:58):
Coming back to something we touched on a bit, is this idea of smaller teams. You tweeted a similar stats, so I'm just going to read these numbers, in terms of your competitors. Asana has 1600 employees. ClickUp has a thousand employees. Slack has 2,500 employees. Smartsheet has 3000 employees. Monday has 1500 employees. You have, I think you said, 70 something employees?

Jason Fried (00:10:20):
Yep.

Lenny (00:10:22):
You have similar numbers of customers, about 100,000 to 150,000, and you make a lot of profit and they generally don't. How is this possible?

Jason Fried (00:10:31):
We run a very different kind of business. We are focused on efficiency, we're not focused on growth. They're focused on growth. So typically, when you have a lot of people, you think you can do more things at once, and you probably can. You do more things at once, and have different offerings to different people, and different tiers, and salespeople, and all the things that build up an organization. We don't have any salespeople. We don't have 15 different versions of Basecamp. We're not after enterprise, so we don't have the enormous support costs and enormous support infrastructure required to service customers like that, and customize this and customize that to keep a whale happy who's paying you $300,000 a year.

(00:11:13):
We don't have any of those things. We have one price, basically. Well, we have two prices on Basecamp, one price on HEY. Actually, two prices on HEY. Two, basically. But one code base, one product we offer everybody. Let's take Basecamp for example. Nobody can pay us more than 300 bucks. I don't care how big your company is, the most you can pay us is $299, you get unlimited users. What that allows us to do is to just build one product, do a really nice job, keep it tight, and simple, and clear, and not have the complexity that comes with trying to service and satisfy so many different kinds of companies at different price levels with different price points and different expectations. That's why these companies tend to get bigger and bigger and bigger.

(00:11:58):
They also, frankly, build products just differently. We build products with two people at a time. So every feature we work on in Basecamp, or HEY, or whatever we're building is two people, one programmer, one designer, and they have a maximum of six weeks to deliver the feature that they're working on. Most of them are usually a couple of weeks, but they have a maximum of six weeks. So we don't get stuck in these big huge projects, with meetings with 18 people, and slow decision-making, and indecision, and complexity, and all the things that come with trying to do too many things for too many people. Now, all that said, we could still make the mistake of hiring hundreds of people because we could afford to do so. But to spend money because you have it on things you don't need is something that Silicon Valley's gotten quite good at, but we're quite bad at intentionally. I don't want to spend money on things we don't need.

(00:12:49):
So we think that constraints, simplicity, small teams actually are where it's at, and keep us honest, and allow us to do great work for our customer base that we know, small businesses, very tight companies like ours, and satisfy them versus trying to go after the big companies, and have to have salespeople, and have long sales cycles, and whatnot. Honestly, if you gave me 1,000 people, I wouldn't know what to do with them. We would fall apart. If you gave me 500 people, I wouldn't know what to do with them. We would fall apart. We would be a worse off company with 500 people. I'd be completely lost. So, that's the other thing. I don't even understand how they run, and the amount of layers they must need, and the amount of complexity organizationally that they must have to... The latticework they have to build up to support all that weight, is just remarkable and it's foreign to us.

Lenny (00:13:39):
Okay. I definitely want to talk about how you operate in your way of working, 'cause it's really interesting and there's a lot companies can take away. But, I want to follow on this thread of small teams. I have a few quotes that you've shared that I love.

Jason Fried (00:13:50):
Oh, no.

Lenny (00:13:50):
Oh, no.

Jason Fried (00:13:52):
No, good. No, it's good. Hey, if I said it, I said it. Let's go.

Lenny (00:13:55):
No, they're awesome. They're great. Around this idea of staying small, one is, "Small is not just a stepping stone, small is a great destination itself. Also, if you think you're too small to be effective, you've never been in bed with a mosquito."

Jason Fried (00:14:08):
Now that's not my quote. That's someone else's, to be clear.

Lenny (00:14:10):
Okay. Okay, you popularized it.

Jason Fried (00:14:11):
It's a great quote though.

Lenny (00:14:12):
Okay. Then there's one more. "You don't need to outdo the competition, it's expensive and defensive. Underdo your competition. We need more simplicity and clarity." I think a lot of these things point to, there's a few paths to success and goals for people. One is build a massively scaled, everyone's using a product like Figma and Notion, and build a venture scale, $100 billion company. Then there's this path which is, we're just going to make a bunch of profit we're going to make individually. We're going to take home a bunch of cash. We're not trying to have everyone in the world use it. I know your focus is, you call it, the Fortune 5 million versus the Fortune 500. So maybe just whatever you want to share about what success means to you, how you think about what success is for you, for the company your building.

Jason Fried (00:14:53):
For me, it's really about, would I want to do this again? If the answer is, "Yeah, that was enjoyable. I enjoyed that. That was worthwhile. I'm glad I did that. I'd like to do that again," then it was successful. Now you could carve out some extremes there. I'm sure someone who's addicted to drugs might go, "That felt great, I should do that again." So you got to be careful with that, in a sense. Obviously, I'm not talking about that. Addiction's a whole different story. But in general, with this stuff, "That was fun. Let's do that again. That worked. Let's do that again." Or, "That didn't work. I didn't like that. That was a pain in the ass. That was too complicated. That took too long. Let's not do that again." So it really is about, do you want to do that again? That's what success is to us at a root level.

(00:15:37):
Now, on the business side of things, we have to be profitable. That doesn't mean that everything we do needs to be profitable. I am not driven by data, or I don't have different P&Ls for each product in a way where we're looking at them very carefully. It's in total, collectively, are we making more money than we spend? That's the only thing we ultimately look at, whether or not this product is more profitable than that product, and this is behind that, it's all the things we do. It's all the things we do. I don't even think you can actually draw lines back to everything and go, "That was worth it. That wasn't worth it." What is the value of saying thank you to somebody? Would you want to A/B test that and, if it turned out that it was worse to say thank you to somebody, would you not do that? No, you would do it because it's still the right thing to do.

(00:16:28):
So a lot of our things are, what feels right? What seems like the decent thing to do? What things do we enjoy making? As long as we can, at the end of the year, look back and go, "Well, collectively, more worked then didn't work," then we're okay. That's how we look at it. We don't have financial goals. We don't have OKRs or KPIs. I don't have revenue targets. I don't have growth targets, in terms of the number of customers we need to pick up this year versus last year. I don't look at any of those things. It's just, at the end, "Did we make more than we spend? We did. Then the things we did this year were worth it." That's how it goes.

Lenny (00:17:08):
You also have no investors. You have no board. You have no plans to go public. You have no plans to sell the business.

Jason Fried (00:17:13):
Right.

Lenny (00:17:14):
There's this book, I don't know if you've read this book called, Finite and Infinite Games.

Jason Fried (00:17:18):
No, I've not.

Lenny (00:17:20):
Okay. I think you would love it. The whole premise of this book, it's like a terse, tricky, philosophical book, but it's very short. It espouses, you want to be playing infinite games to be happy in life, games that never end versus games like, I'm going to build a business and sell it. Or, I'm going to go public, that's my goal. Or, I want to achieve this promotion. You get most joy out of things that never end, like building great relationships, building a company you want to keep working at forever.

Jason Fried (00:17:45):
I like that. What's interesting is, I've always thought of my career this way. When I got my first job, I was 13. I worked in a grocery store for a bit, and then I worked in a shoe store. After that, maybe when I was 15, I got a resellers license, which was this thing... This is way back in the day. I think they still exists. A company called Ingram Micro D, which had this huge thick catalog of electronics equipment. If you had a resellers license, you could buy these things at wholesale prices, then I could sell them to my friends for retail, which is almost 2x wholesale. Even though I'm not selling electronics equipment today, I'm selling software instead, I feel like I have the exact same job as I did when I was 15, that this is a long continuum of finding stuff that I like.

(00:18:31):
In this case today, it's building things that I like, and selling them to like-minded people who also would find them useful or those things too. So whether or not it's software, or electronics, or stereo equipment, or whatever the heck it is, or music organizing databases, it's all the same to me, and I just want to keep doing it. This is my day job. The other thing that's interesting about entrepreneurship is, sometimes there's a sense of, you can get a job or you can be an entrepreneur. Well, an entrepreneur is a job. This is my job, so I want to create the company that I want to work at, and I want to keep doing this job for as long as I can. As long as I'm useful, I'm good at it, I enjoy it, I want to keep doing that.

(00:19:14):
So to get in bed with an investment that would say, "In five years you have to stop doing what you're doing, you're going to get a big paycheck maybe, but you got to stop doing what you're doing because we're going to sell this business, and you're going to have to go work for this other company for two years and do their thing. Then eventually, after that's over, you'll leave and you'll go start another thing," that just has no appeal to me at all. I'd rather just keep doing the thing that I'm enjoying doing, as long as I can continue to make it work.

(00:19:37):
What's cool about having a company like ours, which is an independent business, we don't have to ask anyone for permission. No one can tell us no. So we can turn this into anything we want. It's this vehicle, more so than it is a software business. It happens to be, of course, what it is, but it could be something else as well. There's no limits to what it could be, and that's a fun way to go through life too, in this all-terrain vehicle which can anywhere, on-road, off-road, whatever, and you can get anywhere you need to go. That's what's really quite fun about the kind of business we have.

Lenny (00:20:12):
You have this term you hold, instead of a startup it's a stay up.

Jason Fried (00:20:15):
Yes. I'm so sick of the startups. It's cool to start a business, obviously, but I'm sick of that term dominating. Because, frankly, starting a business is actually way easier than staying in business. Now, none of it's easy, so I want to be supportive of people who are starting businesses. But they should know that that's actually not the hard part. Literally tomorrow, I can start a new business. You can come up with a name, and you can make a thing, and you can put in the app store, and you can sell it for two bucks, and you've got a business going. But, are you going to be there in two years? Are you going to be there in five years when competition rushes in? When you have employees, are you going to be there? Staying is harder than starting. So I'm here to celebrate stay ups. Plenty of other people are here to celebrate startups.

Lenny (00:21:01):
I feel the same way. I always say this about newsletters, and it's also true for podcasts. Easy to start a newsletter, hard to keep it going.

Jason Fried (00:21:07):
Totally. I've seen your newsletter fly. We have a newsletter and it's been pretty flat. I'm like, "How does he do it?" It's hard. It's really hard. It's hard to build a podcast audience. It's hard to build a newsletter audience. So yeah, starting something is really easy, but then most people end up in this plateau area, 'cause they get some initial growth, the word gets out, and they end up with 6,000 somethings, and then you're stuck there. Then it's like, "Well, do you want to keep doing this? Or, are you just high on the growth? Or, do you actually like the thing?"

(00:21:42):
If you want to do the thing for a long period of time, you've got to like the thing because you're going to have to endure these moments of plateaus, which is what staying up is all about. Sometimes those go down. We've had wavy years, always been profitable, but our profit's different every year. Sometimes it's more, and sometimes it's less. Sometimes our margin is more, sometimes it's less. If you compare yourself to the previous year, you can get demoralized to some degree. But I just, "What do we want to keep doing?," and then we're in it to stay in it.

Lenny (00:22:13):
Speaking of enduring, you've been at this for almost 25 years now, I believe?

Jason Fried (00:22:18):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:22:19):
Have there been periods where... I like that sigh that you just had there.

Jason Fried (00:22:24):
It's a long time.

Lenny (00:22:25):
So maybe along that path, one, is there a point at which maybe you started going off track and you realized, "This is not what I want to be doing. Why did I do this to myself?" Then two is just, what have you learned being at this for this long?

Jason Fried (00:22:36):
I would say, over the past few years, I've had more thoughts of, "How long should I do this for?" I go back and forth. I can tell you, what's interesting is, right now, I'm probably more excited than I've been in many years. But, a year ago I was not so excited. I think that after you've been doing this for a while, you do tend to just compare, what was it like in the early days? What's it like now? All the new things that are harder weren't harder before, and now they're hard today. Do I like doing this kind of hard work, or would I rather do...? You just amass this history, and so you tend to just call back to it, and look back to it. So you opine for the early days, or you reminisce, I should say.

(00:23:16):
"Yeah, it was so much easier when we were 20 people." "Yeah, but we weren't doing this, and times were different, and you can't go back anyway." But, it's interesting. Next year I'll be 50. We'll be doing this 25 years. I'll have been running this company for 25 years. Part of me thinks, "Is that enough? Maybe that's enough." But right now, I'm really excited about what we're doing. We're doing some really great product work, probably the best we've done in many, many years. Launching this new thing called ONCE, which hopefully we're going to build three or so products next year under that category. I would like to write another book. We finally have another idea for another book.

(00:23:53):
So there's just, right now, this outpouring of energy. I'm trying to be very conscious of my energy interest. Right now, I'm getting energy from the business. There are times in the past where the business sapped energy for me. If it SAPs too much, at some point, you start to think, "Is it worth it? Do I want to keep doing this?" Right now, I'm fueled again by it. But, I don't know what it'll be like in a year from now. I really don't know. I think I'm more conscious of that than I've ever been given how long I've been doing this.

(00:24:21):
Also, I always have this strange fantasy, I'm always curious, "What would someone else do with this place? What if someone else could just step in tomorrow? How would they run it? No one's ever had a chance to run it but me. What would they do differently?" I'd have to be completely detached from it to let them really run with it. But, what would they do? I always have this curious about that, I would say. Not curious enough to find out, but still curious. It's always in the back of my head.

Lenny (00:24:49):
What do you think they'd do?

Jason Fried (00:24:50):
I think they'd probably be focused on growth. I think there's opportunities that we miss all the time. I think that we are stuck in a certain... Stuck sounds like a negative term, but I don't mean it that way. But, we're stuck in a certain groove. We do things the way we do things. We change the way we do things here and there, but we're not really jumping into a new groove. I think someone would jump into a new groove and run the company differently, maybe make a lot more products than we're making today. Maybe resurrect a couple of things that we did in the past. Probably spend a lot on advertising, a lot of marketing, probably take our margin way down and try to focus on growth. What if we spent 70% of our margin on growth? What would that look like? I just feel like that's what most people would probably come in with a business like ours and do. They go, "Oh my god, there's so many missed opportunities here. Look at this, and look at this, and look at this. You've got this brand, and people know about you, and you've got 100,000 paying customers. Think about all the things you could do." I'm not really thinking about all the things we could do. I'm thinking about what we're doing. So I think someone else would come in and think about the things we could do.

(00:25:49):
I'm thinking about the things we are doing, with a little bit of a look ahead to things we could also do, but they're still pretty close to what we're doing today. So, that's what I think would happen. It'd be interesting. It'd be neat to live in a reality where there could be a second reality running right alongside you, truly. Not an A/B test, which is hard to do. You can't really A/B test an entire company. I'd seek to A/B test small things. But, it'd be cool if that was something that could happen. Maybe there's some simulation down the road.

Lenny (00:26:16):
I was just thinking-

Jason Fried (00:26:16):
It's a possibility.

Lenny (00:26:17):
Maybe we're in the simulation variant where you're still running it.

Jason Fried (00:26:20):
It could be.

Lenny (00:26:21):
And there's another... This a cool exercise, actually, just to think about it. If I were to bring in any leader, what would they do? Just as a thought exercise.

Jason Fried (00:26:28):
This is a weird way to think about it, but I almost would be embarrassed by what someone would come in and look at, and go, "Oh my God, you guys are missing so many opportunities here." I'd be like, "Yeah, I know. I know we are, but I'm totally fine with it." But, there'd be this moment of judgment and reckoning with, "Do you realize how much you're leaving on the table?" You could have five different pricing tiers, and make a lot more money, and you can maximize this and maximize that, and squeeze this and squeeze that, and address this market, and you could have special versions of Basecamp. Wow, churches are using Basecamp? We could do a special version for churches, and for synagogues, and religious institutions, or education or nonprofits. Think of all the slight different things you could do with these different..."

(00:27:06):
I'm certain that all those opportunities exist on the table. They don't interest me, personally, in terms of making multiple products. But I could see someone else going, "There's a huge opportunity here. We got to pursue this." I'd be really proud if someone did that, and made the business bigger and better. I could never have done that. I'm glad someone else did that. But right now, we're running it our way.

Lenny (00:27:29):
Coming back to this as a path people can take with their business versus a traditional venture scale business, this path is essentially build something, sell it, make money, live like a chill life. Not super stressed, growth-focused obsessed, need to build a billion-dollar company. Do you think this path is something everyone should do? Is it a specific type of personality, a specific type of product? Do you recommend people that sometimes do go this big shot venture scale route?

Jason Fried (00:27:59):
I'm glad there are some people who do that. I'm glad that there's some businesses that-

Jason Fried (00:28:00):
People who do that. I'm glad that there's some businesses that wouldn't have worked out had they not taken a bunch of funding and went big, clearly. And there's many impressive businesses that do that. But let's face it, those are extreme outliers. The majority of companies on this planet run like ours. They're bootstrapped, they don't have any money. No one's willing to give them a penny and they open up a shop somewhere, they do something, they put their shingle out and they launch a website or whatever and they try to make it work. So most people are doing it our way, even though in our industry it seems like we're the outliers, but we're not. We're actually incredibly boring and mainstream, really. If you were to pick any random business owner on the street, they'd run their business like us. I got to make more money than I spend otherwise I'm out. I don't have this big cushion of millions sitting in the bank that I can just spend on things.

(00:28:48):
So they're pretty, they keep an eye on costs. They think about this carefully. But yeah, I'm glad there's people who are going for the moonshot and doing it their way and doing it a different way. And the world moves forward sometimes because of those businesses and it's great. It's great and I admire them. It's just that it's not the path I would take and I think because that's not who I am, and I think this is the important point that I want to get across, is I'm not really, hopefully I don't come off as encouraging everyone to be like me. I'm not saying that at all. What I'm saying is this is a way to be. It's an alternative to what you're often hearing in our industry, which is like go big or go home, raise a bunch of money and get huge and unicorn status and the whole thing.

(00:29:29):
That's a way. Just know though that basically almost nobody makes it that way. Really, almost nobody really makes it that way. And there's a lot more room to make it and to build a successful business, if you throw out that outlier and look at all the other places you can land as a business. So my interest is optionality. If I could land in 135 different positions and have a sustainable business, that's great. Versus saying there's only one way I'm going to be successful or happy. Those odds aren't really in anyone's favor. Even though of course some people win the lottery. And I'm not saying it's luck. There is luck, a lot of luck, including we're lucky that we've made it. So there is a degree of that when I say lottery. But really the point is that there's only a few slots for a few companies like that at any one time. Meanwhile, there are hundreds or thousands of slots for other kinds of companies to make it if they don't go for the moon.

Lenny (00:30:31):
Just to close this thought around whether, if you have an idea going the venture route makes sense. What do venture scale companies need to achieve? What investors look for that to even work out? To your point, it almost never works out. What is it you have to do for it to feel like, okay, this is a venture scale idea versus this is an awesome idea. We could just make money every year, every month from it and not raise money and life will be great.

Jason Fried (00:30:54):
I'm probably the wrong person to ask, but I would say there are versions of our... Let's just take Monday for example. Basecamp and Monday are quite a bit different, but they live in the same world. We could have flipped, someone could have had the Monday approach and sold Basecamp that way, and Basecamp could have gone big in that way and Monday could have stayed small in our way. Again, I'd rather be my business than their business. I would not trade Basecamp for Monday's business any day of the week because I love what we're doing. We're profitable, we're happy. We don't have to deal with the things they have to deal with. So I wouldn't trade businesses or places with anybody. But you could imagine it could have been swapped. So it's not that Basecamp couldn't be this big venture scale, whatever you want to call it, although look, hey, we have the same number of customers roughly than they do.

(00:31:46):
Are we? I guess we are venture scale in that respect. But again, point is is that depending on how you approach it, you can take anything in any different direction. So it's more of a mindset, what are you after? We're not after that and they are. So that's what they do. And we do it a different way. So I don't necessarily think... There's things like Airbnb is a great example that that has to have a certain degree of scale to really be something that no matter where you go in the world, you're like, I can get an Airbnb there. And that's probably going to take money to get there. Same thing with Uber. Uber's another example, and these are easy to pick, but they're great examples really. When Uber was getting started and they had to proliferate all over the country to begin with and all over the world.

(00:32:33):
So it was this reliable thing you could think of just you would think of a cab. If I went to New York or Chicago, I knew there'd be a cab. Was there going to be an Uber? I don't know. Well, you have to know that there's going to be one to begin to trust us. So in order to do that, you have to expand rapidly. So there's that kid of, those kind of businesses exist and those are great examples of venture-backed companies that kind of need that massive initial push to be available in all the different places because they're actual physical products. Airbnb's a physical product, Uber's a physical product, Basecamp, Monday, Asana, they're available everywhere instantly anyway. I don't know what you need the money for other than marketing. And it's interesting because marketing's losing them a lot of money. So it's an interesting thing. But anyway, you can talk to them about that.

Lenny (00:33:20):
I want to start chatting about your ways of working, how you operate at 37signals. There's a lot of really unique approaches. One is you mentioned that every project is, I didn't know this. It's two people, a designer and engineer, and then two to six weeks of work. Can you just expand on how you actually do that, how broad development works there?

Jason Fried (00:33:36):
Yeah, so we have framework development framework we invented called Shape Up, and if you go to basecamp.com/shapeup, you can read the book, it's free. You can also get a print version if you want. Shape Up is our methodology for actually building products. And part of this is this idea at the root of it is this idea of the six-week cycle. That whatever we choose to do can take no longer than six weeks. So this is not an estimate of time, it's an appetite, which is a radically different approach. It doesn't sound like that much of a different word, but it really is. An estimate is like how long do we think it's going to take? And however long it takes is however long it takes. And most human beings are terrible estimators. We all are pretty much terrible estimators. So that's why things keep going and going and going and going.

(00:34:21):
We instead have appetites. And our appetite for any individual feature is no more than six weeks. Essentially that's our budget we're willing to spend. I'm only willing to spend six weeks in any feature. So we have to figure out the simplest, most effective version of that to get that done within six weeks and get it done by two people. Now, not everything gets the full six weeks. Some things were like, we have a one week appetite for this. This is not that big of a deal. If we have it, great. If we don't have it, that's fine. We're willing to spend a week on it. Not that it could take a week, because it could also take 12 weeks if we give it 12 and it could take 24, if we give it 24. Work expands to fill the time available. So for us it's about appetite.

(00:35:00):
So the idea of appetites, maxing things out at six weeks, two people max, and then there's a lot of other details, and I could go on for an hour about Shape Up, people can read about it. But it's those fundamental principles, appetites, six week max, small teams and this idea of shaping the work ahead of time, then giving the team a lot of latitude to figure out how to get that thing done. We don't have a spec, we don't create to-dos or tasks or tickets for people. They create the work that needs to get done to fulfill the idea that we've written up and designed essentially, and they figure out how to do it. Then we trade. So they might get into something that we've said, we have about six weeks. Well, we're only give it six weeks and two weeks in they go, we actually stumbled into something we didn't realize.

(00:35:50):
This is probably not going to be able to be done the way we thought. So can we do it this way? And then we have a discussion and there's a conversation. There's a lot of molding and changing that happens along that period of time. We call it trading concessions. There's all the trade-offs we're always thinking about. So all these things that come to bear. And then people often ask, well, what if you don't get it done in the six weeks you gave it? Well, so it depends. So in most cases it should die, meaning it just doesn't happen. Because if we say we're going to give it six weeks and we give it seven or eight or nine or 10, then we're not really giving it six weeks, we're giving it 10, then we don't really have a system.

(00:36:27):
There are times though, when there's a couple days left when we're on what we're calling the downslope. So we have these things in Basecamp called hill charts. And things that are on, that's actually work... A project's more like a hill. It's not like a linear line. If you're on the left side of the hill, it means you're still pushing this thing up the hill. You're still trying to figure out how to do this. But once work gets to the top, it's downhill from there. It's just pure execution and we know how to nail it. So if we're almost at the bottom of the hill on something and it needs two more days, fine. If there's any work that's left over that's still on the left side of the hill, meaning we're still pushing it up, we don't know how we're going to do it and we're at our time limit, it almost certainly dies. So there are some contextual decisions to make at that point, but fundamentally that's how we approach work. And this prevents long running projects that never end, which by the way are the most demoralizing kinds of projects.

(00:37:17):
Things that you're stuck on that you don't want to do that never end, sucks. And if people get stuck on a couple of those, they want to leave their job. So the implications here are significant. And so we want to keep people out of that zone of like, I hate this work and it goes on forever. Because sometimes you're going to hate the work. Not all projects are that exciting. Sometimes it's maintenance stuff, sometimes it's updating an internal billing system that's boring and no customers are going to see but needs to be done. But you'll know that, hey, at maximum we've got four weeks on this. I can already see the end from the beginning, no big deal. But if it's like this is going to take nine months and you're on week four and you're like, I hate this, bad. So we want to stay away from that sort of thing.

Lenny (00:38:00):
You have these quotes along these lines about planning, long-term business planning is a fantasy. I don't plan long-term because I want to do what I think, not what I thought.

Jason Fried (00:38:09):
Yes.

Lenny (00:38:09):
I love these. This whole idea of appetites, it's very appealing. It makes so much sense. It's like the ultimate impact to effort calculation. The effort we'll put into this is fixed and we'll not go beyond this because the impact we expect from this is pretty clear. And if the effort goes up and up and up, well why did we even do this? But obviously the downside is you can't promise things really to sales marketing, which I think makes sense in your type of business. Do you see this work in businesses that aren't your business this approach?

Jason Fried (00:38:43):
Well, let me talk about promises for a second. Promises are the downfall of every business. Every time we've made a promise to get something out in a certain period of time and we kind of inevitably seem to miss it, it's funny how it's almost like it would've been out in time, but the fact that we'd promised it made it not deliver in time. There's some strange thing that happens when you promise things. So we've learned to not promise anything. We can share what we're working on if we want to. We can tell people we're doing something. And by the way, the worst promise, and by the way, we've made a couple of these recently, we always regret them. It's like by the end of the year. That's the one promise you got to be very careful of, because it's so easy to make. There's nothing easier than promising work later.

(00:39:29):
And the further away it is, the easier it is to promise. And so this whole, by the end of the year, oh, red flag. Just remind yourself whenever you say that to yourself, go, oh, wait a second. Wait, wait, what am I doing right now? Because you're probably setting yourself up for disappointment. So as far as other companies running this way, there are a number of other companies that are running this way and more and more are adopting Shape Up all the time. But it's a struggle. It's hard. It's hard to change the way you work. I think companies form roots and roots go in the ground and once your root structure is formed, the plant that grows from that is the plant that grows from that, basically. You kind of have to uproot. And this is not really a totally clear metaphor because that plant is that plant, but you almost have to plant a new seed somewhere else, let's just say, and then grow something new because it's very hard to change in flight and change what you have and change what you're used to.

(00:40:24):
So what we often encourage people to do is keep working the way you're working, but some future project, some low criticality project, try this new method on that. So if it doesn't work, because it's probably not going to work very well the first time, just like if I gave you a guitar and you never played before, it'd be unreasonable for me to expect you to play well. You're going to suck for a while. So go pick some things that don't matter if you suck at them for a while and try this method over there and go, oh, you know what? I'm actually getting quite good. Now let's try to bring this into some more critical stuff. I think that's the important way to approach these sorts of projects, which is to take the criticality out. Because what ends up happening is that when people try to try something new on something really critical and it doesn't work, they'll never try it again.

(00:41:08):
They've destroyed all future opportunities to try this again, because everyone knows how bad it went last time on something that really mattered. And they would've gone, we could have done it our old way. Our old way worked. It kind of sucked, but it worked. And so now you're comparing two things that aren't really comparable, but you're always going to go with the momentum that you had versus the new thing. And so you got to be careful with that. So I know I'm rambling a bit on it, but that's my general sense and feel on how to adopt a different way of working.

Lenny (00:41:36):
There's also this cool down period after one of these, what do you call these? A sprint or what's the term for it?

Jason Fried (00:41:42):
No, I hate that term. I don't like the word sprint because how do you feel after a sprint? Exhausted.

Lenny (00:41:48):
But also pretty good.

Jason Fried (00:41:50):
You can. Yeah, yeah. It's funny because I was a sprinter in high school, so I love sprinting. But if you go all out, you might feel high for a minute, but you can't go all out again. You've got to really catch your breath and you certainly like to sprint. I remember my track coach actually ran in college for a year until I realized that I wasn't good enough. But he made us run 20 200s in a row with just two minutes break in between, and the 200 is an incredibly hard race. You're all out for 200 meters or yards. And after the fifth one I just threw up. I just threw up. It's like that's kind of what work is for a lot of people. It's like 20 200s, they have these sprints and they never seem to end. And there's one sprint after the other, after the other, after the other, after the other.

(00:42:36):
And that's why I don't like the word because you can't layer that back to back to back to back. You cannot sprint back to back, to back, to back in life. And you can't do it at work. People do it at work, but I don't think it actually works. So what we do is after our six week cycles, we typically take what we call a two-week cool down. So we call these cycles, not sprints. A two-week cool down, and we call them cycles because cycles happen again and again and again. Sprints start and end. Cycles happen. There's cycles in life and seasons, and I like that idea that you're prepared for this thing to happen again.

(00:43:12):
Take two weeks, cool down. That's when people can sort of internally freelance. They're still working, but they're kind of tightening up a couple of things. Maybe we just shipped or working on a couple extra days on something that didn't ship that's going to ship in two days, or kind of fixing some bugs and messing around with some stuff that they wanted to get to, but no one ever had time to and was never scheduled. So that's kind a good time to do that. In the meantime, a few of us are shaping up the next cycles projects and finalizing that and writing the pitches up for that. So that's what those cycles are for. It's not that you're stopping work, it's that you're doing other kinds of work. And that I think is replenishing and refreshing, and I think that's the important part versus back to back to back sprints of the same kind of work all the time.

Lenny (00:43:54):
You mentioned also that you have no growth goals, that you make decisions a lot on instinct and gut and opinion, which sounds amazing, it's great if you could pull it off. Feels also very hard to operationalize and maybe make the best decisions in times. Can you just talk about how you actually operationalize that and what you find happens when you approach things that way?

Jason Fried (00:44:15):
I'll just admit that that's the only way I've ever known how to work. I don't know how to make decisions by numbers or I don't find any joy in it, frankly. I've always been intuition driven and gut driven. And frankly, to be honest, I think everyone actually is. And this is part of the thing I want to write up. I've been thinking about writing about this. I think everything's a judgment call. And so yeah, data can play a part. All sorts of things can play a part, but unless you're letting a machine make the decision, that's purely rational. If you're asking a human to make it's a judgment call. They're bringing to bear thousands of things they know and don't know about that influence them about this particular decision. And it's why when companies hire executives, what are they looking for in executive? They typically go judgment and experience.

(00:45:06):
They're not like they can read an Excel spreadsheet. That's not the thing that matters. Anyone can read that or anyone can read a chart or you can learn to do that. They're looking for judgment and experience, which is a very amorphous thing. It's like, what is it really? Well, they've been around, they've seen a lot of things, they've absorbed a lot of experiences and they're going to bring those undescribable things to bear to make decisions for the business. So out of all the things, data might be one thing, but there's thousands of things that go into a decision that many of which you don't even know. And I just feel like I'm comfortable admitting that that I don't really know why I'm making these calls, but I'm making these calls regardless. And I'm not looking at a number and going, if this is fifty-one percent versus forty-nine, I'm going this way for sure.

(00:46:01):
That could be an input perhaps, but it's not the only input. And I think people should recognize that even if you're a data-driven person, there's so much more at play here. So I just feel like just being honest about that and that's sort of how I've always looked at it. And I also will admit, as I just mentioned, I don't know the things that go into my decision-making process, but I'm absolutely fascinated by decision-making. I think it's one of the most interesting human endeavors. And I would just say that give your intuition credit. Give your gut credit. It's absorbed everything. And plus the things that you don't know it absorbed that are valuable.

Lenny (00:46:42):
It's easier to do that if you're the founder running the company, obviously. Is there something you find that you can do to help your teammates approach things that way too? Do you just trust their instincts also in a similar way?

Jason Fried (00:46:54):
Yeah, you're right by the way, it is easy for me to sit up here and say this, I own the place. No one can fire me. I get it, right. I can be wrong all the time, go, my gut just told me to do this. And I understand, I do. I'm self-aware enough to understand that. But I think that by demonstrating that's how we make decisions, it creates space for other people to make decisions that way. And when we have conversations, I'm talking with my team about something, I'll often go, I don't really know. It feels like this. It feels this way. And they'll say, I feel this way. And I'll ask them, how do you feel? How do you feel? What we ask people in general is we say, what do you think? We don't say, what do you know? We often say, what do you think? We might say, what do you know?

(00:47:43):
But we also say, what do you think more time. And what does that mean? What do you think is, I don't know where these thoughts come from and I don't know what forms them. So I think it's interesting to look at the things we say and go, we actually do want people to think. And so I'll often say, what do you think or what do you feel or how does this feel? Is something we talk more about at work than pretty much anything else, which is like, how does this screen feel? How does this flow feel? How does this feature feel? How does this word feel? How does this sentence feel? How does this paragraph feel? How does this website feel? How does these colors feel? Because human beings feel.

(00:48:20):
And while we have a logical side to us and a rational side to us, we're primarily feeling creatures. Even if we don't admit it, we are. And so I'm always curious about that. So I bring that up a lot and I ask other people how they feel, and I think hopefully that encourages people to share that side of their opinion. And we almost never, sometimes we look at numbers to sort of be an input, but it's never prove that. I'll never say justify that. That's just not terminology or lingo that we ever bring up. It's not a way.

(00:49:05):
It's, how do you feel? It's not like, how certain are you? I try to tend to shy away from anything that's about certainty. We're not after certainty. I want to know how you think it feels. So anyway, I'm rambling again, but this is, I'm rambling because this is actually how things go. When we talk, there is a lot of this, it's not precise in a sense. It eventually becomes precise when it's out in the world, but the thought process is very rambling and very amorphous, and you kind of find your way as you go. And eventually go yeah, yeah, that's it. That's it. That feels right.

Lenny (00:49:45):
This kind of advice comes up a lot actually on this podcast, especially for product managers, that there's a lot of power in just trusting your instincts and not just being this kind of unbiased participant in a product team, having actual, here's what I think works from your own experience using the product from your own life experience. But this came up with Brian [inaudible 00:50:05] episode. He's running the company, he's telling everyone basically, here's what we're building. A lot of people said, okay, that'd be great if our CEO is also a designer, very product-minded person. Many people aren't that, many people don't have actual enough experience to have built amazing instincts. So, do you solve that by just hiring people that have a lot of experience? Is it like a hiring thing? Is it trust people that have a lot more experience more because not everyone's going to have the right instinct?

Jason Fried (00:50:34):
It's true. Look, Brian's probably one of the greatest CEOs around today, but I like small businesses. So he knows how to run a bigger organization. I wouldn't. So I can't really step into that answer from that perspective. One of the reasons we stay small, I think, is so we can all rub off on each other. And when we hire, we can be very, very selective because we only hire a few people a year. And so I only hire designers and product people, David hires programmers, and different people in the company hire different people. But when I hire designers, I'm curious about their tastes. I'm curious about what they like. I'm curious about what other products they think are good. I'm curious about what they've seen that they admire or who they... I'm always asking about that because that helps me get a sense of who they are and what lens they see the world through and what kind of influences they're going to bring to bear. So that's the kind of stuff I'm looking for.

(00:51:34):
And one of the things that we do during the interview process for designers specifically and product people, which is the same thing in my mind, is they do a project for us at the end. So the last five finalists will do a project for us. We'll pay them to do the project, they'll have a week to do it, they'll do it, and then I'll critique it with them. Even if I love it, I will push back in certain areas. And one of the things I'll often ask is, if you had another couple days, what would you do with this? And I want to see where people go with that. To me, that is where you can see they don't have any time to think. So where does their gut go? What are their instincts? Where do they arrive after having to riff on the spot with something?

(00:52:18):
So what's behind what they built? Because what they built should just be some of what they had in mind. It shouldn't be everything. Now they're exhausted of every future idea. And I've seen some people who we thought were really good, and in that moment, they don't know where to go with it. Now, that's not to say some people don't need time to think and think it through, but I'm still looking for people who just, their gut is filled with ideas. And so it doesn't always translate but that's how I try to suss out whether or not someone has a good gut instinct on where to go. And it almost doesn't necessarily even matter where they go with it because this is raw, just raw gut. But I want to see that they have one and they're willing to lean into it and not be afraid of saying things that may not make any sense.

(00:53:08):
But yeah, I've got some other ideas and we could try this, and we try this, and I kind of play with this idea. And I don't know. Actually, now that I'm thinking about it, maybe we try, what if we did that? What about this? And then I would say something and we'd riff and we start riffing. And when we start riffing, there's a synchronicity that I'm looking for. And when I feel that synchronicity and that resonance, the two wavelengths are just perfectly vibrating together, then I know we have something. So that's the kind of stuff I'm looking for when I hire people. And I do think that that translates to people with a better gut feel than someone who's more of a, let's call it an academic product person, which can be very fine at other places, but it wouldn't really work here.

Lenny (00:53:46):
That's really great advice for someone looking for someone that has a good instinct and gut. And I think it's interesting because that's often the opposite, what you described is what many people don't want. Someone with just a ton of ideas. Because a lot of companies, a lot of leaders are like, we got plenty of ideas. We just need you to help us ship stuff.

Jason Fried (00:54:02):
I don't want that either. So I don't want just ideas. So they have to make something that's clear. First of all, it has to be good and clear. And then they also have to be able to riff on the spot and think about how else they could take this. We've had some people who were just so scatterbrained and they've got a million ideas, but when we asked them to execute something for this project, it was a total mess. You could see their time management skills were off and they focused on the wrong things. That is not a go for me, that's a no go.

(00:54:31):
What's a go is that's a clever design, well executed, thoughtful, clear, and here's where they could take it from here on out if they had a few more days, or even if we had 15 minutes, what would you do you do with that? So that's the kind of stuff that I think ultimately is the meat of it. And so I always think of it in terms of play. This is play. I want to play with this product. I want to play with this design. I want to play with this idea. It's play and play is a thing. It's a very clear thing versus a rigid, boring approach to product development, which again, can be successful, but it wouldn't work at our company.

Lenny (00:55:12):
Great clarification. I completely agree.

(00:55:16):
This episode is brought to you by Wix Studio. Your agency is just landed a dream client, and you already have big ideas for the website, but do you have the tools to bring your ambitious vision to life? Let me tell you about Wix Studio, the new platform that lets agencies deliver exceptional client sites with maximum efficiency. How? First, let's talk about advanced design capabilities. With Wix Studio, you can build unique layouts with a revolutionary grid experience and watch as elements scale proportionally by default. No-code animations at sparks of delight while adding custom CSS gives total design control. Bring ambitious client projects to life with any industry, with a fully integrated suite of business solutions, from e-commerce to events, bookings and more, and extend the capabilities even further with hundreds of APIs and integrations. You know what else? The workflows just make...

Lenny (00:56:00):
... APIs and integrations. You know what else? The workflows just make sense. There's the built-in AI tools, the on-canvas collaborating, a centralized workspace, the reuse of assets across sites, the seamless client handover. And that's not all. Find out more at wix.com/studio.

(00:56:18):
Okay. We had some questions come in from the audience when we were preparing for this. We both tweeted to see what people wanted to ask. I have two that I picked out. One is from Matt Mullenweg. How cool is that?

Jason Fried (00:56:29):
Oh my God.

Lenny (00:56:31):
I think you may have seen this question, but the question is, what is a spectacular failure of someone trying to follow your advice and failing when it doesn't stick? What is the reason?

Jason Fried (00:56:41):
People trying to make a rapid, fundamentally, 180 degree changes quickly is a great way to fall flat on your face, basically. I have seen people who try to adopt, let's say, Shape Up, and they come back six weeks later and they're like, "This sucks. This doesn't work." I'm like, "I'm not surprised to hear that. Tell me how you did it." And then, they explain like, "Oh, the next project we did, we did this." I'm like, "Yeah, I'm really not surprised to hear that now." Because you can't really do that. You can't turn on a dime. There's this thing called momentum. I always try to think of things in terms of the physical world. The more massive an object, the more energy it takes to change its direction. This is why big companies move slowly.

(00:57:26):
This is also why momentum, which is the way you've been working for four years, is going to power you forward in a certain way. It's very hard to turn the corner immediately or turn around. You just cannot do it physically. If you can't do it physically, you can't do it this way. I think that's what I've seen, is these rapid like, "All right, starting tomorrow, we're starting Shape Up." It's like, well, no, it's not going to work. Unless you say we're going to do it on this other thing that doesn't matter so much. That's one thing I would say.

(00:57:52):
The other thing is that pretty much every business is a spectacular failure. It just is. It's like, business is really hard and the ones that make it are all outliers. This is why most businesses fail. There's a million reasons why, and it's always hard to pin it down. And we can all look back. By the way, I don't like to look back on things. I'm not much of a fan of looking back on failures and trying to figure out what went wrong so we don't do it again, because I don't think we know what went wrong. I think we can spend a long time trying to analyze it and we're going to find something that we can agree on, and it tends to be what you can agree on so you can move on. But that doesn't mean that's what it was.

(00:58:37):
Just like we don't really know why you make decisions, you don't really know why things didn't work. Sometimes there are some examples, and I think it's true if you're talking about a mechanistic system. You're stamping metal and it's supposed to have perfect circles and it's an oval. You can go back to that machine and see how the thing worked, and the line. You can adjust that and fix that. A lot of work though is not that way, especially software work, where there's a million different inputs and a million different people. It's not simple stamping machines. It's a different thing. I don't know, but I do think that trying to make big changes too quickly is a primary reason.

Lenny (00:59:13):
You've seen this approach work at traditional companies, I imagine? It's not just companies that work in your way where there's no investors, they're not obsessed with growth? You've seen Shape Up implemented at traditional public type companies?

Jason Fried (00:59:27):
Yeah, it's usually smaller teams. It's not like Airbnb, Brian's not going to go, "Okay, tomorrow, we're following this thing that these guys over 37signals came up with." But it's typically small teams inside larger companies that experiment with this. Sometimes it spreads and sometimes it doesn't, and it doesn't always need to. It could be this one division, this one group that works a different way.

(00:59:45):
Also, it doesn't have to be fully Shape Up. It could be 30% of it. Maybe it's just simply the six-week cycle thing is the thing and the rest of it doesn't matter so much. Or it could be this idea of appetites versus estimates, and they can work that into the way they work. Take whatever works. You don't have to go wholesale on any of these things.

Lenny (01:00:07):
Awesome. A second question comes from Leo Polovets, one of my favorite VCs. He works at Susa Ventures. He asked the question a lot of people actually asked. It's just, what does he think he got right and where has he changed his mind, if anywhere? You share a lot of strong opinions, very contrarian opinions. So, maybe just mostly on that second part is what I'm most curious about. What have you changed your mind about?

Jason Fried (01:00:29):
A few years, well, a handful of years ago, we used to make multiple products, and we went to just doing Basecamp. I thought I would be personally satisfied for the rest of my career, working on one thing and just making that thing the best it could possibly be. Essentially, working on one sculpture, and constantly tweaking it and chiseling it and just polishing it, and just making it better and better, and better, and better, and better. I still thoroughly enjoy working on Basecamp. But a few years ago, we built this new thing called HEY, HEY.com email service, because we just felt like we had to make more things again.

(01:01:04):
This idea that I thought, that we could be happy as a company just doing one thing really well, which was a major shift. We had multiple products. We basically wound those down. We didn't ever close them down. People can still use them, who were using them before, we just stopped selling them. We even changed the name of the business from 37signals to Basecamp. We're saying, we're signaling all through. We're doing one thing that's just this thing called Basecamp. It's a huge, massive decision to make, and so we were all in on it. And then, a few years ago, we go, "You know what? We're makers. Let's be honest about ourselves."

(01:01:39):
I'm talking about me, and I was talking about David. But we were just like, "We want to make more things again. We have some more ideas. Why are we suppressing ourselves? Let's not do that." We made HEY and now we're doing ONCE, and we're going to make more products and more products and more products. We're going to probably do another book, as I mentioned earlier. It was that. I think that's the biggest major fundamental 180 degree change that I've changed my mind on, but I changed my mind all the time.

(01:02:08):
I disagree with myself constantly on small things. Product design decisions or the naming of something, or how we roll something out, or how I'm going to write something or present something or say something. There's probably an answer, I'm sure there's an answer in this podcast that if I listen back, I'd go, "I would probably answered it differently," or, "I don't even agree with the way I answered that." There's a million things like that happening all the time. But in terms of big things, I think that's the best example I can come up with.

Lenny (01:02:33):
It's clear that you've designed your life and designed your business in this very intentional way. Because the default path, and I'll reference this back to this other podcast episode, the default path is, build a company, raise a bunch of money, build massive business, generate a lot of revenue, exit, try something else. And you've done something very different. You've built a company-

Jason Fried (01:02:53):
Can I speak up to that, though?

Lenny (01:02:53):
Please.

Jason Fried (01:02:56):
Because this is the pathless path stuff?

Lenny (01:02:57):
Yeah.

Jason Fried (01:02:57):
Is this what that was? Yeah. I'm moderately familiar with that idea. I didn't listen to that podcast, but I saw some clips. I find it interesting because you've designed your life intentionally. It's funny because there are some principles I hold, perhaps, or some direction I'm headed, but I don't think about any of this ahead of time, including the company. We don't have a multi-year plan. I don't even have a one-year plan. I don't even have a six-month plan or a quarter. We think about everything we're going to do every six weeks. Every six weeks, we rethink what we're going to do next.

(01:03:33):
We're very much an in-the-now company, making it up as we go. And this is true for me, personally, my career, the whole thing. I didn't have any of this planned out. I didn't decide I wanted to be like this or like that. I just figure out what works and keep doing that until it doesn't. And then, maybe we do something else. But it's very much, I'm not on a path. I can't see the path. I'm on a path. We're going somewhere. I don't want to stand still. But I don't know where I'm going, and I'm perfectly comfortable with that.

(01:04:05):
For me, it is really much about making it up as you go, based on, again, being in touch with how things feel to you, what your intuition is, what your gut tells you, what makes you happy. What do you want to do? What can you do? Sometimes, it's things that make you happy and you can't do, just because life is what it is. So, understanding that and figuring out what the trade-offs are. But really, it's figuring out as we go, and I think, frankly, it's the best way to run a business. I think it's the healthiest, most honest way to run a business, which is, to figure it out as you go.

(01:04:37):
I think the further out you plan, the less you know about the decisions you're making. And by the time you get there, you're probably going to be wrong, or you're going to want to do something else. And then, if you're like, "Don't do those things," then what's the point of planning? People end up doing things they don't want to do because they said they were going to do them. Obligations in the future, I think, are quite dangerous, and I think they send people down a path of unhappiness, actually. I think just staying closer to now is probably the best way to do that.

Lenny (01:05:04):
A lot of this trickles down from the biggest decision you made, which is, don't raise money, keep control of this business. You're the boss. There's no boss above you.

Jason Fried (01:05:13):
Yeah, the independence. If you go to 37signals.com, there's 37 ideas. And the first one, there's a 00, which is start here, which is like a read me. But 01 is independence. Independence is the root of all the things we're able to do, and we did make that intentional decision. We didn't know all the tentacles that come up from that and what it's going to impact and touch, but we knew principally, we want to be able to do what we want to do.

(01:05:40):
We want to be entrepreneurs and to me, that means working for yourself. The moment you go out and take money or have these big obligations, you end up working for someone else. I do understand why some companies do it, but I don't understand why a lot of people do it, who probably shouldn't do it. I think staying independent is a wonderfully fulfilling experience, and it's very hard to do when you're beholden to someone else's timeframe and expectations.

(01:06:12):
Another thing we rarely have here are expectations. This is the point. We launch a new product, I don't know what's going to happen. We launched Basecamp, I didn't know what was going to happen. We launched HEY, I didn't know what was going to happen. We're going to launch some new stuff soon, I don't know what's going to happen. We don't say, "If this gets 20,000 users, then it's a success." I don't know. We don't care. It doesn't even matter.

(01:06:33):
We're making it anyway, and we're going to see what's going to happen. The market will tell us what happens. I'll just wait to find out. There's no sense in spending the time thinking about what could be.

Lenny (01:06:43):
Just to push back, I imagine there are expectations of like, "I hope this works out. I hope people adopt it. I hope it becomes the best email client in town." There's a sense of like, "We want this to succeed"?

Jason Fried (01:06:53):
That's pride, though. That's a matter of like, we want to be proud of the work that we did. We really hope people like it, and we want to keep doing it. To me, that's a sense of caring about the work itself. It's not so much about the outcome, which you don't control as much as you might think. Clearly, we want people to accept the work that we do and we want to find enough people who like it to make it sustainable, but I don't have them in mind. This is going to sound selfish, but I have me in mind first. Because if I'm not for me first, it's hard to be for someone else.

(01:07:29):
I'm for us. We want to make things that we're proud of, that we think are really good, that are unique, that brings something new to the world that doesn't exist, otherwise there's no point in doing it. That bring a different perspective that only we can provide because everyone has their own. We want to make sure ours is very visible in the products that we make, which is why we approach things very differently than most, and our products are very different than most. That's why they should be there. We should provide alternatives.

(01:07:56):
As I said earlier, I don't like the word competition, because it almost sounds like you could be making the same thing. I want to provide an alternative, which is a different approach, a different way forward. It could be in pricing. It could be in the way something works. It could be in the flows in the thing. It could be the entire conception of the thing, but it should be an alternative. If it's not an alternative, it doesn't need to exist. Anyway, that's how I think about it.

(01:08:24):
But yeah, there are expectations. Or I should say, maybe it's more like there are desires and hopes of acceptance to some degree, because it needs to. Otherwise, we can't stay in business. But really, it's like, are we proud of it first? We're wrapping up the HEY calendar right now, which is the calendar we're building for our HEY email service. I'm really proud of it. I have no idea what's going to happen. It's very unusual. But I'm really proud of the work that we did, and that's enough for me.

(01:08:47):
I think it's going to do well. I don't know, though, and it doesn't really make any sense to wonder if it will or not. It just, it will or it won't. All I can do is, be proud of the work that we're doing and be proud of the people who are doing it, and feel like we're putting something out in the world that we think should be here. Whether or not people agree is up to them.

Lenny (01:09:05):
You mentioned the principles of the company and I was going to touch on one of these actually. What's the URL to check these out? By the way, we'll link to it in the show notes.

Jason Fried (01:09:11):
Yeah. 37signals.com.

Lenny (01:09:12):
Okay. Right, just the homepage?

Jason Fried (01:09:15):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:09:16):
Okay. Amazing.

Jason Fried (01:09:16):
Yeah. Yeah. The homepage, yeah.

Lenny (01:09:16):
Okay. One of them is, work isn't war. You wrote a book about this roughly, about Work Doesn't Have to Suck, but I guess, can you just talk about why war work feels like war, and then what maybe people could do to make it feel less like war?

Jason Fried (01:09:29):
This is about words in a lot of ways. I'm not looking at the page right now. I could pull it up and read it, but essentially, a lot of work uses war metaphors. You're targeting customers. You are conquering a market. Gosh, now I really want to make sure I get all these right. Hang on, I'm just going to look this up. Because these things are how people talk about work. It says, "They conquer the market. They capture mindshare. They target customers. They employ a sales force. They hire head hunters. They destroy the competition. They pick battles and they make a killing."

(01:10:10):
That's how people talk about business. I find that to be depressing. It just feels depressing to me. We use words to establish a perspective in a way of thinking about the world. And if those are the words that are in your head, then you feel like it's this war. This is the other thing. People are always like, "What do the Navy SEALs do?" And they're like, "Heck, yeah." That's the Navy SEALs, man. It's not your software business. Why are we always looking to Navy SEALs to tell us how to run our business? "The military, they've got a group of eight and they do these."

(01:10:42):
It's like, "Yeah, okay, that's that context." Can we not look at that for a second about ... That's amazing. What they do is amazing, obviously, but what you're doing is you're making B2B accounting software. Let's just chill for a second here, okay? I like to think of words that are more additive and alternative. " We can exist. Let's exist. Let's make something great." Not, "Let's beat them, let's conquer them, let's make a killing." Let's just make something great. I think that matters, and it changes the way you think about the work that you do.

(01:11:16):
It's more about pride and excitement and a spirit of creation than it is destruction. I think if you go into it with destruction in mind, you're going to end up in a pretty dark place. That's our point of view.

Lenny (01:11:31):
Awesome, I love that. Coming back to this bootstrap path, there's a lot to love about it. Independence, with that trickles down all these things that you're able to do with your company that other companies aren't able to.

(01:11:43):
For someone that's thinking about going down this path and wants to bootstrap their company, that doesn't have a lot of money because it takes cash to start a business, do you have any advice for just how to get started down this path?

Jason Fried (01:11:53):
Yeah. First of all, it's hard. This is hard. When you have nothing, especially, it depends where you are in your life, too. You may have a couple of kids and you don't have a lot of time, and you got to pay mortgage. It's tough, so this is hard, but it's the reality for almost every business in the world that starts. The best advice I could give you is, and this sounds so trite, but really it's true, is, stay as small as you can for as long as you can. The only thing you can really control are your costs. You can't control the alternatives in the market. The competition, you can't control them. You can't determine the market itself. You can't control the economy. You can't control how much advertising costs, but you control your own costs.

(01:12:39):
The other thing I would encourage people to do is, figure out how to do as much as they can on their own before they bring on a second person. Really work and struggle through something on your own. The moment you bring on someone else, you've got another mouth to feed. It becomes expensive. You got another personality to deal with the more you rely on them. And if they turn out to be the wrong person, you have to lose them. You don't have anyone to do the work that now you have them doing, and now you've got to do it. You're not going to be any good at it. You got to start as small as you possibly can and do as much of the work yourself as you possibly can.

(01:13:11):
Keep your costs in check. Don't spend any money on branding. Don't go get an office. Don't spend anything on anything, basically, except the tool you use. Let's say, it's your laptop or whatever you're going to use. Get a good one. They don't cost much anymore. 1,500 bucks or something like that, you can get a really nice MacBook Air or whatever. You need an internet connection and maybe you need a host somewhere or whatever, but use Squarespace to set up your site for 15 bucks a month or whatever. Don't go hire a web designer. Find all the efficiencies and keep your costs incredibly low, and don't make things hard on yourself.

(01:13:47):
This is the other thing that all businesses at every stage need to keep in mind. While it's hard, things are relatively simple until you make them complicated. Simple can also be hard, but complicated is a lot harder. I think Brian Chesky had a really good bit on this, I think, on your podcast about how companies get complicated. And I loved that. When I was hearing it, I kept hearing this unfolding, this complex shape that you almost can't fold back. It's so complicated now that you don't even see where it came from. Now, it is what it is and you can't put it back in the bottle. It's just a mess, right? This happens really quickly and it can happen at a small scale, too. These are a bunch of things, and none of this is to say it's going to work. You could follow all those things and it could just completely fall apart. And it probably will. It's just the reality. I think something we use at 37signals, David taught me this, it's really a stoic thing, which is just the idea of negative visualization. What's the worst that can happen? You got to be at peace with the worst that can happen. Just role-play that and go, "What's the worst?" For example, we're doing these new ONCE products. What's the worst that can happen? Well, the ONCE model is totally different. It's not SaaS. It's you pay once, you download the software. You install on your own server.

(01:15:09):
We're putting a lot of effort into this. This could be the wrong time to do it. It could be a total flop. This could not find any traction on the market. What's the worst that can happen? Well, we spent six months exploring something and having a really good time doing it. Our margins are there, so we can do it. I wouldn't suggest someone does this if they can't afford to do it. But we know this might not work, and we're already at peace with the fact that this might not work. That's, I think, how you ultimately are able to move forward, is to be at peace with knowing what's going to happen if it doesn't work out.

Lenny (01:15:42):
I want to touch on Linear. One, it's interesting that you guys have a lot of similar philosophies. What is it about project management, task management software that creates this sort of approach to business? That's maybe one question, if there's something there.

(01:15:59):
And then, the other is, it feels like they have a lot of similar philosophies. Growth isn't a focus. It's gut and instinct. They have paid work trials. They're profitable. They don't spend a lot of time around VC money.

(01:16:11):
Do you have a feeling like this approach could work in the venture route? And do you see them as maybe an example of like, "Hey, maybe we could adopt a lot of these things and also raise money?" Maybe there's another direction here?

Jason Fried (01:16:22):
Yeah. I can tell you I don't know enough about them to comment on their ... I've heard some about them and it sounds like they have some similar points of view. Where those came from, I don't know. Maybe they materialized out of nowhere. Maybe they picked them up from someone else. Maybe they came up with them themselves. Lots of different ways to work. It's nice to hear that other people are trying some of these things and it's working for them, so that's great.

(01:16:45):
The thing with the VC route, so the idea of having too much money, it doesn't mean you can't work efficiently and thoughtfully. But it does create a degree of sloppiness, because you don't have to. When you don't have to, and when I'm saying have to, you could say have to what? Have to do a whole bunch of things. When you don't have to, we don't have to make money, when you don't have to be efficient, when you don't have to be profitable, you just get sloppy.

(01:17:15):
"Let's hire some more people. Whatever, we can afford to. In fact, they need us to spend the money, by the way. They didn't give us the money to save it and earn 6% interest." Which would be great now. Three years ago, 0% interest. "They didn't give us the money to sit in the bank. They gave us the money to spend the money." What are you going to spend it on? Two things, people and marketing. Basically, that's what you spend it on.

(01:17:36):
We can buy more ads. We can do more of this. We're going to do that. We can hire some more people, build up more teams, do more things simultaneously. There's a certain sloppiness in that. I think it just becomes harder when the environment encourages slop, which is why I think the value in bootstrapping is that it teaches entrepreneurs, it not even teaches, it forces them to have to figure out how to make money. The more time under the curve they have making money and practicing making money, the better at it they're going to get.

(01:18:07):
I used the guitar metaphor a bit earlier, I'll use it again. If you're playing guitar, if I give you a guitar and ask you to go up on stage and play guitar, you're going to suck. It's going to be horribly embarrassing and you're going to be terrible at it. You might be terrible at it a month later, but you'll be slightly better at it. You do it for six months or a year, you're going to be better and better. And then, five years and you're really getting good. Why do we think that a business that is sloppy, that doesn't have to make their own money, that is just getting pumped full of money by somebody else, can all of a sudden turn on the profit spigot and all of a sudden be profitable?

(01:18:36):
What you see is that they oftentimes cannot because they're just not set up to be that way. They've never played guitar before, and now they're being asked to play guitar. The reason I think it's great for entrepreneurs to start bootstrapping is because they just have more practice making money. They get better and better and better at the fundamental skill you need to have ultimately to run a successful business, which is to make money. If you don't have to do that from the start, you're just not practicing that. You're practicing spending money.

(01:19:02):
Getting good at spending money is not a valuable skill as getting good at making money. That's why I think it's just harder. But, of course, it's possible. It's just harder.

Lenny (01:19:10):
What I'm hearing is, essentially, to do this well. You need discipline. Understand, here's the incentives they're driving me to; spend more money, grow faster, and being really good at not ... And then, also, it sounds like you just need investors that are on board with ... "We understand. We're not going to focus on growth obsession. We're not going to focus on getting new teams. We're going to give you space to build it the way you want."

Jason Fried (01:19:33):
That exists. It's just also an outlier in that industry. I think what you need are constraints, is what I'm actually trying to get at. You need constraints. When you have just loads of money, you basically have very few constraints. That's what tends to lead to slop. Versus like, "Hey, if we don't figure this out, we can't make payroll next week or next month." You just start to figure things out. One of the best stories I heard about this was Peter Rahal, who started RXBAR. Are you familiar with RXBAR?

Lenny (01:20:00):
Mm-hmm.

Jason Fried (01:20:01):
Yeah, little protein bars or whatever. There's a great article about this years ago, where he was talking to his dad about, I think, raising money or something. His dad's like, "Hey, go sell 1,000 fucking bars and come back and talk to me." He's like, "Just sell some fucking bar. Get out on the street and sell some bars, man. You've got products? Sell products. Go, sell." Versus all the things you could possibly do. "Go sell some bars." It's just such great advice and it just cuts through all the crap. I like that scrappiness, and you don't get scrappiness from having large S. You just don't. It's just too easy not to have to do anything.

(01:20:46):
Not to say that VC companies aren't doing things. They're doing a lot of things, obviously, but are they honing the scrappy skills? Are they learning how to make money and have margin and be profitable? If they don't have to, they probably are not. I think at some point, and we're starting to see this now, this is not like an I-told-you-so thing, this is just, this is what happens. This is not me. This is just economic cycles. Money's harder to find, it's harder to get. Even companies who've raised money, investors are not necessarily putting in additional rounds. There's deep cuts happening, layoffs, pain and suffering.

(01:21:23):
It's hard to switch from having a lot to not having enough, and then having to work as if you know what to do. I think there's a lot of confusion in the market now, at companies now, I should say, because they don't know what to do. They haven't had to do it before. I feel for them in a sense because, how could they be expected to know what to do? Just frankly, as I said earlier, if someone dropped 10 million bucks on me and 1,000 people, I would have no idea what to do with that. Truly, I would not. I would waste it is what I would do. If you don't have the experience, how are you going to know?

Lenny (01:22:00):
I'm the same way with the newsletter and the podcast. There's no way I can grow this thing with money, really. I've tried a bunch of little experiments and nothing really does anything. It actually comes back to, let me find this quote that you have of just your business strategy in a nutshell. "Just keep making great shit. Keep your cost in check. Charge appropriate prices for your work. Share as much as you can and let the chips fall where they may."

Jason Fried (01:22:22):
That's basically it. One of the things I don't think I said in there was, enjoy it. Have fun. Enjoy the ride. Love who you're working with and create a great environment to do great work, and so other people can do great work and thrive as well. That's all baked into that. It's not like, set targets. It's not, try to be a billion-dollar business. It's not, aim for an exit. It's not, be on the cover of whatever. It's not many of those things.

(01:22:52):
Maybe it's the Midwesterness in me, growing up in Chicago. I don't know. It's just that. The best business advice I ever got, I got from my dad. It's just a simple line. It's like, "No one ever went broke making a profit." And maybe that's just my guiding light, ultimately. It's like, because you can go broke generating a lot of revenue. A lot of companies do. But you can't go broke generating a profit, and I think it's just really tight.

Lenny (01:23:18):
What a great quote. Final question before we get to our very exciting lightning round. Let's talk about ONCE. This is a new product/umbrella of products you're developing. Can you just talk about the thinking here? And then, I think you guys are announcing the actual first product within this umbrella?

Jason Fried (01:23:32):
Yeah. The idea behind ONCE is, David and I feel like, we're probably a bit early here, but we feel like there's going to be a bit of a turn back towards the way things were. Pendulums always swing. And for the last decade or so, SaaS has been pretty much the only way to run business software. Basically, you rent it. There's really not a lot of alternatives. You rent software. We think that there's subscription fatigue and also some benefits to that, for sure, but there's also a lot of downsides just to ...

Jason Fried (01:24:00):
... that, for sure, but there's also a lot of downsides to subscription software. You keep paying the same amount every month for the thing that you had last month. It's not like a magazine where every month you get literally a new issue. So that's new. I'm paying for new weekly or monthly, okay, that makes sense. I mean, I know there's new stuff that comes out in software products but let's face it, the core of the thing that you're using, 90% of the time is the thing you've been paying for four years now, every month. It just seems like, nah. So we are going to launch this thing called Once, which is essentially a brand and umbrella, a line, a product line of non-SaaS products, of products, not services, things people will download, software business offer products, people will download, pay for once and then install on their own server or a shared server or in the cloud, their own cloud or whatever.

(01:24:53):
But they'll run it, they'll manage it, they'll pay for it once and there's no subscription fees, no recurring fees. They get updates, they get support and some of that stuff, but that's it. And so we're going to launch the first one shortly here and then we plan on doing, hopefully, maybe three more next year. And the beauty of these things is that what we're basically doing is we're going out in the market and looking at it, although we already know it because we've been in this world. But we're saying, what are the commodities out there? There are a lot of commodities in business software and there's like 50 alternatives and they're kind of all sort of the same yet they're all still charging luxury prices. In my opinion, if you're paying tens or hundreds of dollars a month or in some cases, thousands of dollars a month, month after month after month after month after month for when there's hundreds of alternatives and there's no price differentiation really between them, that's an opportunity. In every other industry, there's generic peanut butter, there's generic pencils, there's generic everything in a sense.

(01:25:50):
So we're out there looking for commodities that are still charging luxury prices that we can create really beautifully tight, simple, essential generics of very high quality that don't do everything that the other products do, but get the core of it right, the 80-20, we get that right at a high degree of quality. And we can build these in typically three months each with two people. And the maintenance cost is zero to us, essentially. There's no marginal cost here because we make the software and we sell it and we don't have to maintain it in terms of hosting and the whole thing, which is what the expensive part of SaaS is. So anyway, that's the idea behind Once. And we, again, don't know what the market's going to think. I have no idea but we're really excited about trying this and seeing what happens.

Lenny (01:26:33):
And then could you talk about the first thing you're launching or is that not out?

Jason Fried (01:26:37):
Yeah, sure. The first product we're going to be launching is basically an old product that we made way, way, way back when. So years and years and years ago, 2006, we launched a product called Campfire, which was-

Lenny (01:26:38):
Oh, of course.

Jason Fried (01:26:50):
... a group chat tool.

Lenny (01:26:51):
How could you not remember Campfire?

Jason Fried (01:26:53):
Well, some people are-

Lenny (01:26:55):
Are younger.

Jason Fried (01:26:55):
... 22 and they don't know, understandably so. But if you've been around, maybe you remember Campfire, which was a group chat tool, which is I think eight years before Slack came out or something like that. So it was really early and it was really hard to get people to even understand what this thing was, and a lot of people didn't get it. And then Slack came out, of course, and steamrolled it and really, really executed beautifully and did a great job. But chat has become a commodity. There are a million ways to chat with people now, and in the business realm, they're all still quite expensive and they're all month to month to month. You got Slack, you got Teams, and you've got a few others and it's like, you know what... And there are some open-source alternatives, by the way, that are free or cheap. But we want to put something back out there.

(01:27:41):
So we're going to relaunch Campfire under the Once brand. You'll pay for it once, you'll install on your own servers, and you'll run it. And it'll do 90% of the things that you want to do every day and these other chat tools and do them very, very well and very, very simply and very, very easily. And we think it's going to be really interesting. And by the way, the other thing we're thinking about with these Once products, which is interesting, just get to this alternative point of view, is that these don't necessarily need to replace things. They can be in addition to. You might still run Slack at your company but you want to back up for when Slack goes down, or you want a special air-gapped chat for your executive team that cannot be leaked by another company where you're hosting data or having other people involved that might have access to it by accident.

(01:28:34):
You can run things, you can have different tools doing similar things but for different groups in different contexts. Now, you probably wouldn't want to pay month to month to month to month to month for a backup system when something almost never goes down, but if you only have to pay for it once, it might be really... that's a good thing to have. That's an insurance policy to pay for it once and we just have it in our back pocket. The other thing we're doing with Once product is that you get the code. And so if you're a product team and you're curious to see how this product was built, and we've gone to great lengths to make it exceptionally well-built for this purpose, this is a book, essentially, of how to build this kind of thing really, really, really well on the CSS on the HTML and the Ruby on Rails side, for example.

(01:29:18):
So you'll get all the code and you can look at it and you can modify it, you can play with it and you can tweak it. You can't resell it. There's a certain licensing but it's yours. And so if you want to change the layout, go ahead. If you want to add some features, go ahead. If you want to mess around, go ahead, it's yours. And that's another thing that's really novel. You don't get that in subscription software. So there's a lot of things going on that we're trying. There's some other really cool stuff. I'll tell you, one more quick thing about it is that we're trying to make this first prompt especially have as few words as possible, maybe 30 words. So we're picking tools that are... or picking categories that people already know how to use, and so we're trying to keep as many words out of this as possible so it's instantly essentially available for the entire world.

(01:30:05):
It doesn't have to be localized. It's just like, it's universal software. We're trying to think about it this way. And when we do have a word, we're going to have a panel that shows that translation in a bunch of different languages. So it's not like you install this pack or that pack, it's like, you can hit this because different people in the world work in different countries. So we have people in different countries that work for us. I don't want to just have the Indian version because people in India might also have people that work in Brazil and they need the Portuguese version. So you can see all the different languages for certain words when we use them, which is a really novel thing.

(01:30:34):
We're kind of playing, this is the whole thing like, these tools give us a chance to play and explore new realms and new ideas that we couldn't do with SaaS. This is one of the things I'm getting back to the first question you asked me, I think, or maybe it wasn't the first, but this is why I'm excited again. There's some novelty again, there's some new explorations again. We're able to do things that we couldn't do in other places. So there's an excitement that's building around this creative exploration again, and that's really firing us up.

Lenny (01:31:03):
It's clear how you're excited about this. You're saying how you thought you'd be happy just building Basecamp for the rest of your life, and clearly, there's a pull here, I'm going to try something totally new and different. Also, the domain is awesome, Once.com, right?

Jason Fried (01:31:14):
Yeah, that was fun. And we're still going to do Basecamp in here. So we're still doing SaaS. I still believe in SaaS. This is not going to replace SaaS but there should be an alternative. People should be able to buy what they need versus rent what they need.

Lenny (01:31:27):
I think this is going to be an interesting experiment because this is how we started with software and then SaaS came and everyone loved this idea of, I don't have to worry about anything. I'm just going to pay you monthly and you take care of maintenance and hosting all that stuff and keep updating me with better features. So I think it'll be interesting to see if we've missed something leaving that world. One clarifying question, for updates, do you buy yearly, like a new Campfire every year, or how does that work if there's updates?

Jason Fried (01:31:54):
So the plan is, is that let's say you buy Campfire 1.0, this is the way software used to work. It's the same approach, which is like, you'll get all the 1.X updates for free. And you'll be able to decide if you want to update yours or not. So we'll say, hey, 1.1 is out and here are the new things and you get to decide if you want to download that and update yours or not. So you can stick with 1.0 if you want or you can skip a version, whatever you want to do.

(01:32:19):
If when we get to version 2.0, there'd probably be... you'd probably have to buy it again, but we'd probably have a discounted upgrade rate. But that's like, you also totally optional. I don't know if we'll ever even get there. We might not need to. Have no clue. But we're leaving that door open that if there's a radically new version that we had to sink another six or eight months into or something, it feels right to say you'll need to upgrade. Maybe you get half off because you're a previous customer or something like that. So we don't know but that's the plan.

Lenny (01:32:49):
I think it's also important for people to remember your target is not to replace Slack at big tech companies, like your market is the Fortune 5 million as you described.

Jason Fried (01:33:00):
First of all, we don't have a sales team, so it's self-service, it'll always be. If some big huge company says... they look at their bill, their Slack bill and they're going, we're paying 1.2 million a year for this? Wait, wait a second, I can pay less than 1,000 bucks once for this. Maybe that's worth having, or maybe even if we don't use it, it's absolutely worth buying because maybe we will use it, or maybe we can experiment with it in this place. One of the things we're trying to do here is find a price point and it's going to be under 1,000 bucks. I won't tell you exactly where, but we're trying to find a price point where it's kind of becomes a no-brainer, like, you know what? We should buy this, we should have, this should be in our toolkit, and we should use this in certain parts of our business even if we don't replace this other thing, although we still might because we might find that as this group or these two groups or three groups that are using this are making exactly the same progress, why are we spending all this money elsewhere?

(01:33:53):
So it's a bit of a Trojan horse, potentially. I don't know what's going to happen. No idea, but it's going to be pretty interesting. The other thing that's really cool about it, this is the tiniest market in the world, but because it doesn't go out to the internet, you can run it in truly air-gapped research facilities. There was a time way back in the day where the White House got in touch with us. This is when Obama was running and wanted to use Basecamp. But they're like, we need to install it because we can't obviously host this stuff on your servers. I know, I totally get it. We can't do that, unfortunately. Sorry. But they have security needs that are just far beyond what most things allow, but this is the kind of thing where they can actually be completely detached from the public internet and run this kind of software, which is really interesting. Again, tiny market, not what we're building it for, but it's a cool byproduct or side effect, I should say, of running things this way.

Lenny (01:34:49):
And then did you share when this might come out? I know you don't promise dates but is there something you want to share there or is it-

Jason Fried (01:34:54):
Well, unfortunately, we promised. We said by the end of this year, that's why I was getting to that. But we said by the end of 2023, and we're almost there, here we are in December, so mid-December, we're going to start to roll this out to the first batch of customers. It's probably not going to be available publicly to everyone in the world yet, but that'll come soon after. But the first batch of customers are going to get it and we'll slow-roll it out, figure out what we missed, what we need to tighten up and tweak. It's not really a beta as much as it's just a limited release, which is the smart way to do this, and then we'll open the doors very, very soon after that.

Lenny (01:35:30):
Jason, you're breaking your own rule of not saying by end of the year. Apparently, I learned earlier that that's never works.

Jason Fried (01:35:37):
Yeah, it's funny, we definitely said that and we said that six months ago and here we are, end of the year.

Lenny (01:35:45):
It's happening. So maybe sometimes it works out.

Jason Fried (01:35:47):
Yep.

Lenny (01:35:48):
Before we get to our very exciting lighting round, is there anything else that you wanted to share, touch on, or leave listeners with?

Jason Fried (01:35:55):
I think one of the most important things though to remember, and I got to it in another answer, is just like, humans tend to complicate things, and a lot of things are hard but they're still simple until you make them complicated. And just keep that in mind that you can make a lot of progress with two people, and you can do a lot of great work four weeks at a time max, and you can figure things out as you go, and you don't need to know exactly where you're going, and you can be profitable business, and you can find customers who are willing to pay for things. These are all possible things to do. And you don't need to be a big huge company to be successful. And you don't need to be a big huge company to make significant amounts of money. You don't need to do that.

(01:36:42):
You don't need to raise money. So it's like, all those things make things more complicated, actually. Some people think they might make them simpler, if I have a bunch of money, it's simpler. It's actually not simpler, it's harder. In a sense, the more... because those things come with expectations and again, they erase your scrappiness, and there are side effects here. Those things come with very, very thick and strong strings attached. And you got to think about what are those strings attach to and what do they prevent you from doing? You don't have a full range of motion anymore. So I'll leave people with that, even if I touched on some of those ideas earlier on.

Lenny (01:37:21):
And that's a really great way to summarize it. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Jason Fried (01:37:27):
Let's do it.

Lenny (01:37:29):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Jason Fried (01:37:33):
The first one is this book here, so Several Short Sentences About Writing. Do you know this book?

Lenny (01:37:38):
I love that book. I have it on my coffee table.

Jason Fried (01:37:42):
When anyone ever asks me, what book do you recommend on writing? It's this one, Several Short Sentences About Writing. I can never pronounce his last name, but Verlyn Klinkenborg, I believe is his name, although I might be bastardizing that. But it's an extraordinarily good book about writing and it's all about the sentence, beautifully written, fun to read, really great. The other one is pretty much anything by Derek Sivers, but specifically, Hell Yeah Or No. I recommend this book to everybody. It's really had a big effect on me and David, specifically. We use this term, hell or no, all the time internally. Is this a hell yeah or no? It really clarifies a lot of things. And the last one is this design book, which is interesting. There's a few different versions of it. The one I have handy, it's called Home-made: Contemporary RussianFolk Artifacts.

(01:38:35):
And what this book is, it's a collection of... it's a beautiful book. It's very simple. Basically, every spread is a person, a story, and a thing that they had to make because they didn't have anything. They couldn't buy what they needed. They didn't have what they needed. So this example here is a guy put a hole in a spoon to make bubbles for his kid, to blow bubbles, large bubbles. This is a TV antenna made out of forks, and it's just like, getting back to the scrappiness, I admire this kind of ingenuity among or over pretty much anything. And I think that this book is full. There's a couple hundred pages. They have a couple different editions of this, but I love this one a lot. Look at this one. This guy had to make a door handle. I mean, in America, we're like, go get a door handle at Home Depot.

(01:39:28):
This guy didn't have a door handle, so he made it out of a plastic, looks like a gallon oil can or some water thing, and nailed it to a book, which nailed it to a door. Amazing. And this is also why I've always loved... I know this isn't very lightning, sorry but I've always loved looking at jailhouse creations and tools and how people make weapons out of combs and pens. It's just, I find this like, I have nothing, I need something, I can use my human brain to figure out how to make it. I think that scrappiness is beautiful.

Lenny (01:40:03):
Yeah, I was just going to say it speaks clearly to your scrappy mentality. And what is that book called again?

Jason Fried (01:40:10):
This one's called Home-made: Contemporary RussianFolk Artifacts. And there's also an Eastern European one and there's another one too, but Home-made.

Lenny (01:40:18):
What an awesome, unusual selection. Okay, next question. What is a favorite recent movie or TV show?

Jason Fried (01:40:24):
I don't watch TV. I rarely get a chance to see movies these days. I really thoroughly enjoyed Oppenheimer though. I mean, I went to the theater to see it, and seeing that in the theater was really special, but I just love the movie, is fantastic.

Lenny (01:40:41):
Do you have a favorite interview question that you like to ask candidates that you are interviewing to hire?

Jason Fried (01:40:46):
I think we actually went over this one a little bit, which was, I'm always curious about what else... if you had more time, what would you do with this idea? Another one is, whose work do you admire? So it's not so much about what you can do, but what are other people doing that you think is great? I find that, that really illuminates what kind of pulse they have on the world and what they're looking at and what inspires them and what they think is good. So I like that question.

Lenny (01:41:12):
In that second question, what do you look for? Is it someone that you also admire?

Jason Fried (01:41:16):
Ultimately, in the moment, I don't care who it is. It's more about, tell me why. So someone will say, I like so-and-so, I'm like, why do you like them? What are they doing that you think is interesting? This is kind of the thing I tend to always ask, which is, why do you think that that's interesting? I'm always trying to get behind the words and understand where this is coming from because people can prepare answers and they can sound great. But it's like, well, what's behind that? Where are you going with that? Why? What's the genesis of this? That's what I'm always after. And so whether or not I agree with the work or whatever, in the end, it plays a part to some degree but I'm more interested in, how did you get there?

Lenny (01:42:01):
Is there a favorite product that you've recently discovered that you really love?

Jason Fried (01:42:06):
Yes, although it's more of a category. I bought an old car, and I've fallen back in love with stick shifts. I learned how to stick, and then I basically have had automatic cars for many years and I got back into sticks. And now it's even deeper than that. I got back into the old analog driving experience and how wonderful it is to feel attached to the machine that you're using, that you turn the wheel and it turns it rod and it turns the wheels, and that your leg muscle actually is what's breaking the car, to some degree. There's something about that direct feel that really surprised me. It surprised me how much is missing in modern cars and it actually... I like to draw these parallels because this is how I see the world. It reminded me of our business, actually. I think we have a very stick shift business.

(01:43:06):
We have a very direct business. Everything's very, very tight, very straightforward. There are not a lot of layers of abstractions. There are not a lot of things in the middle between the work we do and the way it feels, and I think of large businesses as automatic transmissions and modern cars where you just... everything's simulated. You don't really know what the road feels like. You can't really feel it in the steering wheel, or maybe there's some fake feel in there now. The brakes are just sending a command to a computer to squeeze the pads. The transmission is like, you don't control it, it just does its own thing. And there's a beauty in that too, but there's also a disconnect that I forgot about until I got back into driving the old car, which is harder to drive and noisier and bumpier and creakier, but there's a real directness to it that's really special, and I think it's actually a good way to look at business and to remind yourself that staying as connected to the thing that you're doing as possible has a lot of value.

Lenny (01:44:11):
That's an awesome metaphor. Next question, do you have a favorite life motto that you often repeat yourself, share with folks, find useful in work or in life?

Jason Fried (01:44:21):
And I don't always live up to it, but basically, it's worry less. There's a great Tom Petty lyric. I can't remember which song it's in, but I think it's on Wildflowers on the album. Most of the things you worry about never happened anyway. And it's just so true. I find myself worrying about all sorts of things that don't matter and never happen, and then you're like, God, I spent three days worrying about that, or I went to this appointment and it was fine. The amount of worry, and it's just all in your head, and it's all about anticipating the future that hasn't happened yet, and I try to tell myself that, and I try to tell others that in business. I try to tell myself that in life and in business, but also, I tell others that in business, what if people don't like... I don't know. You'll find out. Worry less about it. It probably isn't going to be a big deal anyway. So that's what I would say.

Lenny (01:45:12):
Worry less.

Jason Fried (01:45:13):
Worry less.

Lenny (01:45:14):
Final question, I was going to ask you this before you mentioned this, but you said you're writing a new book, potentially, are you able to share what this new book might be about?

Jason Fried (01:45:22):
We haven't started writing it. I can tell you, or I'm thinking about it, and it's going to revolve around the idea of gut and intuition in business and decision-making. I don't really know exactly how they all play in here in a book, but I think we need to celebrate gut and intuition more in business. And most business books are not about that. They're about the opposite in many ways. Whatever, you can't improve what you can't measure, or whatever these things are. And I think that's true in a lot of realms, like medicine, you can look at your biomarkers and you can do things.

(01:45:59):
I don't think things are quite as direct in business, and I think that intuition and gut is something to be celebrated. So I think what we're probably going to end up doing is looking at all the ways we use intuition and gut to make decisions at work, whether it's hiring or product decisions or policy decisions or whatever it is. Maybe break down some of those decisions in the past, perhaps, or talk about things on a day-to-day basis about how we employ those tools to move forward. So that's roughly the idea. It's very loose right now but hopefully, we can tighten it up and that's what I'd love to focus on that next.

Lenny (01:46:30):
That's an awesome topic for a book. I was thinking Worry Less could also be an awesome title for a book, if that's another topic-

Jason Fried (01:46:35):
That'd be a great title for a book-

Lenny (01:46:36):
... to go down.

Jason Fried (01:46:37):
Yeah, that would be.

Lenny (01:46:39):
I'm reading Charlie Munger's Poor Charlie Almanack right now.

Jason Fried (01:46:42):
Oh, beautiful.

Lenny (01:46:43):
There's a whole thing around the way we misjudge and make mistakes with our psychology, just like a heuristic [inaudible 01:46:50].

Jason Fried (01:46:49):
Human misjudgment.

Lenny (01:46:51):
Exactly. And I feel like that would be a part of this story of gut instinct are often right, but here's ways that we are often wrong, so maybe that's something to think about.

Jason Fried (01:47:00):
Yeah, it's funny. I had one opportunity to meet with Charlie Munger.

Lenny (01:47:03):
Oh, wow.

Jason Fried (01:47:04):
It was on a Zoom call, and it was four of us, and we got an hour with him.

Lenny (01:47:04):
Wow.

Jason Fried (01:47:09):
This was a few years ago. And I only asked him one question. I was mostly just a student listening to other people's questions. I said, what's your take on doing something well that you know nothing about? Essentially, is there power in being completely ignorant about something? I didn't add this but I've often found myself more creative when I don't know how to do something versus like, well, this is how you're supposed to do it, so you fall into this pattern. And I really loved his answer, which was, "I would just... trust your instinct on that," which is like, a lot of great things happen because you don't know how to do them.

(01:47:47):
In fact, a lot of innovations happen because you don't know how other people do them, and all you have is your gut. All you have is your intuition. All you have is how you feel about the thing. You don't have evidence, you don't have other examples to follow. You don't have a list of what to do. You just do. And I'm paraphrasing here. But it gave me a lot of confidence and hope to continue to follow our gut. And maybe this is, ultimately, in a way, what was the seed for this book perhaps, although I hadn't really thought about that until now. But it's a beautiful thing to read and to listen to him speak. I love it.

Lenny (01:48:29):
Jason, we covered everything I was hoping we'd cover. Thank you so much for making the time for this. Two final questions. Folks want to follow up and maybe ask more questions. How can they reach you if they can? And then how can listeners be useful to you?

Jason Fried (01:48:42):
So you can hit me up on X, Jason Fried, F-R-I-E-D. I'm on LinkedIn as well, and you can also email me directly, just Jason@hey, H-E-Y.com. So hit me up there. How can people help me? I mean, if you like what we're doing, spread the word. We don't really spend any money on advertising and marketing. We've explored a little bit here and there but most of our growth has been organic, and it's just word of mouth. So if you like what we're doing, tell people about it because it really helps us out.

Lenny (01:49:09):
Amazing. Jason, thank you so much for being here.

Jason Fried (01:49:11):
Thanks, Lenny. It was great.

Lenny (01:49:12):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lenny'spodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
We're going to be talking about how to grow your power.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:00:02):
The reason why you should pay attention to this is because it leads to a lot of good things, salary, getting promoted, being happy in your career, being less stressed.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:11):
You're not describing how the world should work. This is just how it is.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:00:15):
Not only is, but how it was and how it will be.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:20):
The Seven Rules of Power, get out of your own way, break the rules, show up in a powerful fashion, create a powerful brand, network relentlessly, use your power, and understand that once you've acquired power, what you did to get there will be forgiven, forgotten, or both.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:00:32):
This is not about personality. These are skills they can be mastered.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:35):
People might be hearing this and they're like, "I don't want to be this person."

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:00:38):
Well, you already have done a fabulous job of illustrating principle one. That is one way to get in our own way. If I think power is dirty, the first thing that's going to happen is I'm not going to do what I need to do to be successful in my career.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:52):
The opening quote to your book that I have here, if you want power to be used for good, more good people need to have power.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:00:58):
That's exactly right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:03):
Today, my guest is Jeffrey Pfeffer. Jeffrey is a Professor of Organizational Behavior at Stanford's graduate School of Business, and teaches one of the two most popular and oversubscribed courses in all of the MBA program, called the Paths to Power. The other class, by the way, is Touchy-Feely, which we dove into last month. In his class and in his recent book, the Seven Rules of Power, Jeffrey teaches the things that you can do in your life and in your work to build your power, and through that get things done and advance in your career. As one student described the class, it's the cod liver oil of the Graduate School of Business. You know it's good for you, but you feel a little nervous about it. In our conversation, we dig into each of the seven powers, why it's important to build these skills even if you feel uncomfortable.

(00:01:48):
We talk through a bunch of examples of the power in action and the impact it has had on people's lives, why it isn't as cringey or scary as you may think. I was actually nervous to have this conversation and I ended up being a huge fan of Jeffrey and the work that he does. We end the conversation with what you can start doing today to start building your own power. This podcast is basically for anyone that wants to advance in their career, whether you're an IC or a CEO, and I'm really excited to bring it to you. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes, and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Jeffrey Pfeffer. Jeffrey, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:02:36):
Thank you, Lenny. I am honored that you invited me on.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:40):
I'm even more honored that you decided to come on. We're going to be talking about something that makes a lot of people uncomfortable. I think it's going to make me uncomfortable. We're going to be talking about how to grow your power in life and in business. Let me just start by asking why does this stuff make people uncomfortable, and why is it still important for people to learn how to do this well?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:03:02):
Well, it's important because a guy named Gerald Ferris developed a scale of political skill. And he and a bunch of his colleagues over the years did a lot of empirical research that demonstrates that political skill is associated with a lot of positive outcomes, salary, getting promoted, being happy in your career, being happy in your job, being less stressed. So the reason why you should pay attention to this is because it leads to a lot of good things. The reason why it makes people uncomfortable. You said it made you uncomfortable. Maybe I should ask you the question, why does it make you uncomfortable?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:44):
There's a lot of things here that are probably not how people want to live their life necessarily, or want other people to act.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:03:51):
Yeah, so I think it makes people uncomfortable because the realities of what it takes to get power bear almost no resemblance to what you're taught in Sunday school or the mosque or wherever, how your parents raised you. They bear almost no resemblance to how we think the world ought to be. They bear a little resemblance to our aspirations. And I think we look around the world and we see people who have acquired enormous amounts of power and have used it for bad. But I tell people, I see people with hammers hitting other people on the head. That does not mean that a hammer is not a useful tool. You can take a screwdriver and stab it into somebody's belly. I have a very dear friend who we'll probably talk about later in the podcast. Laura Esserman is a breast cancer surgeon, and I tell people, Laura has a knife. She uses it to cure cancer. Muggers have knives. They use it to rob people. So I think we've confused the tool for how it has been used.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:56):
You also have this quote that the people who need to understand power and build their power skills are people who come from backgrounds or characteristics who would normally put them at a disadvantage.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:05:04):
I think that's exactly right. I will go this Sunday to Nashville Tennessee to talk to a bunch of people of color in the NFL who are trying to rise up the ranks. Stanford runs a program because the NFL is serious, I think, about trying to make more opportunity for people, underrepresented minorities. But these are folks who will not succeed unless they learn power skills, because the world is stacked against them in lots of ways.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:41):
This episode is brought to you by Uizard, empowering product leaders to ideate and iterate faster than ever before with the power of AI. As a product manager, I often spend hours taking screenshots and then annotating them with feedback for my team. With Uizard, I can simply upload my screenshot and Uizard's AI will turn them into a fully editable UI design, that I can then take, make tweaks to, and then share with my teams in minutes. And when I want to get really creative and explore totally new ways to improve our product experience, I can use Uizard's AI to generate new design concepts from simple text prompts, and turn them into interactive prototypes effortlessly.

(00:06:21):
There's a reason that over 2.6 million people have trusted Uizard to accelerate every phase of their product life cycle and speed up time to market. Developers can even export UI components to React and CSS to speed up their development. Uizard's drag and drop editor is super easy to use and you can collaborate in real time with your entire team. Even your CEO and customer service teams can contribute. Unlock all of Uizard's game-changing AI powered features and more with 25% off Uizard's Pro annual plan. Visit uizard.io/Lenny and use code Lenny to check out today. That's uizard.io/Lenny.

(00:07:05):
This episode is brought to you by Webflow. We're all friends here, so let's be real for a second. We all know that your website shouldn't be a static asset. It should be a dynamic part of your strategy that drives conversions. That's Business 101. But here's a number for you. 54% of leaders say web updates take too long. That's over half of you listening right now. That's where Webflow comes in. Their visual first platform allows you to build, launch, and optimize web pages fast. That means you can set ambitious business goals and your site can rise to the challenge. Learn how teams like Dropbox, IDEO and Orange Theory trust Webflow to achieve their most ambitious goals today at Webflow.com.

(00:07:51):
Another element of your course that you try to make clear in your syllabus is to teach people not to be as judgmental. You also have this whole huge bold phrase, "This class is not for everyone." Can you just talk a bit about maybe why it's not for everyone and then why being less judgmental is important?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:08:07):
The class is extremely popular. I have a long waiting list. It's kind of mythical. And because of the principle of social influence, we are influenced by what other people do. We're influenced in our choices of restaurants, we're influenced in our choices of music. I'm not sure I like Taylor Swift, but I certainly want to go see Taylor Swift because everybody else is. And many people sign up for the class. And one year in particular, there were some people who sat in about the third row up, directly in front of me, and they looked every day like they were having some terrible thing put up some horrible orifice or something. They looked literally in pain, and so I decided, and of course they learned nothing. If you come to the class and you're in that much psychological discomfort, you're not going to learn anything.

(00:08:55):
And so what I try to do is tell people that in order to benefit from this class, you have to be open to learning the material. And if you're not, and by the way, this would be true for any class. If you go to physics and you say, I don't like physics, I hate physics, I don't believe in physics, I don't believe in the theory of physics, whatever, you're not going to learn anything. And so I'm trying to get the class, given those huge waiting lists, I'm trying to get the class to have people in it who are in fact going to benefit from it rather than sit there and look like they're in pain. And the judgmental thing, if Matthew 7, "Judge not that ye be not judged." The Koran says, "Only Allah can judge people." The American poet, Walt Whitman said, "Be curious, not judgmental."

(00:09:46):
Mother Teresa said, "If you judge people, you have no time to love them." Judgment, if I need to build a positive relationship with Lenny because you are on my critical path in my job, and jobs necessarily entail a reasonable amount of interdependence, I get things done through and with other people. If I decide that Lenny is whatever set of bad adjectives you want to use, dumb, incompetent, immoral, whatever, my ability to build a positive relationship with you, and you remain on my critical path, becomes almost zero unless you're a better actor or I'm a better actor than I think most people are.

(00:10:32):
So therefore, you should suspend judgment in the sense that if somebody is on your critical path, the only judgment you should make is they're on my critical path. If I want to get something done, I need their collaboration and cooperation, and the fact that I may not like them is in fact irrelevant. And as I have taught senior executives over the years, it is absolutely clear to me that one of the skills that they have mastered is they have a skill that you cannot tell what they think of you. And that's important because I need your collaboration, I need your cooperation. And if I leak out in ways that say I don't respect you or I don't like you, I don't admire you, whatever, my odds of getting you to work productively with me goes essentially to zero. So that's a judgmental story. Does that make sense?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:21):
Absolutely. And I have a quote from your syllabus along these lines, "Not everyone we encounter in Paths to Power is someone you're going to want to emulate. This is a class about how to get things done, how to build and wield influence, and there are multiple ways to accomplish these objectives." So I've had two friends actually go through the course. One I asked about the course of the impact it had on her. She's actually a founder now. And she told me that your class was her single most favorite class at all of Stanford Business School, because it was realistic and applicable to life as a founder. Because it didn't sugarcoat business, didn't sugarcoat life. It told her how the world really works and it is helping her succeed with her startup right now.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:12:00):
Thank you. There's no higher praise than that. I actually don't read, I shouldn't probably say this on the public, but I don't actually read my course evaluations because the impact I want to have is not to have people like me, but to have that kind of impact. To make people more successful, more effective in their lives.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:22):
That is a good segue to one of your rules of power. So let's just talk about your Seven Rules of Power. I actually have your book right here and if folks want to learn more, here it is, Seven Rules of Power. This is your fourth book about power, and this is your best book about power, because it basically summarizes everything you've learned in a really cohesive way. So let me first share the Seven Rules of Power and then I'm going to dive into a few of them. Does that sound good?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:12:44):
That sounds perfect.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:45):
Okay, so the seven rules, one, get out of your own way. Two, break the rules. Three, appear powerful. Four, build a powerful brand. Network relentlessly. Use your power, and success excuses almost...

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:13:01):
Everything, correct.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:02):
Okay, success excuses everything almost. Got it. Okay. So let me start with power four, which is around personal brand. And the reason I want to start here is I have a friend that's actually in your class right now, Ralph, and I saw that he started a podcast. And he told me that he did it because it was part of the homework that you give students. You call it Doing Power. Is that the name of the homework assignments?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:13:25):
Yeah, I have. So we give them a bunch of assignments throughout the class, which are self-reflective assignments, but their big thing for the class is they have to do power. They have to do something during the quarter to take the principles of the class, and what they're learning, and put them into practice. And that is because everything I do, I do for a reason. That is because if you don't use what you learn, the learning will disappear. So if you go to a French class and you learn French, and you never speak French, in about a relatively short period of time you'll forget everything you learn. And so I want the learning to stick with them, so I try to get them to do something with it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:06):
While we're on this tangent, I wanted to talk about this whole, you have a book, the Doing Knowing Gap.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:14:10):
Knowing-Doing Gap.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:11):
The Knowing-Doing Gap. So let's just spend a little time there. I think that's really important. What are some examples of things that have come out of people doing these homework assignments, things that maybe led to something interesting?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:14:22):
Let me take my most extreme example. My most extreme example is probably Derek Kan, K-A-N. And Derek Kan was a little bit older when he went through the MBA program. And in 2012, his Doing Power project was to get appointed to be Mitt Romney's, it was Mitt Romney was running for president, to be head of economic policy for the Romney campaign. Believe it or not, he was offered the job. Believe it or not, he turned it down for reasons which we could go into if you want, but aren't that interesting. He wound up relatively soon thereafter as number three in the transportation department, working for Elaine Chao. And I have a picture of him when he comes to the class, I introduce him. I tell students, I give them a trigger warning and I introduce him. He wound up, at the end of the Trump administration, as the deputy director of the Office of Management and Budget. And since typical of the Trump administration, by that time there was no director. He essentially ran the $6 trillion US budget. This is six years out of business school.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:35):
I was thinking whether he got that during his class. Amazing. Okay, so this is a success story of Doing Power. Let's talk about this first power of building brand, and I think this is where people start to feel uncomfortable. They're going to be like, oh no, I don't want to be doing this. This doesn't feel good to me.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:15:51):
Why?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:52):
So let's talk about it.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:15:53):
Okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:54):
Let's see. So talk about this power of building a personal brand.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:15:58):
There are by definition fewer positions at the top than at the bottom. The world, we might not like this, and I know people, the late Tony Hsieh, the Zappos tried to do holacracy or whatever, but the world is essentially hierarchical. The animal kingdom is hierarchical. It is better to be at the top than at the bottom for a number of reasons. Okay. If that is true, if there are fewer positions at the top and then at the bottom, then your job to advance your career is to figure out how to get promoted. There are many ways to get promoted, but I will guarantee you one thing, no one is going to promote Lenny if they don't know who the hell you are. So it is not sufficient for them to know who you are. They have to know that you're smart and personable and have whatever skills you've got, but they have to know you.

(00:16:52):
If they don't know you, you cannot choose what is not in your head. You know that better than I do. So therefore you have to do something to differentiate yourself. You have to build a brand. So when I think of Lenny in your podcast, I think of something. Not just 25 billion podcasts. When I think of somebody in McKinsey or Bay or BCG, one of the consulting firms, a gazillion people start off as front-line consultants. What are you going to do so that somebody knows who you are? What are you going to do that creates value for the firm and for you? So my friend Keith Ferazzi, when he started at Deloitte Consulting, did not do the spreadsheet stuff that he was, by the way, not very good at and didn't like. He started the Lincoln Quality Award. He decided to try to take Deloitte's brand recognition from about one or 2% to 30%.

(00:17:54):
He was appointed, though he left before he actually took the job, to the position of partner and the first chief marketing officer at Deloitte. I have another friend, Tristan Walker, who wanted to get hired at Foursquare. He sent emails to the founder. The founder ignored him. So Tristan Walker did something I think very bold. Tristan Walker began signing up partnerships. So one day the founder says, holy God, he signed up Starbucks. Maybe I ought to hire this guy. So you have to do something that causes people to know who you are, and that is what building a brand is about.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:36):
It sounds very benign put that way. When people hear, I need to build a personal brand, it sounds like I need to post on LinkedIn, I need to post on Twitter, start a newsletter, start a podcast, which I know is kind of a part of it. But what are some examples you've seen of ways to build a personal brand that are effective?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:18:50):
So I have a friend who I bring to the class, a lovely tall Asian woman named Laura Chau, who made partner at a venture capital firm after four years, which is fast. Laura works for Canaan Partners, C-A-N-A-A-N. Laura said, I do not work for Andreessen Horowitz, I do not work for Sequoia, I don't work for Greylock, I don't work for any of these very visible large VC firms. So if I am going to get deals in the consumer space, that's her domain of expertise is consumer and consumer tech, somebody is going to have to know who Laura Chau is. Because again, you're not going to get the deal if nobody knows who you are. And so she basically did everything you talked about. She did writing. She started a podcast in which she invited influential people on. She contributed to a book. She helped people out.

(00:19:55):
She did networking dinners. She did everything she could so that people would recognize and know Laura Chau. And one of the things she did was she's tall. In general, Asian women are not tall. She decided to play up the fact that she was, in the words of some people, the tallest Asian woman they'd ever seen. She wears heels. In her heels she's six feet one inches tall. She also, when she comes to my class, many people come to my class with hoodies, God knows what. She has style and it's a unique style. So she thinks about very strategically, how am I going to dress? How am I going to look? How am I going to show up? How am I going to do what I need to do so that people know who I am? Obviously there's substance. If you have visibility without substance, people will know you're useless. But if you have substance without visibility, no one will know the substance that you got.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:56):
You also talk about how you can reframe this idea of not being self-promotional, but it's amplifying the impact of the team that I work with, or it's me scaling myself by sharing things I know and pointing people to it.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:21:11):
Absolutely, absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:11):
Awesome. Okay, let's move on to a different power. Let's talk about power one, which is getting out of your own way. Talk about what that means and how someone can work on that.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:21:20):
Well, you already have done a fabulous job of illustrating principle one by talking about how this is the topic that makes people uncomfortable. And when something makes people uncomfortable, in general, they're going to shy away from it. So if I think power is dirty, if I think power is evil, if I think power is something I want nothing to do with, the first thing that's going to happen is I'm not going to do what I need to do to be successful in my career. So that is one way in which we get in our own way. Another way in which we get in our own way, many people suffer from what is called in the psychology literature, imposter syndrome. They believe that they were the admissions mistake at Stanford. They were the hiring mistake in whatever company they're working for. That somehow they got to this job, but they don't really deserve to be there because they're surrounded by people who are smarter and better than them, and therefore they will do things.

(00:22:18):
I can't even believe that this goes on. So I will have students, not many, but a few. Now raise their hand, I'll call them, and the first things out of their mouth will be, I don't know if this comment is going to be useful. This is called pre-emptory apology. If the comment is not going to be useful, don't say it. That's number one, but number two, don't apologize. Pardon me for interrupting. Pardon me for taking up your time. Stop all this apologizing. If you got the job you're in, you probably are not only qualified, you're probably overqualified. So don't use descriptors of yourself that disempower you. Don't think of yourself as not deserving of the job that you hold, because that attitude will leak out and other people will say, if Lenny doesn't think he deserved the job, then maybe I shouldn't think he deserves the job either.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:19):
So basically the first power is you're shooting yourself in the foot by worrying too much about whether people like you. This friend of mine who's now the founder that I read some quotes from, she said her number one takeaway from your class is if you want to be liked, get a dog.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:23:32):
That's correct. That is a quote from my dear friend Gary Loveman, who for many years ran Harrah's, which then became Caesars, the casino company.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:43):
You also talk about this. Yeah, there's this quote I have. "Acknowledge that others are often no better than you, because that makes you feel better about the story." So for people that actually want to be liked, I like being liked. I don't know if it's a flaw in my upbringing. Is the lesson you're capped on your power if you worry about if you want to be liked?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:24:05):
At the end of the day, you don't want to be intentionally disliked. You don't want to violate my dear friend Bob Sutton's book The No Asshole Rule and gratuitously be an asshole. But you are hired to get a job done. It's interesting. I unfortunately am now too old. In the words of my chiropractor, I'm suffering from too many birthdays. So I have a lot of doctors who are doing a great job. Trust me, when I choose a doctor, I have a, unfortunately he retired, a neurosurgeon who did two surgeries on my spine. He's considered to be one of the top 20 in the country. If you go on Yelp, you read about his personality and his office furniture. As I said to somebody, he's doing microsurgery on my spine, I can wind up permanently paralyzed. I really don't care about his personality. I don't care about his office furniture.

(00:25:01):
That's an extreme example, but it makes the point. When you are put in a role, you are put in a role because presumably you are supposed to perform in that role. If you get appointed to be a head coach, if we make you a quarterback on an NFL team, or we make you center on a National Basketball Association team, you did not get that job because people thought you had a cute personality. You got that job because you have the skills to make your organization successful. And if you do not use those skills because you're worried about what everybody else is thinking, you are not only harming yourself, but you're harming them because you are not doing what you were hired to do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:46):
So a simple way of thinking about this, which makes me feel better about. As we talk through this, I'm becoming less uncomfortable with these, which is a good sign. It's don't actively try to be disliked. Don't prioritize being liked, prioritize competence and respect.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:25:59):
Correct, absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:01):
And doing the thing that needs to be done.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:26:03):
Absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:04):
Okay, great. Let's talk about rule number two, which is break the rules. So basically again, these powers are ways to grow power, and you're saying that if you break the rules, you get more power. Talk about why that's the case, what that looks like.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:26:18):
Well, for many reasons, number one, when you break the rules, you stand out. You become memorable when you do something that's unexpected. And being memorable is of course important, as we've already discussed. That's number one. Number two, the rules were made mostly by the people who are favored by the rules in place. So if we were talking about business strategy, we would talk about a word that is probably now overused. We would talk about being a disruptor. That you would disrupt an industry. And how do you disrupt an industry? By doing something that is different from the other industry incumbents. In Southwest Airlines, you don't do hub and spoke. At Amazon, you provide an incredible level of customer service. Whole Foods, you don't optimize on the cost of the stuff in your store, but you optimize on fitting local taste, whatever. You would be a disruptor, you would do things that are different.

(00:27:14):
The same principle holds for you, that if you are going to be successful, you have to do what number one, plays to your strengths, to use the title of a Gallup book. Number two, you have to do things again that cause you to stand out, and you have to do things that basically will make you more successful. One of the conventional wisdoms that people I think adhere to way too much, is don't ask. Don't ask, don't ask for help. You need to show self-sufficiency. So my colleague, Frances Flynn, Frank Flynn, wrote an article with Vanessa Lake entitled, If You Need Help, Just Ask. And it turns out people overestimate how many people they're going to have to ask to get help, and it turns out that asking for help makes people uncomfortable.

(00:28:03):
I was married, if you read the acknowledgments in Seven Rules of Power. For more than 35 years I was married to Kathleen Francis Fowler, who I could send you a picture. She looked literally like a supermodel and I never have been any particularly better looking than I am now. So somebody said to me, how'd you get her to go out with you? And the answer of course is, I asked. I asked, I asked, I asked. No one, well, maybe not no one. But few people are going to go out with you if you don't ask them out. Few people are going to marry you if you don't ask them to marry. Few people are going to do anything if you don't ask. And what is the worst that could happen? If you ask and they say, no, you are no worse off than had you not asked in the first place. If you don't ask, you're not going to get it. If you ask and they say, no, you're not going to get it. Get over your ego, ask.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:59):
Is there another example that comes to mind of someone breaking the rules say in business, that ended up being really successful as a result, or just someone that is really good at this in business?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:29:07):
I can give you many examples. One of my favorite examples would be Jason Calacanis. I don't know if you know Jason.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:14):
Oh yeah, I know you did a case study on him. I know him well. Yeah.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:29:18):
So I think Jason, I think consistently breaks all kinds of rules. First of all, when he comes to my class, nobody likes him, but that's okay. Almost nobody likes him. But...

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:30):
That's power number one. He's not worried about.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:29:33):
Yeah, that's number one. But also I think there's a conventional wisdom in the venture capital industry which he defies almost completely. He makes a lot of little bets, not a few big bets. He runs a very lean operation. He doesn't have a lot of partners. He doesn't have actually any partners, so he can't be fired by his partners. He began his career in journalism, which is interesting. Being a journalist is a wonderful job because you get to ask people all kinds of questions. And if you ask smart people questions, and you have some reasonable level of intelligence yourself, at the end of that process, you're going to wind up incredibly smart and incredibly insightful. And he wound up incredibly smart and insightful around aspects of the internet industry.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:23):
And he definitely has a lot of power. I think I am going to link to the case study in our show notes where you basically walk through how he went from nothing to a very powerful person.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:30:31):
And by the way, a very rich person as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:34):
Let's talk about another power, power five, networking relentlessly. What does that look like and how do you get better at this?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:30:42):
Well, I think there's research that shows that many people find networking dirty, and that's because I think they think about it in the wrong way. My friend John Levy, who has written a fabulous book, You're Invited. Which is a book about how to put on events that people want to come to. Is a fabulous human being. Will tell you that the first principle of networking is in fact generosity. It's generosity. What can I do for you? How can I be helpful? Who can I introduce you to? Either a company or a product or a person who can be helpful to you in your career.

(00:31:20):
But in order to be able to introduce you to someone who's going to be useful to you, I have to know people. If I don't know anybody, I can't introduce you to anybody. And the more people I know, the more likely it will be that if you say, I need to know somebody in X, I will know that person. So the broader your social network, the more people and the more things you will know. If knowledge is power, networking is a fabulous way to get knowledge about people and about ideas.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:53):
It's funny to hear this where it's like, yes, obviously this is right, but connecting it to if you want to become more powerful, more successful, you need to do this. I think that is a powerful point that we're all making here, is just like this actually is necessary if you want to acquire more power.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:32:10):
Of course. I have a funny story about networking. So we have a thing in Stanford called View From The Top, in which these fancy people come in and give a talk. And one of the people came in and give a talk and made my class instantly popular, because he's an extraordinarily wealthy person. His name is Omid Kordestani, and so I reached out to him and I said, "Omid, let's have breakfast." So I can understand because during the thing, when somebody asked them what class was the most important in his success, he said mine. So I said, "Tell me your story." He said, "Well, I graduated from Stanford. I'm Persian in background, immigrant background. An engineer, HP, all the things that would make you kind of a nerd or something." He said, "I went to work for a couple of startups that didn't do well. Then I found myself in the mid-nineties at Netscape." The browser company, big deal. Anyway, Marc Andreessen.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:07):
Oh yeah.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:33:08):
Okay. "So I found myself in Netscape in marketing and business development. I was not making any progress. One day I decided to take your class to an extreme. I decided to stop doing my job." So I said, "When people gave you projects to do or assignments or tasks and you didn't do them?" He said, "It turns out that I spent my time, not obviously at the bar, but in networking first with people inside of Netscape. And it turns out if you're well-connected to the senior leaders, they don't really care if you do your job or not. That's number one. Number two," he said, "oftentimes I can find other people to do the work I was doing. So instead of basically spending time doing my job, I networked first within Netscape." But Netscape was not that big of a company. So after a while he decided to go through, which is by the way, his job anyway, in marketing and business, he decided to basically drive through the Silicon Valley talking to people. And this is the rest of the browsers are just beginning.

(00:34:14):
Nobody knows what a browser is, nobody knows what the internet is going to become. So he's having all these fabulous conversations. All right, so he now knows basically everybody. It's 1998 and a little tiny company decides 10 engineers, typical Silicon Valley company. 10 engineers, all engineers. I have a friend who went to work for a company, run a company that had 26 people. He didn't have one sales and marketing person. Anyway, the company now has 10 engineers. They decide they need to hire their first business person. Being an analytically oriented company, they say, we're going to do this very analytically. We are basically going to ask everybody we can think of, and a few people we can't. Give us a list of the best technically oriented business people that you know. And there is of course one name that appears on every list. It is Omid Kordestani who becomes employee number 11 at Google and makes two and a half billion dollars.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:13):
Great success from networking. Well done. When people hear about networking, it just feels like you said, very cringe. I don't want to go to these networking events and try to pretend to talk and care about people. Do you have any advice for just how to make networking feel less cringy?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:35:28):
One of the exercises I give my students is I say, write a list of 10 people who, if you knew them and if they knew you, would be important for whatever you're trying to accomplish in your career. So maybe you're trying to get into biotech, you need to know 10 executives in biotech or whatever. Make a list of 10 people. Then for each person figure out how you are going to meet them. By the way, not necessarily in a network event. Maybe you want to do what John Levy does, which is hold dinners. In which by the way, the guests do the cooking, which is a very interesting idea. That of course taps into the IKEA effect. You always like something better if you participate in creating it. Maybe you want to hold dinners, maybe you want to try to reach out to them at lunch.

(00:36:21):
Maybe you want to reach out to them and say, here's an article I think you'd be interested in. Here is somebody who I think you'd benefit from meeting. So recently, I'm not a particularly good networker, though I'm better I guess than some people. I recently met Esther Wojcicki, I'm sure I killed her name. She's considered the grandmother of Silicon Valley. She's Susan Wojcicki's mother. And she is interested in depression, particularly depression among teenagers. And I said, you should know Leanne Williams, who's in the Psychiatry and Behavioral Science Department, who has done probably 300 articles on depression and has invented something which is called Precision Psychiatry. So I connected them to each other. Just send an email. I think you ought to know each other. They got together. I get credit for knowing people and connecting them, but I also benefit them. Leanne needs to raise money. Esther's got money. Esther needs to understand the cutting edge research in depression and biomarkers of depression, which is what Leanne's specialty is, so they benefit. So this is not some icky thing. This is connecting people who benefit from being connected.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:38):
That touches on something you teach in the book is, in your networking you want to become a broker, you want to be central. That's kind of what you want to work on. Can you talk a bit about what that means?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:37:47):
Well, that means you want to connect people. So many people with benefits, and many groups with benefits for being connected, and they're not connected. What does a venture capitalist do? Connects people with ideas to people with money, and takes a fee for doing it. What does an investment banker do? Connects people trying to sell businesses or raise capital with people trying to buy businesses or who have capital. What's a real estate agent do? Connects buyers and sellers of houses. There are all kinds of examples where the person's entire job is connecting people. But even for the people whose job it isn't, you benefit from knowing people. The more people you know, the more things you know. As I sometimes say in my class, if leadership management, call it what you will, is getting things done through other people, it seems like common sense that the more other people you know, the more you'll be able to get done.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:45):
As someone that has become central to a lot of things in the product world, and has built a large network as a result of this podcast newsletter, I can tell you a thousand percent. This creates a lot of opportunity and power, you could say in quotes. So I've seen it happen.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:39:00):
Of course.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:03):
This episode is brought to you by Heap, the product analytics solution that shows you everything users do on your digital product, website, mobile product or other digital services. We all know a great digital experience when we see it. It's intuitive, it anticipates your needs, and it makes it easy for you to do your job. If you're trying to build that kind of experience for your users, you need up to date, reliable information about what your users do in your product and why they do it. Want to know how your users behave across platforms, what keeps them coming back, what they're doing that you're not even aware of? Well, I have some great news for you. Heap captures all of this user activity for you automatically, and then gives you definitive answers to all your questions about user behavior in seconds, not weeks. With Heap, it's easy to prioritize the product investments that improve conversion, engagement and retention. Visit heap.io/Lenny to get started with a demo. That's H-E-A-P dot I-O slash Lenny.

(00:40:10):
Another lesson I guess you teach is to pursue weak ties. Talk a bit about what that means. What do you mean by that?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:40:14):
Well, the people to whom you are strongly tied, your family, your spouse, significant other, your friends, the people who work with you at work will probably, because they are close to you, know the same things and the same people that you do. So to the extent that you build ties with people who are more different from you in every dimension, you are more likely to learn non-redundant information, and come in contact with people that you don't already know. This again seems common sense. There's a lot of research behind it. Mark Granovetter, a sociologist who still teaches at Stanford, wrote a book entitled The Strength of Weak Ties.

(00:40:59):
And basically, no, actually, pardon me. He wrote an article called The Strength of Weak Ties. His book was called Getting a Job. And he did a study, I guess it was at that time in Boston. He did a study of job seekers in Massachusetts, and he looked at people who got jobs through applying to ads, through more formal means. And then he looked at people who got jobs through referrals from their network. And it turns out, of course, the jobs that you get through your network referrals are much better jobs. And oftentimes the best jobs that people got were referred to them by people that were not particularly close to them. Because they had a view, that's the word I was looking for, a view into the ecosystem of the Boston labor market, that the other people didn't have because they weren't in the same place as the other people.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:00):
I love that lesson. Let's talk about another power, which is using your power. So when people think of using your power builds more power, that's not intuitive. You talk about how it creates this self-perpetuating growth of power the more you practice power. Can you talk a bit about that?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:42:16):
Sure. So when you are given, it's interesting, my friend Deborah Gruenfeld, who wrote a book called Acting with Power, talks a lot about people's ambivalence to power. So sometimes people are put in a job. Herminia Ibarra who teaches now at London Business School, at one point taught in Seattle, at one point taught at Harvard, has an article in the Harvard Business Review in which she talks about a woman in a drug company who gets a promotion, and says to her colleagues, to whom she's now overseeing, that she's not sure why she got the job. She's not sure she deserves the job. Needless to say, she didn't do very well in this job because she got in her own way. But part of this is you are put in a position of power. You're put in a position of authority in order to make things happen. So to the extent you mobilize your resources and get things to happen, you'll get more resources.

(00:43:14):
People want to be associated with success. To the extent that you become successful, more people will want to work with you. To the extent that you get more stuff done, you'll get more promotions, more opportunities. Nobody's going to give you a job to do if the last five jobs like that they gave you, you couldn't get done. So the more you are able to do, which oftentimes of course requires power and influence, the more you're able to do, the more you'll be asked to do. But better yet, the more resources you'll be given to help you get things done.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:48):
And I think there's interestingly you teach that just showing that you have power creates more power. People see that you have this power and they start to follow your lead more, right? That's a part of this.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:43:57):
Yep. I just saw over the weekend the movie, the latest movie in the franchise of the Planet of the Apes. When Jim Collins left Stanford, he gave me a book called Chimpanzee Politics, which is of course not based on the Planet of the Apes, but it's based upon the study of chimpanzees. We are the same. People are attracted to power, you know that. By the way, that will account for a lot of what is going to happen in the presidential election.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:26):
Let's save that for the end, because I think that's an interesting piece of your book, of the connection to Trump. So let's save that for a bit. I think that'll be really interesting. Kind of along the same lines of the area we're just talking about. And another rule of power is to show up in a powerful fashion. So look powerful, talk about what that looks like.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:44:43):
So my colleague at Berkeley, Dana Carney, C-A-R-N-E-Y, is writing a book called Tell, which is about the importance of body language and how to master body language. There is some evidence that suggests we respond mostly to how people look, secondarily to how they sound, and by far the least important to the content of what they say. You can see this by turning on your TV and turning off the sound. Watch the presidential debates with the sound off. They'll be much better. I have another colleague in marketing by the name of Baba Shiv, who talks about people's freaky mind, or the idea that we are in fact descended from primates, and that we are controlled in lots of ways by our emotions. And so we respond affectively to other people. We respond to how they look. There's evidence in economics that suggests tall people earn more salaries, control, earn more money, controlling for lots of things, attractive people.

(00:45:46):
As long as you're not too attractive, you earn more money. Optimal level of attractiveness because people respond subconsciously to how people look, how they sound, how they show up, how they present themselves. In my class, I take the example of Tony Hayward of BP, the Macondo oil spill, and Lloyd Blankfein who was accused of shorting the securities that he was selling, which by the way, Goldman did. And before I let them hear Tony or Lloyd, we show about 60 seconds. And Lloyd's case 34 seconds with no sound. And even if you did not know who these people were and I asked you to make a bet, who's going to keep their job and who's going to lose it? You would know just from their physical appearance.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:37):
I love that.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:46:39):
And by the way, what Dana Carney will tell you, and what common sense will tell you, is that these are skills that can be mastered. Robert de Niro was not born Robert de Niro, in the sense of acting skills are learned. How you show up, how you command the room. There's a guy named Regis McKenna who is older than God, who's famous for running a very, very, very fancy public relations firm in the Silicon Valley. And his biggest contribution to life, as well as by the way to his personal wealth, is that he made Steve Jobs Steve Jobs. When Steve Jobs began, Steve Jobs couldn't convince you to buy water if you were dying of thirst. He could not give a presentation to save his life. And Regis McKenna and his team took Steve Jobs under their wing and created Steve Jobs, a man who could sell anything to anybody. These are skills. This is not about personality. This is not about undergoing some kind of cosmetic surgery or whatever. These are skills, everything we've talked about, networking, showing up, all these things. These are skills that can be learned.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:55):
I have a list of some of the stuff you actually recommend for looking and appearing powerful. So I'll read a few and I'm curious what else comes to mind. So do not read from notes. Make eye contact. Keep it brief. You say that anger can be a signal of power because it's outside the norm. It's kind of breaking the rules. Don't apologize. It's kind of the opposite. More gestures, which is interesting. Open body posture. Louder voice. Okay, I'm going to speak louder now. I like this. Okay, what else comes to mind as ways to appear powerful?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:48:26):
Invading people's personal space. So gentle touching, standing close to someone. We're not talking about sexual touching, we're talking touch on the arm or the shoulder, shaking people's hands. That's a way of I think being more powerful. But you've covered the main ones. Eye contact. One of the problems with Tony Hayward of BP is that he's been given a statement to read. You cannot read something in front of you and make eye contact at the same time. So he looks like he's scripted. He looks like he's insincere. Jack Valenti, who I had the privilege of knowing, who for 38 years was the head of the Motion Picture Association of America, and typically rated one of the number one or number two most effective lobbyists in Washington DC, said to my class when he came to my class, which he did, "I never appeared before Congress with notes. I wanted them to believe, which was by the way, true, that I was in complete control and complete mastery of the material, and that I did not need notes or a bunch of assistants around me to help me.

(00:49:40):
That I, as the head of the MPAA, understood the motion picture industry." And then he would give you a little aside about how it was the one industry that consistently had a budget surplus in trade. He would talk about how many jobs he created and he had all this stuff at his fingertips. But basically his command of the material made him more powerful. It's interesting, Jack Valenti was five foot two inches tall and he came, talked to my class, and the next class I said to people, "What are your reactions? What are your thoughts?" And a woman raised her hand and said, "He feels taller than he is." And I thought that was an assessment that was both true and insightful. When the five-foot-two Jack Valenti appeared, because of his presence, because of his body language, because of his Texas drawl, because of how he moved on the stage, he felt bigger. You would not say he did not feel five-foot-two.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:54):
Let me read a couple more because this is a good example of stuff he did. Other ways to appear more powerful is more speaking time, longer gazing time, more disinhibited laughs. Is that just you laughing and feeling like you're just...

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:51:08):
Well, humor. Humor. The famous author, Salman Rushdie said, and I quote Salman Rushdie, it's a fabulous quote. "If you can get people to laugh, you can tell them anything."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:20):
Yeah, stand-up comedy is a great example that. So again, I think here people might be hearing this and they're like, I don't want to be this person. I don't want to be talking all the time. I don't want to be pretending like open posture. Is the advice here just you don't need to do all these things. Just know this makes people more powerful. Don't necessarily judge people, do some of these things maybe because it'll add to your power? How do you think about just people that are turned off by this sort of thing?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:51:45):
That's a wonderful question. So I say to my class, on the very first day of class, that we will go through four stages. We'll go through the stage of denial. It doesn't work in my culture, it doesn't work in my organization, doesn't work for me, it doesn't work in my religion, whatever. Then we'll go through anger. When they get angry at me, how can you teach us this stuff? Then they'll go into sadness. I actually believe this and I'm depressed. And if we're successful, they will go through acceptance. And the process I have, again, I do not have the most popular class at Stanford Business School because I am good-looking, because I'm the smartest person at Stanford or anything else. I am strategic about thinking about if I have someone who's going to come into this class, I have to get them from denial to acceptance in 10 weeks.

(00:52:38):
And how are we going to do that? The easiest way to do that, if I said, Lenny, I want you to become a better tennis player, or a better roller blader, or a better ice skater, whatever, a better piano player in 10 weeks, what would we do? If we have practice and coaching. And that's what I do in the class, practice and coaching. I have executive coaches who work with the class and I give them assignments that ask them to practice what they're learning. And therefore, by the end of the class, most people have made this transition because it is true. If you've never... I had a dinner the other night, this Israeli woman who's like, I've done amazing stuff. Amazing. Which is fabulous. And she said at the dinner, she said, "I would've never done this before taking your class." And the way you get them to do this is I don't say, Lenny, you're going to swim the English Channel tomorrow.

(00:53:38):
If I want you to swim the English Channel, we're going to start by swimming in pools and make every day a little bit more challenging. That's what we do. I don't start by saying, you're going to network like Keith Ferrazzi or John Levy, or you're not going to be as bold as Jason Calacanis, who trust me is extraordinarily bold. You're not going to necessarily do what I did. You're going to begin where you can begin, and push yourself out of your comfort zone. Because, and again, this is common sense.

(00:54:13):
There's also a ton of research behind it. If you always stay in your comfort zone, you'll never do anything different or better than what you're currently doing. This is true. If I said to you, I want you to, at the end of 10 weeks, lift a hundred pounds, I can't do that by on the last day saying lift a hundred pounds. We have to work up to it. And that is, it's the same principle here. So don't do something that looks so off the wall or so out of character for you that you can't conceive doing it. Push yourself a little, push yourself a little.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:49):
There's an interesting connection here too. What some say is kind of the opposite of your class at Stanford, which is Touchy-Feely. We had Carole Robin on the podcast and she has a framework, the 15% rule where you push yourself 15% beyond your comfort zone. Where it's just a little bit, but it's not too far, and it feels like you try to do a similar thing.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:55:07):
Yeah, absolutely. So you begin by doing what you don't think you can do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:12):
Let's spend a little more time here around the homework assignments, and this kind of Knowing-Doing Gap that you talked about. So you shared a couple of homework assignments you give already, find 10 people, think of 10 people you want to meet that'll help you with your career and then try to meet them. And then there's this, I guess my friend started a podcast, I don't know which homework it was. What other homework assignments do you give?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:55:30):
So we begin, there's a literature on goal setting that says if you set goals, you're more likely to achieve them. This is, again, not some huge insight, but there's an enormous scientific literature about this. And so I begin the very first homework assignment is, which is by the way, on the very first day of class, why are you here? Why are you here? It is now the end of this class. What would success look like to you? What would you like to accomplish in our 10 weeks together? Second assignment, I give them a reading from the Power book, which is the book before Seven Rules, which talks about the seven attributes of power. Go out and get people to rate you on these or rate yourself. Set for yourself a development plan, energy, focus, being willing to tolerate conflict, all these qualities. What are you strong on? What are you weak on? What do you want to build during our time together, and how are you going to do it?

(00:56:35):
So we begin with goal setting. One of the assignments I give them, which is the class that Jason comes to, what resources can you create? You're at Stanford Business School, elite, fancy Stanford. What can you do in your 10 weeks here? I have people who created awards. A woman who created an award gave it to Karlie Kloss, the model. Got in trouble with the school. It turns out it's easier to ask forgiveness than permission. So what can you do to create resources that will give you some leverage? That would be a third assignment. The networking is a fourth assignment. The acting with power. I show them the videos and I tell them in advance of the class, and I tell them they need to become Tony Hayward. They need to do a better job, which is, by the way, a low bar, representing BP. And give me a 60 to 90 second video and then share it with colleagues and get feedback on it. And then we're going to call on people in the class.

(00:57:47):
In other words, for every idea, I try to think of something. And this is all, by the way, this is all front-loaded. And by the end of the class we're not doing this so much. But I try to give them an exercise that causes them to actually take that idea and implement it. Find people, oh, for branding. Write a personal brand statement, get some feedback on it, then write it again. How do you want to be known? Which is by the way, useful to you because you're a second-year MBA, you're going to go in the job market. What do you want people to think about you? How do you want people to respond to you? How do you want to be known? So I basically take for every topic and have them do it. And then the coach, their person, their coach, who is responsible for 23 of these people, give them feedback on this.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:44):
I could see how this makes a big impact on someone's life.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:58:49):
Yeah. And so at the end, I had a student a couple years ago said to me, "It is not that I got more feedback and more useful feedback from your class than I did in any other class. I got more useful feedback in your class than I did on every other class I took combined."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:09):
I can see why. Let's talk about the last power. So we've talked through six already. We have only one more to go, which is maybe the one that probably upsets people most, which is that once you have power, people will forget what you did to get there. Talk about what that looks like and is that a power or is it more just like this is what you should know about.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (00:59:28):
And I put in rule seven for the following reason. In spite of everything that you and I have been talking about, many people in a stage of, I don't know, denial or something, say, I'm worried that if I do this, at the end... People believe that the world is homeostatic. It is not. That it's going to adjust, but whatever. At the end I will be brought low. They have the myth of Icarus in their head. You fly too close to the sun, your wings are going to melt, you're going to be brought down. And so I try to convince them, partly through a lecture and partly through rule seven. And some of the principles that I talk about in rule seven. That, in fact, life is not homeostatic at all. That life is actually self-fulfilling. If I believe you're powerful, you will become more powerful.

(01:00:26):
If I believe you have no power, you will wind up with almost no power, and that therefore it is all forgotten and forgiven. And I begin, I believe I begin. But if not, I could begin with the story of the South Carolina Senator who says nasty things about Trump, and then Lindsey Graham, and becomes Trump's biggest acolyte. And the New York Times, of course, is fascinated by this. How can you say all these horrible things about Trump and now be his, basically have your lips affixed to some part of his anatomy? And Lindsey's answer is, I want to be relevant. He's the President of the United States. This goes back to the judgment. I like him, this, that, the other thing. He's the president. If I want to get legislation passed, he, by the way, has taken over the Republican Party.

(01:01:22):
If I want to get stuff done, I need to have him on my side. And like many narcissists and egomaniacs, it is not a good way to get them on your side by saying nasty things about them. So this is the pragmatics. People forget that Bill Gates stole the code on which Microsoft has built. People forget that Jeffrey Epstein, after being convicted of sex offenses, was still having dinners with members of the royal family and members of the New York media elite. People forget that Martha Stewart, who served time in jail, has a brand that's never been more valuable. People forget all this stuff.

(01:02:19):
I still remember sitting in the office of someone whose name I won't use, but I'll use enough that if somebody wanted to search it out, you could. So I am sitting in this guy's office and he's, by the way, a Jewish man. He's got pictures of him with the Pope, he's got pictures of him with Ronald Reagan. He's got pictures with him, with all these people. What is his secret? He, by the way, took a company into bankruptcy. People lost literally billions of dollars. He was fined. He lost money, but he walked away with about $700 million. It turns out, $700 million makes you a big deal. Lives at the biggest house in Los Angeles or one of the biggest houses in Los Angeles. I can't keep up with the construction of the big houses. People want to be close to money, power, and success, and they will overlook your flaws to be close to you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:18):
And again, you talk about this in the book. You're not describing how the world should work. This is just how it is, and this is how you can be successful in the world that we live in.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:03:28):
And by the way, this is how the world not only is, but how it was and how it will be. Because these ideas are not something that I sat down one day and made up or something. These ideas, everything that I talk about, including this last one, has social science and logic behind it. So you can explain not only what is, but why it is.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:58):
So, let's talk about Trump for a bit. At the beginning of your book, you say that basically you were going to write a book about why Trump is so successful and what he's done so well. And your realization is no one's going to pay attention if here's how to be like Trump. And essentially, if you think about all these rules, it's clear he is very good at all of these things.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:04:16):
That's correct. By the way, not because he read the book, but because he does it through trial and error or something.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:22):
So when people hear that, they're like, I don't want to be Trump. I don't like how Trump is. I don't want to be seen that way. Do you have any thoughts on just how to make people feel comfortable following some of these powers and building power, knowing that, oh wow, maybe he's the epitome of some of this stuff?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:04:38):
I will tell you a story. In 1993, a woman named Laura Esserman, who's a doctor, took my class. She claims publicly that this is the only class at Stanford for which she did all the reading. By the way, while she was getting her MBA at Stanford, she was having her first child and practicing medicine full time. Laura Esserman said to me one day, "You have a case. You have cases on all these people doing evil things. Why don't you ever write a case about somebody doing good things?" And of course, I wrote a case about her. So she comes to the class. Case was published in probably 2003, 2004.

(01:05:31):
She comes to the class and the students are, what is the right word? Hard on her? That would be a modest thing. The students eviscerate her because she is incredibly smart, incredibly well-intentioned, but she will not network. She says, "I don't have time for schmoozing." She will not do almost any of the stuff that we talk about today. So she and her husband, Michael Endicott, two of my closest friends in the world, and I go out to lunch afterwards. And smoke is coming out of her ears and she is pissed off. And this is a very accomplished woman and a very smart woman. And she's pissed. I said to her, "Laura, you have boundless energy and boundless intelligence. You're a force of nature. Let me discuss something from the past subject of physics.

(01:06:39):
You are creating friction. With enough force you can overcome the friction. If you reduce the friction, just think how much more you could accomplish." And she looked at me and changed. And I will tell you, and I've said this publicly, because I get to introduce her for all the awards she's won, and she's now won a ton of them. Including Time Magazine 2016 list of a hundred most influential people in the world. And I say to people, and I say it with pride, that of all the things I've done in my life, the thing I'm most proud of and most proud of is creating Laura Esserman.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:20):
That is an awesome story and a really good way of thinking about this from a different angle.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:07:24):
Yeah, no, and I said to Laura, I said, "You want to make profound changes in the drug development process. You want to make profound changes in whether or not we learn from the treatments that are being given to people. You want to make profound changes in the connection between research and teaching, research and practice. You want to do all these things. If you are going to accomplish any of these things, you need to cross the bridge." And she hasn't crossed the bridge completely and she and I joke about it. But she crossed the bridge a lot and she has accomplished incredible things. She's won every cancer award that can be given. And by the way, she's won all these awards for the American Cancer Society, who she fought with. She's won these awards from the Susan Cohen Foundation, who she fought with.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:20):
This is an incredible example of the opening quote to your book that I have here. "If you want power to be used for good, more good people need to have power."

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:08:28):
That's exactly right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:30):
And I like the, it's like a quote attributed to me, is how you...

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:08:34):
Yeah. Well, I don't remember saying it, but somebody said, I said it. I'll take credit for it. I said to Laura, "You want to change medicine? Medicine is not going to change without the application of power and influence." If change was going to happen, it would've happened already. You have to take on entrenched interests. She has a whole thing, which we need not go into because it's pretty technical, on screening. She said, everybody's getting a mammogram every year beyond a certain age, which is stupid for a variety of reasons. You can read, she was on the PBS NewsHour about this. This is what got her in trouble with the radiologists. The radiologists, of course, are selling screening. She said, there's some people that need to be screened every month, and there's some people that need to be screened never because of their genetics. She wants custom tailored screening or precision screening. Anyway, she fights everybody.

(01:09:29):
Richard Blum, Dianne Feinstein's husband, both Dianne and Richard Blum are now deceased, was at a thing where she launched the Athena Project. The Athena Project, she's now, with her collaborators, collecting data on the diagnosis and treatment and outcome for 150,000 patients in the University of California Healthcare System. So I'm supposed to give some opening talk to provide entertainment. And Dick Blum is there. Dick Blum, of course is wealthy. He's Dianne Feinstein's husband. I said to him, "Dick, how did Laura get you here?" And I still remember, I think this is a quote in one of the books I wrote. He said to me, he said, "Look." He said, "I've learned that at the end of the day when Laura asks you to do something, you may say no, but at the end of the day, you're going to do it anyway. Save yourself the aggravation."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:20):
Oh man, I feel like you're just endlessly full of good stories that we could just keep going on and on. Let me try to summarize the rules of power real quick and see if anything else emerges. And then have just a couple more questions. So the Seven Rules of Power, get out of your own way, break the rules, show up in a powerful fashion, create a powerful brand, network relentlessly, use your power, and understand that once you've acquired power, that what you did to get there will be forgiven, forgotten, or both. Let me ask you a question, maybe half in jest. You teach people how to acquire power. Why aren't you the most powerful man in the world?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:10:57):
Ah, that's a very good question. To which I have a very good answer. I have a colleague who's unfortunately now deceased, by the name of James G. March, who was a very, very distinguished scholar. And James March said to me many, many years ago, something which is completely true. You can have power or you can have autonomy, but you cannot have both. And I have chosen to live a life of freedom, autonomy. I could tell you stories that would bring tears to your eyes. I'll tell you one. We had a dean of the Business School whose wife was dying of cancer, and she was projected to die in the fall. So the Business School goes to him and says, we'll give you the fall off to be with your wife. She lives until June. It's now winter.

(01:11:46):
You have responsibilities as the Dean of the Business School. You have to meet with alumni. You have to go around and raise money. You have to show up at events, university events. I do not necessarily think that is how he wanted to spend the winter and spring quarters, but that's what you have to do. When I wanted Jack Valenti to come to my class, I did not call Jack Valenti. I called Judy Dickey. Judy Dickey was his assistant. Judy Dickey controlled his schedule. I meet Jack on such and such a day. He can't make it on that day. Fine. I can adjust the schedule. Can he make it on this day?

(01:12:24):
When I wanted my friend Gary Loveman, who ran Harrah's and Caesars and then was the number two executive at Aetna, I want him to come to my class. I called Reggie Kirk. I didn't call Gary Loveman. And that's all you need to know. I do not have an assistant who controls my schedule. I control my schedule. You will not find my Outlook calendar on any website, on any computer. I want autonomy. If I said to you, "Lenny, I will give you $1 billion, or for that matter, $10 billion if you can buy-"

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:01):
Yes.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:13:02):
Wait, if you can have last week again. You can't. You can't. Time goes in only one direction. I want control of my time. It is much more important to me, being a Dean or an Associate Dean, a job that I was asked to do. I took one academic administrative job. I'm actually memorialized, believe it or not, in the Stanford Record, as having led, and this is according to my expenses, the Nobel Prize winner who was Dean at the time, that I led the biggest and most successful transformation in the history of higher education. I did it. I did it once. I didn't like it. Life is too short. I want to do what I like.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:52):
That's a really profound point that I think people don't think about, is there's always this drive to acquire power. And your point is that there's a big downside, which is a lack of autonomy. Yeah. You think about the, as I was trying to get Satya Nadella on the podcast, and I talked to his comms people, and they're like, every hour for the next three months is booked already. We know what he's doing. He's extremely booked. And you think about the president, obviously at Elon. I totally get what you're saying.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:14:17):
It is true, and I don't want to do that. And by the way, power also comes with enormous visibility. Donald Trump has done, for 40 years, what he's now being accused of doing, the tax stuff, all this stuff. He's been a grifter all his life. But when you become President, people are going to look at things that in the past they would not have looked at. You become president of a university, you're going to have scrutiny as the President of Harvard Law and the President of Stanford Law, when they both had to resign, in one case because of plagiarism, in another case because of research misconduct.

(01:14:55):
Power comes. You're going to be put under a microscope. People are going to look at what car you drive. They're going to look at who you go out with. They're going to look at how you spend your time. They're going to look at how you associate with, you'll have no privacy. You'll have very little control over your life. Everybody will feel completely free to dissect you in public, in private, whatever. And you'll face the trust dilemma. When you are rich and powerful the question will be, are people praising you, are people associating with you because of you or because of the position you hold?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:41):
Yeah. Do you spend any time, just to follow this thread in your class, convincing people stop being so obsessed with power, stop being so obsessed with becoming the top of everything? Is that a part of the class?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:15:52):
No.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:52):
Or is it just...

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:15:53):
No. I teach them, they see we have a class on the price of power. I bring out Rudy Crew. Rudy Crew was the New York School's Chancellor under Rudy Giuliani. By the way, he tells many interesting stories about Rudy Giuliani, who did not just become the joke that he is overnight. He's worked hard to become that. But in any event, he tells. And one year, one year, because his daughter at that time was living in the Bay Area, when I asked him about the effect of the positions he held, Head of Miami Dade County Schools, Head of New York City schools.

(01:16:29):
Had Hillary ever won, he would've been Secretary of Education. Literally. There's Lauren in the room. And he said to the class, Jeffrey asked me the question, "Why don't we let Lauren answer it?" By the time she was finished, there was not a dry eye in the room. What is it like to be the child? What is it like to be the significant other of these people? And you know the answer to that because you can see the suicides, the divorce rates. There is a price that not only you pay, but a price that your family pays.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:09):
I think that's a really good balance to the entire conversation. Maybe just as a last question, what if we give the audience a homework assignment to work on these power rules? What's something that you'd recommend someone try to do? I know it's probably dependent on what they're good at, not good at. What's something that they could do to start moving towards one of these rules?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:17:28):
So what I would say, and it comes from something that you talked about in our conversation at several times, which is this is uncomfortable. Okay. So if I want you to do something uncomfortable, I could say, "Lenny, go do this uncomfortable thing on your own." Or I can say, "Lenny, I want you to do this with help, with social support." And so the first thing I would say to someone is, if you think this is uncomfortable, or if you think you're not skilled at this, get coaching. Get a coach.

(01:18:03):
I send out regularly the list of the coaches who work with my online and on-campus classes. Happy to do it. And they're happy to have the business. Get a coach. Get a personal board of directors like they talk about in the Wall Street Journal. In other words, get people who will give you advice, give you social support, and hold you accountable. That's the very first thing I would tell people to do. It's hard to do anything on your own. If I said to you, "Lenny, I want you to start an extraordinarily successful podcast and I want you to do it without any help." You would not be where you are today. So that simple principle, get help.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:48):
It feels like a part of rule number one. Get out of your own way. Ask for help. Jeffrey, I was nervous for this podcast because I thought this was going to be super uncomfortable stuff. It turns out all of this makes so much sense, and there's a really nice way of framing all of these rules, and there's so much reason to actually invest in these skills. So I really appreciate you putting in the time being here, sharing all these stories and insights. Is there anything else you want to share as a kind of a final note or something to leave listeners with before we wrap up? We did it. We covered everything?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:19:19):
No, I'm happy. I'm happy you're a very good interviewer, which is why your podcast is so successful.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:24):
I appreciate that.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:19:25):
I'm happy to spend the time with you, and I hope whoever listens to this will, I hope, first of all, there'll be a lot of listeners, but I also hope that they will find it useful.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:32):
I know they will. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they, or find your book, I guess, if they want to learn more? And then how can listeners be useful to you?

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:19:41):
So you can find my book anywhere where books are sold. Don't look at a physical bookstore because nobody carries it, including actually Stanford bookstore, where they run out of it if people... And you can find it on Amazon. Seven Rules of Power. So that's how you can find the book. By the way, at the end of the book I talk about, I have a personal website, jeffreypfeffer.com. If you go to that website, you can find my course outline. So you can take the course on your own if you want, or get somebody or take it in a group of people.

(01:20:13):
You can find research, you can find articles, you can find columns. You can follow me on LinkedIn or I don't do Twitter anymore, but you can follow me on LinkedIn. So there are a lot of resources available for this. A company was once thinking of hiring me to give a talk in their organization, and the woman who wound up hiring me said, "When I was discussing you and arguing that we should hire you for this presentation, one of the people in the committee said, is he a good presenter?" And her answer, I love this. I remember this. Her answer was, "He's a fabulous educator." My job is to educate. That is why I have done what I have done for now more than 50 years.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:03):
Holy moly. I didn't even realize that.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:21:06):
For more than 50 years, I have been in the business of education. Not just about power, but about many other things as well. But I'm in the education business, so I'm happy to provide people with the resources, with the readings. The Seven Rules of Power is well footnoted. It talks at the end about we could reach out for the coaches. You can go to the website and get the book. But I think consistent with what you and I have talked about, if all you do is read, you're not going to make very much progress. You have to do it. You cannot learn tennis by reading about tennis, or by watching a movie about Serena or Venus Williams. You have to actually get out on the court and do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:51):
Which is a good plug for your other book, the Knowing-Doing Gap, which actually helps you with the skill, which you can also find all your finer retailers. Jeffrey Pfeffer, thank you so much for being here.

Jeffrey Pfeffer (01:22:04):
Thank you for having me on your show.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:06):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at LennysPodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Jerry Colonna (00:00:00):
We're socialized to bullshit not only ourselves, but everybody else, especially in the entrepreneurial community. All our companies are moving up into the right. Every product is working. We don't really have any problems because we're crushing it, and that's just a lie. The question that I often ask is how have I been complicit in creating the conditions I say I don't want. The purpose of this question is actually to evoke your own agency. A perfect example of that would be, I say I don't want to feel busy all the time, but the truth of the matter is I feel really unnerved and disconcerted if my agenda isn't jam-packed. So if you want to create a high-functioning team, do your work, and it starts with the person who has the most power.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:49):
Today, my guest is Jerry Colonna. Jerry is one of the most well-known and respected executive coaches in the world. He's co-founder and CEO of Reboot, an executive and leadership development firm grounded in the belief that better humans make better leaders. Prior to coaching, Jerry co-founded Flatiron Partners with Fred Wilson, which ended up being one of the most successful early-stage investment funds in the world. He's also a partner at JPMorgan Chase and the author of two books, Reboot and Reunion. As you might expect, this ended up being a very real and very open conversation about being busy and self-inquiry and the dangers of a growth mindset and the reasons that leaders and teams most often fail, and it's not what you think. Also, we talk about a very simple equation that Jerry and his team use to cultivate great leaders.

(00:01:37):
This is an episode that everybody should listen to and spend time with. It'll make you a better person, a better partner, and a better leader. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. Also, if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you now get a year free of Linear, Superhuman, Notion, Perplexity, and Granola. Check it out at lennysnewsletter.com and click bundle. With that, I bring you Jerry Colonna.

(00:02:05):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next-generation A/B testing and feature management platform built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams. Companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth and for understanding the performance of new features. And Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does.

(00:02:35):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most was our experimentation platform where I could set up experiments easily, troubleshoot issues, and analyze performance all on my own. Eppo does all that and more with advanced statistical methods that can help you shave weeks off experiment time and accessible UI for diving deeper into performance and out-of-the-box reporting that helps you avoid annoying prolonged analytics cycles. Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insights with your team, sparking new ideas for the A/B testing flywheel. Eppo powers experimentation across every use case, including product, growth, machine learning, monetization, and email marketing. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com/lenny and 10X your experiment velocity. That's geteppo.com/lenny.

(00:03:22):
This episode is brought to you by Contentsquare, the analytics platform that helps companies build better digital experiences. Ever wonder why customers drop off before converting or why some pages perform better than others? Contentsquare takes the guesswork out of digital experiences, giving you real-time insights into how users interact with your site or app. With AI-powered analytics, automatic frustration detection, and clear visualizations, you'll know exactly what's working and what's holding your customers back. Whether you're optimizing an e-commerce checkout, refining a B2B lead flow, or improving a mobile app experience, Contentsquare pinpoints exactly what needs fixing and why. Contentsquare powers better customer journeys across 1.3 million websites and apps. Discover the insights you've been missing at contentsquare.com/lenny. Jerry, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Jerry Colonna (00:04:19):
Well, thanks for having me, Lenny. It's really a delight to meet you and to be with you today.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:24):
I want to start with a very classic Jerry Colonna piece of advice that I've heard you share in other places, and I just want more people to hear this advice, and this is a question that you ask people when things aren't going their way, and I'll give you a hint. The question contains the word complicit.

Jerry Colonna (00:04:40):
Right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:41):
Can you share this question and why it's so important to ask this of yourself?

Jerry Colonna (00:04:45):
The question that I often ask is how have I been complicit in creating the conditions I say I don't want? And if it's helpful, let me break down the question a little bit.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:55):
Please.

Jerry Colonna (00:04:58):
So I purposely chose the word complicit because complicit does not mean responsible, and that's a really important distinction. And as I often say, to understand the word complicit, think of the word accomplice. As I will share, you are driving the getaway car, you're not sticking up the bank teller. The second half of that question is I say I don't want. And sometimes people hear that question and they interpret it as, how have I been responsible for the shit in my life? And that is not the purpose of this question. The purpose of this question is actually to evoke your own agency, is to look at the ways in which you may have been diluting yourself.

(00:05:56):
A perfect example of that would be, I say I don't want to feel busy all the time, but the truth of the matter is I feel really unnerved and disconcerted if my agenda isn't jam-packed. And the reason that this is all really important is part of my approach not only to coaching, but to the process of growing up, is to use what I call radical self-inquiry, to really cut through our own delusions and say, how does it serve me to feel completely busy to the point where I feel exhausted? And perhaps there's another more conscious way of getting that feeling than feeling like crap all the time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:56):
This is a good segue to something that I hear you. You have this equation that you and your firm use to think about how to create and cultivate great leaders, and it includes one of the variables is radical self-inquiry. Can you share this equation and just how you work with folks to build this in them?

Jerry Colonna (00:07:14):
Sure. I'll tell a little story about that. I remember one time I was, this is how the equation came to be. I was doing a talk, I think here in Boulder at Naropa University where I used to be on the board of trustees. It's a Buddhist university, and as is often the case, I'm winging it as I go and I'm walking around probably without shoes on because that's what I do. And there was a dry erase board behind me and I was trying to explain what it was that I do, what it was that I encourage people to do. And I jumped up at the board and I wrote practical skills. And in writing that, what I was trying to convey, what it is that people typically come to a coach for. They want to understand how to do their job. They want to understand how to live. They want to understand the how.

(00:08:11):
And then, I wrote plus, and then I sketched out radical self-inquiry. And I said in that moment, I said, "People will come and ask me how, and I will drive them crazy because I will say something like, tell me about your father, or tell me why you chose to be in the job you're in the first place, or tell me about your relationship to money, or tell me about your relationship to self-worth." And then, I expanded it and I put another plus sign and I said, "Shared experiences." And then, I drew an equals equation line underneath the whole thing, and I said, "Enhanced leadership plus greater resiliency."

(00:09:05):
And so, the equation is practical skills plus radical self-inquiry plus shared experiences, that is the process of actually talking about the craziness that goes on in your head equals greater leadership. That all makes sense. But then, there was this other piece, enhanced resilience. And when I do this on a dry erase board, I will often circle that phrase, and I say that is the purpose of this whole thing, because the truth is, if you follow my story at all, you know that in my late 30s, the depression that had really marked most of my life had gotten so bad that despite my outward success, I was suicidal and lost.

(00:09:58):
And I will turn to the audience and I say, "I get you want to be a great CEO, I get you want to be a great executive, but what I really care about is you not killing yourself in the process." So if we take a step back, the whole point of what we refer to as the equation really boils down to that point, how do we grow up and become the leaders, the adults we were born to be without feeling like crap?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:31):
And there's this huge implication here that a lot of people think that when they reach a certain point, become successful, make a certain amount of money, get a beautiful house, still be happy. And essentially what you're saying here is that's very often not the case. Maybe in most cases, not the case.

Jerry Colonna (00:10:48):
It's not only not the case, it's the big lie that we're socialized with since childhood. I remember one time I was on the road doing a talk for, I was promoting my first book, Reboot, and I was at, I think it's called the Fitler Club in Philadelphia. I was doing a fireside chat. And after talking with my conversation partner, a guy named Chris Fralic who was one of the co-founders at First Round, really, really good guy. We turned to the audience and there was a Q&A as there often is, and this young guy shoots his hand up and he introduces himself and he says, "I'm 19." And he looks over to his right and his mother's sitting there and he says, "And my mother brought me here," which I laughed.

(00:11:40):
And he said, "So what you're telling me is you don't have to be an asshole to be successful." And I could not think of a better summation of everything that I'm about than for a 19-year-old kid to look up and say, "You don't have to be an asshole to be successful." And of course, the corollary to that is you don't have to feel miserable just because you're trying to create a career.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:12):
As people start to think about this and think, okay, I feel like I've been heading in this direction of I just need to keep climbing the ladder, making more money, as they hear you talk, what's the pivot that folks should make in their mind around where they should actually be heading? What is a direction where they'll end up not wanting to kill themselves, in spite of being successful?

Jerry Colonna (00:12:34):
To be clear, not everyone ends up in that level of depression, but the hack, if you will, is consciousness. So what do I mean by that? Part of what makes radical self-inquiry radical is we're socialized not to ask certain kinds of questions. So for example, someone says, "It's really important for me to be ambitious and achieve a particular goal." What's radical, a radical question to ask is, and what will that do for you? What is it that you believe being "successful" will do for you? How do you define success? Where does that come from?

(00:13:30):
In Reboot, my first book, I tell the story of what I refer to as my pursuit of lemon drops. And briefly, when I was a boy, there was a lot... I grew up with an enormous amount of chaos and insecurity, financial and otherwise. And a big source of stability in my life were my mother's parents, my grandfather and grandmother. And Grandpa Guido, who was an ice man and emigrated from southern Italy in early 20th century, always seemed to have, well, he had this endless supply of lemon drops, and they were always kept in this green pantry outside of the kitchen. And for me, the stability and what I considered wealth seemed to match to this notion of this endless supply of lemon drops. And when I got to my 30s and I was outwardly successful and I was a hot shot BC, I had lemon drops, but I didn't feel safe, which was a mindful.

(00:15:02):
And so, I told that story in Reboot as part of my exploration into the core question of how did my relationship to money shape my career choices, shape my school choices, shape my own sense of safety and self-worth? So long-winded response to your question, what I encourage people to do is to ask themselves these kinds of questions so that they can raise their level of consciousness so that they can be in the driver's seat of their lives and not some learned behavior that they developed as a child to answer perhaps their parents or grandparents' anxieties.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:56):
I feel like a lot of people hearing this are afraid to ask these sorts of questions. The reason they don't ask these questions is because they worry that this is going to be like, okay, I got to quit my job, move to the woods, give up all these luxuries they have. I don't even want to think about that. I got a whole family to support. I got to succeed. Advice for getting over that hump of just like-

Jerry Colonna (00:16:17):
So let's just pause, Lenny. Okay, so what you're doing in this moment is empathetically imagining what may be going on for your listener, but the empathy is actually based on your own question because you invited me on the show, you knew I was going to get to this point. So I'm imagining that as you take this in, that thought stream shows up for you. "Jerry," says Lenny, "If I open up that closet, all the shit's going to fall out, and what am I going to do with it?" Does that resonate at all?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:58):
This is why I was nervous to have you on this podcast. I knew what you-

Jerry Colonna (00:17:05):
So answer my question.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:07):
I don't think it's that strong for me to be afraid of that because I've taken a different path already and gotten off the career ladder climbing treadmill. On the other hand, back to your original question, we talked about being busy. I'm very guilty of that. I'm constantly trying to do less, but constantly doing more, and my life is just very busy.

Jerry Colonna (00:17:28):
Thank you for giving me more of that answer. And trust me, your listeners are going to appreciate you being fully there in just the way you were. So let's take a step back. The fear is, if I can reflect back to your original question, the fear is if I go there, I don't know what's going to happen as a consequence of that. If I pause and ask myself, is this relationship working out for me? I might end up leaving this relationship. If I pause and ask myself if this career isn't working for me, I might leave my career.

(00:18:25):
And the good news bad news is that's true. That is absolutely true. And if we look at some of the other observations we were making before like anxiety and depression, we have this belief system that if I pay no attention to the thing that I'm afraid of, it's somehow going to magically go away. If we pay no attention to the source of discomfort, it's somehow going to go away. And that's not actually how life works. More often than not, what we do is we respond to the source of challenge, whether it's a discomfort in our relationship, whether it's a discomfort in the way my life has unfolded. We respond to it by plasting over band-aids and sometimes they're relatively healthy, we become obsessed with working out, or sometimes they're unhealthy. We become obsessed with work or substance abuse or that kind of thing. Or sometimes, and this is super popular right now, we lean into what I would call as a spiritual bypassing where we go to Peru and we go do ayahuasca or we spend the weekend doing mushrooms with friends...

(00:20:08):
And what we're really not doing, Lenny, is confronting the parts of ourselves that need some tending to because we're afraid of the consequences. But I'll tell you a quick quote. One of my favorite books is Bruce Springsteen's autobiography, and about in the middle of the book, he has this passage where he talks about having spent 25 years in psychoanalysis. So let me just let that statement land. Bruce fucking Springsteen, 25 years in psychoanalysis. And he has this passage where he talks about the unsorted baggage of our childhood. And what he rightly asserts is that we all have unsorted baggage, and at some point we're going to pay the price of not sorting that baggage. And the price more often than not is in tears.

(00:21:21):
Now, this is Bruce Springsteen talking about this. This is not some airy-fairy transpersonal Jerry Colonna coach. And the reason I draw that out is we as children are socialized not to develop these consciousness skills. We are socialized to develop what I would call bypassing skills. And as he correctly points out, if you continue to bypass sorting out your baggage, there's going to come a day where you're going to have to pay that price. It could be in your own depression, it could be in, I've seen this a thousand times Lenny, entrepreneurs sabotaging their successful businesses because the belief system from their childhood goes something like, I don't deserve success so let me blow it up. We put this all under the rubric of midlife, but I don't know, when does midlife begin, 35? When does it end, 70? What I do know is it's the bulk of our adulthood.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:46):
Okay, I think you've done an excellent job convincing me and others to spend time on this now, and I think there's an assumption of it gets harder, the tears get more intense as you wait longer. There's this ticking time bomb that better some amount of tears now than 10 times more tears later. Is that right?

Jerry Colonna (00:23:04):
Well said.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:06):
Okay. So coming back to this equation, I think I want to give people some things to do now that they may be likely convinced, okay, I should really rethink what I'm doing. So back to the equation, practical skills plus radical self-inquiry plus shared experiences equals enhanced leadership and greater resilience. So the three things you can work on are practical skills, radical self-inquiry, shared experiences, skills I think people get. So radical self-inquiry, these are essentially questions to dig into what drives you, what makes you happy. What are some questions again that people should be asking there as they're listening or maybe after they finish listening?

Jerry Colonna (00:23:40):
In the time since I've been a coach, which is now going on 27 years, the popularity of journaling has gone up, which is awesome. And part of what happens is people journal, but they don't know what they should be journaling or how they should. So let me give some questions then, and this is a way to approach it. Let's imagine that what we're trying to do, whether we're sitting in meditation, whether we're journaling, whether we're taking time away, we're just pausing and starting to ask ourselves questions. So my famous questions include things like, what am I not saying that I need to say? So let's imagine ourselves in a relationship that's not working.

(00:24:30):
Talk about something that could be terrifying. What am I not saying in that relationship that I need to say? By the way, this is a good question to ask if one is responsible for leading people too. Corollary questions to that would be, what am I saying that's not being heard? And then, of course, what's being said that I'm not hearing? So if we just pause and look at those four questions, how have I been complicit in creating the conditions I say I don't want? What am I not saying that I need to say? What am I saying that's not being heard? And what's being said that I'm not hearing? Can you feel the power of all of that in those questions?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:25):
Yeah. Scary questions.

Jerry Colonna (00:25:27):
They are scary questions. You know you're in the radical self-inquiry zone when the questions take your breath away, when the questions, and by the way, you don't have to share the answers to these questions with anybody but yourself. Now, there could be some power in sharing them in a group of friends and sharing them with a group of colleagues, sharing them with a coach, sharing them with a therapist. But the most important person with whom you should share the answers is oneself. This is a little bit of Buddhism here. Self-delusion along with attachment are the biggest contributors to our own suffering. Self-delusion. Everything's great. How you doing? Everything's great. Bullshit. Can we just not bullshit each other?

(00:26:30):
So let me just pause. Those are just four questions. My first book Reboot has a set of questions after every single chapter. We also have a journal that we put out that has questions and questions, but the more important thing to take away from this is questions that startle us, questions that may cause us to be a little afraid of the answer, that's where the gold is.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:02):
And we'll point people to the book for many more of these questions and the worksheets. For the third party equation, shared experiences, can you explain what that is?

Jerry Colonna (00:27:11):
We were talking about socialization, for example. Prior to launching Reboot, the company, my co-founder, Ali Schultz and I, the roots of Reboot the company began with me designing, or Ali and I designing these boot camps. And the original iteration of the boot camp, we used to call CEO Boot Camp because it was originally we would get first-time CEOs together and we would do a bait and switch. We would pretend to sell them practical skills, and then I would start asking really tough questions like who would you be without the story of who you are? It's like what?

(00:27:57):
The notion of shared experience as an important component grew out of that. Because what would happen is imagine sitting in a circle of people who just have your back, who really care about you as a person. And imagine then discussing some of the answers to those questions. Who would you be without the story of who you are? What is it that you wish that people in your life knew about you, but you're too afraid to tell them? And imagine sitting in a group of people who can just hold that space without fixing you, without telling you what you're doing right or wrong? We, too often than not, especially in what I would say the entrepreneurial community are socialized to bullshit not only ourselves, but everybody else. All our companies are moving up into the right, every product that's working, we don't really have any problems because we're crushing it, and that's just a lie. Imagine having the capacity to be in relationship with people where you can just tell the truth. That's what shared experiences are about.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:26):
My wife does a women's circle where they gather and just share what's really going on within in their lives. And it's-

Jerry Colonna (00:29:26):
That's it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:34):
And it's very confidential. There's a ritual to it, and it feels like that's a really good avenue for things like that.

Jerry Colonna (00:29:42):
What circle do you sit in?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:44):
No circles. This is my circle.

Jerry Colonna (00:29:49):
But there is something powerful here. I think in the last 15 years, the rise of podcasts, good podcasts. What I think what happens is let's hope this is happening for your audience right now, good quality intimate conversation between people who are authentic and real, creates space for someone to be authentic and real, even if it's just with themselves. So you're doing a mitzvah, you're doing a good deed by creating this space.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:24):
Thanks, Jerry. Let's go back to the busyness point, and I'll talk about myself a bit to get it real again, because I think it's also something a lot of people struggle with. I listen to this, they're just like, I'm so busy, and every time someone ask me how I'm doing, busy, so busy, like swirly eyes emoji, swirly eyes emoji.

Jerry Colonna (00:30:45):
With a little head shake.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:47):
That's right. And the melting face emoji. And that's very much me. And it's funny because I started this journey of the newsletter of just like I call the project avoid getting a real job. And it was just like, cool, just do this newsletter thing, not have the job. It'll be chill, write an email once a week. But I just find myself taking on endlessly more and more. And for me, I feel like the drive is it's just fun to see it grow and for it to keep building and doing well.

(00:31:17):
This reminds me, there's a quote that Will Smith shared once that I think you'll like. Someone asked him what it's like to be famous, and he's like, "Really awesome as you're going up to fame. Pretty okay as a famous person. Really bad when you lose that fame." And that's how it feels with the growth of this thing. It's just like growth is up. Oh, life's good, and then it starts to stall. I'm like, oh, no, it's all going to fall apart. So I think that's where a lot of that comes from for me. It's just like, oh, what's next? I got to, let's see what else I can do here.

Jerry Colonna (00:31:44):
Well, how do you feel about yourself when you're on that growth trajectory?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:50):
I feel great.

Jerry Colonna (00:31:52):
Say more.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:53):
I feel like I'm achieving and heading in a... Part of it is just fun. It's like fun to win. So it's just like, yeah, we're doing it. It's working.

Jerry Colonna (00:32:07):
And when you're not growing, how do you feel about yourself?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:13):
About myself. There's this sense that it's all over. Oh, maybe it's all going to fall apart, and maybe I'm not as good at this as I thought, and maybe-

Jerry Colonna (00:32:25):
Okay, so stay in that spot for a moment. So imagine, and I don't know that this is true, but I can imagine that there's a little whispery voice in your head that's always there that says, "Lenny, you're not as good as you think you are. In fact, Lenny, they might even find out."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:50):
Yep. Yeah, imposter syndrome.

Jerry Colonna (00:32:52):
Oh, shit. So by being busy and by being on that growth trajectory, that voice maybe sounds a little less persistent, maybe a little less loud. Now, I want to offer a different potential. What if you could enjoy the puzzle of trying to create something new, trying to create magic, something out of nothing, but it doesn't matter to your sense of self-esteem if you succeed or fail. What if what drove you was not quieting that voice, but what drove you was, oh, this is just fun? Seth Godin, who's a dear, dear friend of mine, talks about art projects.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:55):
Also a former podcast guest.

Jerry Colonna (00:33:57):
So what if you just approached the project as if it was an art project? I think it's going to show up this way. What if it turns out it's wrong? What if it's this? What if it's that? And your sense of self-esteem is not attached to the outcome.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:16):
What's interesting is that's how I started this whole thing. I had no intention of it being a career and way I make a living. It was just, this is cool, people seem to like it, I enjoy it. Let's just see where it goes. No expectations.

Jerry Colonna (00:34:28):
And then what happened?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:29):
And then it worked.

Jerry Colonna (00:34:30):
It became successful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:31):
That's right. It worked out.

Jerry Colonna (00:34:33):
Right. It became successful, meaning you developed an audience, meaning you developed a following.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:41):
And then, income. That was a big part of it.

Jerry Colonna (00:34:43):
And then you developed an income, and then the stakes went up, and then all of a sudden, my heart, the anxiety.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:54):
Not quite that strongly. At times it is, but there's a bit of just, oh, wow, I am relying on this now. I can't just let it fall apart.

Jerry Colonna (00:35:03):
Because my life would fall apart if I let it fall apart.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:07):
Yeah, life would change in a big way if this whole thing ends.

Jerry Colonna (00:35:11):
Right. Right. So what you're talking about, what we're talking about right now, remember before I said in Buddhism, we talk about self-delusion and attachment. Now, we're talking about attachment. When we become attached to the outcome, we inadvertently fuel our own suffering. When we become attached, and in this case, okay, I get it. There's a financial reality. This is important because it helps pay the bills, if it doesn't entirely pay the bills. Great. Got it. Fabulous. But really the deeper attachment is see, I'm not nothing. See, I'm not a nobody, I'm a somebody, and that's the source of the suffering.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:09):
That is so true. That is very much a part of what has driven me is I was always a very shy kid growing up, and I don't think people expected a lot of me except my mom and dad, I guess. And so, I always had the sense, I'll show them, I'll show them what I could do, and that's always, it's this chip on the shoulder thing that I know drives a lot of people.

Jerry Colonna (00:36:29):
How old are you, Lenny?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:30):
43.

Jerry Colonna (00:36:30):
Okay. So maybe now at 43, you can take in the fact that you are somebody regardless of what you do. What's your wife's name?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:48):
Michelle.

Jerry Colonna (00:36:49):
Is she going to love you even if the podcast fails?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:52):
Absolutely.

Jerry Colonna (00:36:55):
What, is she an idiot? No, she's a smart person. The people who actually know you and care about you may be proud of your efforts, but their love for you is not dependent upon its success. And that's like a rewiring. Do you have children?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:27):
Yeah, we got a 22-month-old now.

Jerry Colonna (00:37:30):
Oh, mazel tov. That's wonderful. My children are 34, 32, and 28. So I'll speak like the old man that I am. When we take that test, that spelling test, and we stick it with magnets on the refrigerator, it's at a pride. The challenging message that we inadvertently can send to our children is that we only love them because they got an A on the spelling test. And so, it's really critically important that we as parents do our own internal work to convey that unconditional love that is our birthright as human beings. And we hold onto the goal because the goal is cool, because solving a puzzle is fun, because doing hard work and experiencing the reward from that is affirming, but your value as a human being is unshakable. Now, as a father, isn't that the feeling you want your child to have?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:51):
Absolutely. And there's a lot of parenting advice these days that helps you learn to do that. There's all these TikToks now, don't say good job. Just say good choice or great, hard work. Great job working hard on that.

Jerry Colonna (00:39:04):
Right, right, right. I don't know how I feel about getting parenting advice from TikTok, but okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:12):
I'm excited to have Andrew Luo joining us today. Andrew is CEO of OneSchema, one of our longtime podcast sponsors. Welcome, Andrew.

Andrew Luo (00:39:19):
Thanks for having me, Lenny. Great to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:21):
So what is new with OneSchema, I know that you work with some of my favorite companies like Ramp and Vanta and Watershed. I heard you guys launch a new data intake product that automates the hours of manual work that teams spent importing and mapping and integrating CSV and Excel files.

Andrew Luo (00:39:37):
Yes. So we just launched the 2.0 of OneSchema file feeds. We've rebuilt it from the ground up with AI. We saw so many customers coming to us with teams of data engineers that struggled with the manual work required to clean messy spreadsheets. FileFeeds 2.0 allows non-technical teams to automate the process of transforming CSV and Excel files with just a simple prompt. We support all of the trickiest file integrations, SFTP, S3, and even email.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:03):
I can tell you that if my team had to build integrations like this, how nice would it be to take this off our roadmap and instead use something like OneSchema?

Andrew Luo (00:40:11):
Absolutely, Lenny. We've heard so many horror stories of outages from even just a single bad record in transactions, employee files, purchase orders, you name it. Debugging these issues is often like finding a needle in a haystack. OneSchema stops any bad data from entering your system and automatically validates your files, generating error reports with the exact issues in all bad files.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:32):
I know that importing incorrect data can cause all kinds of pain for your customers and quickly lose their trust. Andrew, thank you so much for joining me. If you want to learn more, head on over to oneschema.co. That's oneschema.co.

(00:40:46):
Just to close loop on this, I think as people hear this, I feel like, okay, cool, everything falls apart. Sure, my parents will love me, my wife will love me, they won't think less of me. However, it's nice to get that really nice couch and that nice hotel and the income, the comfort that comes with income at a certain level is hard to give up. How do you help people get past that that might go away and feel comfortable?

Jerry Colonna (00:41:09):
Well, the good news is, and again, this is a Buddhist reference. The good news is there's a wisdom tradition that teaches all about this. So very briefly, the Buddhist story is in his mid-30s, he wakes up to the truth of birth, old age, sickness, and death. Birth, old age, sickness and death. And he wanders into the forest and he becomes a wandering mendicant and he becomes a holy man, and he's still not satisfied. And as I like to tell the story, one day he decides, fuck it, I'm just going to sit under the Bodhi tree and I'm not going to move until I figure this shit out. And so, he sits and sits and sits, and the story is he sat for 40 days living on a single grain of rice every day because always right, crazy stuff.

(00:42:05):
And when he woke up, he woke up to the four noble truths and the four noble truths are life is filled with suffering, that which we do to push away suffering increases suffering. The third noble truth is that there's an end to suffering. That's a really important one. And the fourth noble truth is what's known as the eightfold path to the end of suffering.

(00:42:34):
So let's focus on the second noble truth because that's really what you're talking about. When we acquire that nice couch, when we buy that nice house that stretches our income to its maximum, if we're doing it to enjoy the couch or the house, then A-OK. But if we're doing it because we're trying to push away the suffering of am I good enough to be loved, to feel safe, and that I belong, that which we do to push away suffering will increase suffering. And in this case, oh my God, what if they take my house away from me? Oh my God, what if I fall backwards down that staircase of life? Oh my God, what if all of those people who have signed up to my Substack suddenly disappear? You see how the attachment becomes that source of suffering? You see how the thing that we do to make ourselves feel better in fact fuels the tenuous hold that we have on our OK-ness? I'm okay just as I am. I'm okay.

(00:44:03):
It all comes down to why we're doing what we're doing. Now, to be clear, this is hard for me. I think it's hard for everybody. When my first book came out, Dan Harris, who's a really good friend and client from 10% Happier said to me, "Don't read the Amazon reviews." The truth is, I've read two reviews. I read it in the first hour after it was released, and I've never read a review since because there's no way I can experience those reviews without becoming attached to how people feel. So thank you. I'll put it over here and I'll just stay focused on the experience that I get from writing.

(00:45:04):
And yes, do I want to sell thousands of books? Do I want people to feel moved by my writing? I do, but you know who gets the most out of my writing? Me, because when I sit down, this is my file folder for whatever I might do for our next book, what I'm trying to do is answer questions that I have. For example, Captain Chaos is running the country right now. What is it that the world is going to need two or three years from now? And what's my contribution to that world? Now, just as I say that, how does that feel to you? It's kind of settling. So I know that in order for me to feel good about my existence on this planet, I have to ask myself these questions and I have to attempt to answer these questions. Whether it turns into a book that people buy or not is secondary, I have to do this work regardless.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:22):
That super connects with exactly again, the way I started this whole thing is I started writing just to crystallize my own thinking, and it ends up being useful to other people.

Jerry Colonna (00:46:33):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:35):
People hear this and they're like, why would I want to give up this great couch and house and car and all these things? That's really hard. And risking that by just doing something that feels good versus it'll make income, but it actually works. That's what I found. If you focus on a thing that is useful to yourself and interesting and not come at it from how do I make the most amount of money and turn this into whole thing, but more just, this is really interesting. I'm going to see where this goes. It will work for me.

Jerry Colonna (00:47:00):
Lenny, you implicitly asked a how question a few minutes ago. How do I do this? How do I do this radical self-inquiry? And I asked, I responded by offering a few questions. Let's build upon that for a moment, because what you are articulating right now is in the process of asking those questions, you can go back to what Simon Sinek would say is your why. You could go back to your core principle. You could go back to the centerpiece within you, which is what do I believe to be true about the world and how do I want to be in that world? You know what animates me right now is a question? With my children being fully fledged adults, I am really focused on what kind of ancestor to my descendants would I like to be? 20 years from now, 30 years from now, 40 years from now, I'll be gone. What would I like those who follow after me to believe to be true about me?

(00:48:11):
And you just paused. I can tell from the Adam's apple jumping up and down, that that question landed for you. It's a question of legacy. It's a question of meaning and purpose. At the end of my days, this is a question in Reboot, at the end of my days, what would I like the people who come after me to say about me? And what I want people to say about me is that he gave a shit about the world, he cared, and he tried, and he was kind. Those are the things that matter to me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:00):
I'm always reminded of that frame of reference when I go to a funeral and people reading the eulogy and the old advice of what do you want your eulogy to say and making that your mission. But on the flip side, there's this viral video of Mike Tyson. Someone was coming up to him I think before his big match recently, and asked him about his legacy, and he's like, "I don't give a shit about my legacy. It's just a made up thing that doesn't matter." So let me just ask you this. Why is it important to think about legacy? Does legacy even matter? We're dead. What's the difference?

Jerry Colonna (00:49:33):
Far be it for me to criticize Mike, and don't hit me Mike, because even as an old guy, I wouldn't want to be hit by Mike Tyson. I don't know what's behind his response, but I can tell you what's true for me. I made oblique reference to Captain Chaos in the world as it is right now. The world's a tough place right now. We live in a world where it's almost normalized that a teenager will shoot other teenagers in school. It's almost normalized that people are dragged off to jail. Something is happening, something that's really disturbing.

(00:50:28):
Now, to be clear, we've always had disturbing times. I mean, I was reminded recently, I'm reading a book called Soldiers and Kings, which I highly recommend, which is about human smuggling from Central America into the United States, and it's an extraordinary book. And in reading that, I was reminded of policies that the US government has used over the years, whether it's supporting dictators in Central America or other sorts of things, things that I oppose, that feel immoral, if not directly immoral.

(00:51:15):
Why does this come up for me? I can't shake the feeling that someone down the line in my lineage is going to ask of me, "And what did you do, grandpa? And what did you do, great grandpa?" I know what I want that answer to be, which is I tried. Lenny, God gave me the ability to put two sentences together in a way that people listen. I feel a moral responsibility to use that God-given gift to help create the world, that I would like to see, a world of kindness and empathy, a world where poverty is diminished, a world where people feel safe however the fuck they identify. I don't give a damn. So is that my legacy? Yeah, and maybe there's some ego implicit in that, but can I go on for just a bit on this?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:54):
Absolutely.

Jerry Colonna (00:52:55):
At the end of Reboot, I write about this moment, and in this moment I am in Marin County. My wife Allie and I are together. And I'm once again torturing myself with this question. Have I been a good man? I drive myself crazy with that question. Have I been a good father? Have I been a good partner? Have I been a good man? And she says, in a very frustrated way, "All right, already. Enough. You're a good man. Stop." And so, I go for a walk, and as I'm walking, I encounter this toppled over oak tree and the roots are all torn up and you've seen trees like this, and clearly the tree died and clearly a wind came and clearly knocked the whole thing down. And I look at the tree and I say to myself, "Here lies a good man."

(00:53:57):
And I liken myself to this toppled over oak tree, and I imagine that that tree had lived its life with its limbs gnarled and twisted by actions that it should have taken and actions that it shouldn't have taken, but good choices and bad choices. But that for the majority of its 75, 80 years, it lived into its purpose of providing shelter and shade for those that may have come from beneath it. And I make this point that at the end of my days, I want to be like this tree just slowly dissolving into the earth, having done the best job I could of being purposeful. I feel better. My suffering is eased when I can lean into that, which then makes me able to be present for the other person, whether it's a coaching client, whether it's a podcast conversation, whether it's just going for a walk with one of my children. I just feel better, and I think I am a better person when I think about things like that. So far be it from me to disagree with Mike Tyson, but I think he's wrong.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:34):
Good callback. It sounds like The Giving Tree to me.

Jerry Colonna (00:55:38):
Oh, yes, yes. Shel Silverstein.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:43):
To give people something to do with this area of legacy. How did you approach coming up with figuring out what you wanted your legacy to be? Are there some questions you asked? Is there something you recommend folks do to help think through this for themselves?

Jerry Colonna (00:55:57):
Well, it's delightful that we've ended up here because I think that I'm still working through those questions. As I said before as we both connected with, I use my writing to find my way to answers to questions. So part of what I'm dealing with right now is, look, I'll turn 62 this year. That feels old, but it also feels settled. And part of what I'm trying to figure out is what do I want my elderhood to be like? And I'll be honest, I'm enjoying this time of my life where I'm finding myself being a voice of comfort, being a voice of maybe even sanity in a time where that feels really insane and challenging. So maybe that's what my legacy will be. I'm not 100% sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:03):
Is this maybe hinted the new book you're working on? Is this the topic you're thinking about or is this not?

Jerry Colonna (00:57:09):
Yeah, and other things. That's right. That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:15):
Speaking of the world being very crazy right now, you talked about your kids, AI is very top of mind for a lot of people in particular. It's stressing a lot of people out. In a lot of ways, it's quite unsettling in future careers, in skills, people-

Jerry Colonna (00:57:29):
It is unsettling, isn't it?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:31):
Quite unsettling, but there's a world where we don't need humans in the future, potentially. Just what advice do you share with clients to help them work through this period of worry with the future, with AI being the core of it?

Jerry Colonna (00:57:45):
Well, if we go back to the equation for a moment, I think it's really important that we actually talk about these things. I would say a year ago, I likened it to the experience that I had. Remember, I'm old enough to remember when not everything had an IP address. Now, our refrigerators have IP addresses. I mean, it's freaking crazy. I'm old enough to remember when you had to install an IP stack into your personal computer in order to connect to the web. That's how old I am.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:22):
Did you have the phone modem where you had to put the phone?

Jerry Colonna (00:58:26):
Absolutely. Absolutely. It was a big, big deal to go from 1,200 baud to 2,400 baud to 56K. Oh my God, it was like a rocket ship. A year ago, I thought we were going through a similar kind of transition. We're clearly not. This is different. And in the coaching therapeutic world, everybody's like, "Oh my God, ChatGPT is going to replace me." And I don't know, maybe. What I am finding is... I wear glasses. So for those of you who are only listening to the audio, you may find that news. What I am finding is in my own life, it's like I have put on a pair of glasses that are really, really sharp and helpful, and it is disturbing and unsettling because I think it does challenge this question of what is our role as human beings?

(00:59:46):
Now, what I come back to, and I could be wrong, but what I come back to is we're talking through a medium, a mediated experience. My signal is bouncing up into the sky and to a satellite. I won't name the company, it's coming back down. I don't know what your access is. We're using this platform or a site to record this, but somehow we're still finding the capacity to be present for one another in a heart-to-heart way.

(01:00:30):
And so, when I look at these phenomena, what I lift up is that. What I am hopeful about is that that which does not matter in the experience of being human gets burned away and is taken care of, call it by AI, but that that which matters, which is presence and connection, human-to-human contact, strategic thinking, formulation, you want to talk about it in terms of engineering, the conceptualization, that that gets elevated and our skills get better at doing that. And in the most optimistic point of view, what ends up happening is we spend more time on that which matters, and less time on that which doesn't matter. And I could be completely wrong and we could all be out of work and making sure that the robots are well-oiled, and that becomes our purpose.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:47):
Along these lines of glasses and even coaching, the world of coaching, there's a really interesting use case I saw today that Dan Shipper shared that I think you'd love, which is now that ChatGPT has memory, remembers everything you've said, and you can think back, you can ask it, "What are blank spots in the way I see the world that I'm not seeing?" You could also upload all your chat transcripts from your meetings and ask it what could you do better in meetings?

Jerry Colonna (01:02:14):
Look, one of my colleagues in the coaching company, he has uploaded, he kept all of his journal entries, I think over 10 years journal entries from Evernote, and he uploaded that. I think he uses Claude, and he's asked Claude to highlight things. What am I not saying that I need to say? What am I saying that's not being heard? He's asked it to reflect back, and I think it's been incredibly helpful for him. I think the result is that he is a better coach, which is interesting, because the feeling is, well, does this replace it? I am finding, I'm using ChatGPT really as a writing and thinking partner in a way that I did not have before, and I'm still using my live real human writing buddies, which are really important to me. Where does this all end up? I had no idea. It is unsettling, it's uncanny, and it's also enlivening and exciting.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:31):
Well put. I love that you can ask these hard questions of Claude/ChatGPT, these questions that make you really scared could ask it what are the answers, and even not have to do the hard work and maybe get a better answer. I doubt that that will give you the best answers.

Jerry Colonna (01:03:47):
Well, what it might do, which I think would be wonderful, is it might give you more questions to ask yourself. I'm a huge fan of powerful questions and the answer I give to a question like what am I not saying that I need to say? That question, you can ask yourself that question every single day. The question of how have I been complicit in creating the conditions I say I don't want? You can ask yourself that question every single day. To take a step back, the subtitle of my first book is Leadership in the Art of Growing Up. The Art of Growing Up is a practice. It's not a scientific moment where one day you wake up and you're done. It's an ongoing practice of not continuous improvement, but continuous inquiry that can feel exhausting when you contemplate it, but enlivening when you live it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:57):
All this, some people may think of as this whole idea of growth mindset. I know that you're not a big fan of this term, that it's used in a harmful way a lot of times. Can you just talk about that why you find that growth mindset as a concept isn't necessarily useful?

Jerry Colonna (01:05:18):
Here's what I have a problem with. First of all, having a growth mindset is a very, very helpful thing. What I have a problem is in having and how we can turn a notion like a growth mindset into a fixed mindset, which is, it's this funny little trick the ego does, and the ego says, "Okay, well, this is a growth mindset. Oh, this is not a growth mindset. Okay, then this is good. This is not good. This is bad. This is..." What Buddhism has taught me is that everything's falling apart all the time even our growth mindset. When we get too fixed on the proper way to do things, we're setting ourselves up for attachment and therefore suffering. So if you can hold something like a mindset loosely with that attachment, go for it. Have a blast. Enjoy it. But the minute you start to nail it down to the floor and say this is the way it ought to be, I ought to always have a growth mindset, you've become fixed. And that's what the ego does.

(01:06:48):
To be more explicit about it from a business context for example, the great business writer Peter Senge says, "It is virtually impossible to challenge the assumptions that made you rich in the first place." So think about it in our experience of starting a business. We have what the Zen Buddhist would say, beginner's mind, all things are possible. And then, we experience, you were talking about it a little before, a little bit of success, and the ego, which is so terrified of not having success, start to say, "Aha, this is the way to do it." And then, we start to deviate from that because life happens and then the anxiety starts. So the question is, how do you hold a growth mindset loosely knowing that you ought to stay present to the world as it is, respond to the changing dynamics, figure out what's next because that's the growth. So put succinctly, stay attached to the growth and hold mindset a little loosely.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:07):
I love that. It reminds me of advice. I did a meditation retreat once, and there's always a sense with Buddhism, and it's interesting how often Buddhism and advice from Buddhist teachings comes up on this podcast by the way.

Jerry Colonna (01:08:18):
When the student is ready, the teacher will appear. You are inviting it in, but keep going.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:25):
That makes sense as you say that. Interesting. So there's this fear I think people have with Buddhist teachings that you will not be as ambitious and you will not achieve as much if you're not attaching.

Jerry Colonna (01:08:41):
If you're not anxiously chasing something.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:42):
Yeah, exactly. If you're just like, "Why do I need that? I don't need to be the CEO of the VP because like, oh, I won't attach to that." And then, so people fear that downside. So I asked this question at this retreat and the advice they shared there was don't attach to this idea, but just point your cart in that direction and head there.

Jerry Colonna (01:09:02):
Yeah, I like that. Look, the fear you're talking about is the fear of complacency. And if we look at the structures of the mind and we look at our socialization, the way we're socialized to ward off complacency is anxiety. And so, if we go back to some of the things we were saying before, if I grow up believing that the way I'm going to make my parents love me is by achieving, then if I become complacent, then what's at risk is their love for me. So just like we made the connection before where unconditional love exists, unconditional positive regard for self, otherwise known as self-compassion can be a powerful motivator, especially when you get to the point where you say, "As painful as it is for me to write, I enjoy writing. I enjoy working out. I enjoy pushing myself. I don't necessarily enjoy it in the moment." But I certainly, when I look at two books on my desk and I say, "You know what? That feels good. That makes me happy."

(01:10:43):
To me, the ability to hold the seeming contradiction of those things is a hallmark of my adulthood. It's to get satisfaction out of hard work for me is a much greater motivator than fear of complacency. As I've sort of slip-slided my way into that place, I have found... I work seven days a week. I don't have to, but I enjoy it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:29):
There's another, maybe a last area I want to spend some time on, which is around teams and what often causes trouble for teams. What breaks teams? What breaks companies? You have this point, you make that it's rarely lack of talent on the team, lack of strategy, lack of execution, that it's something else. What is that something else? What often do you find as the source of the problem for teams that aren't working?

Jerry Colonna (01:11:56):
Well, it's the unresolved, I'll be dramatic with the language, demons from their childhood. It's the unsorted baggage. Here's what happens. Teams are groups, and there are group dynamics that always happen. There is the scapegoat, there is the truth-teller who has to say, "Let me tell you what's really wrong with everything going on." Without the individual's radical self-inquiry skills, groups tend to be condemned to repeating patterns oftentimes of their family of origin.

(01:12:40):
I'll tell you a quick story. There's a very famous software blogger, blogger-owned software that I coached for many years, and we were doing an executive team meeting, and something happened in the group as we were talking that I observed once, twice, and three times, and finally, I said, "Okay, guys, I'm seeing something happen here. Every time we get close to talking about something that's really painful, somebody makes a joke and all the energy disappears and everybody laughs and everybody's nice." And as soon as I said it, my client who was CEO at the time said, "Jesus Christ, that's just like my family." It was like, yes, that's just like your family.

(01:13:35):
Carl Jung once said, "Until you make the unconscious conscious, it will direct your life and you will call it fate." Let's apply it here. Until you make conscious the unconscious patterns operating in the group, the group will continue to repeat those patterns and you will blame somebody in the group. Romantic relationships from a Buddhist perspective, part of what we do in romantic relationships is we find the perfect foil for us to work out our unconscious phenomena. When we join a group, when we form up in teams and organizations, we are unconsciously finding the perfect foils for us to work out our own shit. So if you want to create a high-functioning team, do your work, and it starts with the person who has the most power in the group. If that person refuses to do their work, the entire group will become a manifestation of early dysfunction in the individual's lives. Does that make any sense?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:59):
100%. And this comes up a number of times on this podcast, just the impact the leaders issues have on the rest of the team, and also just this idea that the conditions they're trying to avoid are the conditions they invite in because they're avoiding.

Jerry Colonna (01:15:14):
That's it. That's it. One of my favorite teachers and dear friends is Parker Palmer, and he builds on, I think it was Socrates who said, "The unexamined life is not worth living." And he builds on that and makes a joke, and he says, "But if you choose to live an unexamined life, please don't take a job that involves other people." And that's it. You have a responsibility to examine your own shit.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:43):
So say you're on this team, so there's two sides of this. You're on a team, the leaders clearly got some stuff that they need to work through, but they're not. Is there something you can do there other than just, "Hey, please, this is hurting us?" And then from the leader's perspective listening to this, what should they do? Is it get a coach? What can you do?

Jerry Colonna (01:16:01):
So for the one who has less power?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:04):
Yeah.

Jerry Colonna (01:16:05):
One of the things to ask oneself is what draws me to this position in the first place? How have I been complicit, not responsible in creating the conditions I say I don't want. How have I benefited from the dysfunction that exists in this organization? And benefit is a funny word. It doesn't necessarily mean I'm making more money. It means, for example, a benefit might be, boy, this feels familiar. I always find myself working on teams that are dysfunctional in this way. What is there in that experience for me to learn? So that's one thing.

(01:16:55):
You asked about the person who has power. You were using the word leader. I will talk about power, and you threw out, well, should they get a coach? Let's put it into larger context. Should you examine your life with radical self-inquiry? Yes. I would argue that the more power you have, the more moral responsibility you have to actually pause and figure out what it is that you're doing to be complicit in creating the conditions you say you don't want.

(01:17:28):
To be a very quick example what I'm talking about. A couple of years ago, I was doing a talk at a venture firm's CEO portfolio summit, the portfolio company's CEO summit. And we're sitting in a room, and of course I'm walking around again with shoes off and whatever, and people are firing questions at me. And one woman says, "Well, I'm the CEO of this 15-person company, and I have a question for you. Why is it that nobody on my team can make a decision without me?" And I said, "Who hired them?" And she, "Well..." I said, "Okay, how does it make you feel when they make a decision that you disagree with?" She said, "I'm furious." "Well, how can you hire people whom you expect to make decisions without running them through you if you can't tolerate them making a decision that you disagree with?"

(01:18:37):
You want to build a scaled leadership team, you have to be willing to have them make boneheaded decisions. And that's really, really hard, especially if we're "in founder mode" driving all the decisions. So that's your growth edge. We were talking about before about growth mindset. That's your growth edge. How can I be with the people in my life making boneheaded decisions about something that I care so much about and what is the best way for me to be in relationship about that?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:18):
So much of this comes back to that question we started this with of just how are you complicit in creating the conditions you don't want? A big takeaway for me here, and it just keeps coming up and again and again, is if you're struggling as a leader, if your company's not working as well as you wanted to, if you're having a hard time with your team, going back to that equation, it's not about building more skills like public speaking skills or email skills, or I don't know, financial skills. It's self-awareness, radical self-inquiry, understanding what drives you, what makes you happy. Is that generally correct?

Jerry Colonna (01:19:51):
Lenny, I was just going to say, you just made me so happy you saying what you just said. Yes. I've been coaching now, as I said for a couple of decades. Before that, I was a VC for 15, 17 years. What you just said is the wisdom of my 40 years as an adult. That's it. This is why radical self-inquiry is so damned important because it leads to a little bit less suffering and a lot more resilience.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:28):
For folks that want to actually do that, well, they can rewind back to the middle of the episode where we actually ask the questions that are associated with the radical self-inquiry, and then obviously if they want to dig deeper, they can buy your book.

Jerry Colonna (01:20:41):
Or 10 copies of the book.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:43):
Or 100 copies for everyone at the company willing to Amazon. Jerry, is there anything else that we haven't touched on that you think is really important for people to hear maybe as the last piece of wisdom?

Jerry Colonna (01:20:57):
Now one of the hopes that I have you ask me at the start like what would be my hope is that we ended up being closer and friends, and I feel that. Let me extend that out to everybody. What I always hope from all of these intimate conversations that I try to do in podcasts is that people walk away going, "Geez, I'm not alone." We've made different references to the fact that it's a hard time. The truth is it's always a hard time. And what makes it hardest is to feel like I'm the only one who's going through this. So what I appreciate about what you do, Lenny, is that under the guise of talking about product, you're really talking about the process of being human. And that is a mitzvah. That's a good deed. And so, I hope in the process of listening to this, people walk away going, "Okay, I feel a little bit better today."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:04):
I really appreciate that. The way I think about these sorts of conversations and episodes, I call them Trojan Horse episodes where people come for the other stuff, tactical, practical stuff, and then they get stuff they really need to hear. And so, I appreciate you. Jerry, thank you so much for being here.

Jerry Colonna (01:22:19):
Thank you for having me. It was a delight.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:22):
Same for me. Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
You basically spend all your time working with founders, and through that studying, you create frameworks and training and you use that in your work. I think that's what many, many founders are looking for is how do I avoid pain?

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:00:11):
To be a founder is a state of being, it's an attitude. To be a CEO is a craft. The more founders who can accept that those are two separate things and they're both equally important to build an ascendant startup, the better all of us will be.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:26):
I'm kind of tired of talking about founder mode, but it feels like what you're describing is founder mode and manager mode.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:00:30):
Founder mode gets me angry. That article just got me hot. It really felt like an excuse. We were giving founders a permission to not learn the job. It's not manager mode is bad, it's the greatest CEOs know when to calibrate which one is needed.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:46):
Something you talk about, there's these two phases to a startup journey and most people focus on the first phase.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:00:51):
Phase one is build something people want to buy. Phase two, the one we don't talk about is now you have to build a company around that thing people want to buy. Building a company is always the same. I don't care if it's MedTech or fintech or hardware or consumer.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:04):
You've come up with this methodology that you call the Magic Box paradigm that helps founders think about how to lead to a successful exit long-term.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:01:11):
This is a traditional sales process. You build a list of the companies that might want to acquire you, you ping them and you hope you get a deal. Magic Box argues that the best outcomes for early-stage startups don't happen that way. You're never for sale. In fact, you have seduced a buyer. They see the fantasy, they fall in love.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:35):
Today, my guest is Jonathan Lowenhar. Jonathan runs a firm called Enjoy The Work, which I've heard amazing things about from so many people over the years. Their firm has a singular mission, to help founders become great CEOs. They do this through a blend of mentoring and advising services, which are rooted in their study of how the best startups operate. They take these lessons and fold them into frameworks and advice and training that they offer their CEOs, their insight, which you'll hear in our conversation, is that most founders don't come into the job knowing how to be a CEO, which includes learning how to do hiring, how to manage financials, figure out growth strategy, road mapping, planning, people management, and so many other skills that nobody teaches a founder.

(00:02:16):
In our conversation, Jonathan shares the most common CEO failure modes that he and his team have seen, the Magic Box paradigm for successfully selling your startup, a bunch of advice for finding and hiring the best talent, a framework for building a repeatable go-to-market motion, why and how you should learn to trust your intuition more as a founder and so much more. We could have gone on for so many more hours. Maybe he'll be back to share more advice. If you're a founder or hope to be a founder one day, this episode is for you. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing feature episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Jonathan Lowenhar. Jonathan, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast,

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:03:03):
Lenny, I am damn excited.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:05):
So am I. The reason I'm excited to have you in this podcast is that you basically spend all your time working with founders, and through that studying, what causes them pain, what causes them to fail, what causes them to struggle, and then you take that and you create frameworks and training and you use that in your work with founders, and I think that's what many, many founders are looking for is how do I avoid pain? How do I avoid these things that I'm going to probably run into? To build on that, briefly, can you just help people understand what it is you do, what it is your organization does with founders, how you work with founders?

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:03:38):
Yeah, thank you. I'll tell a bit of origin story that I think ends up answering that question.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:43):
Let's do it.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:03:45):
I had run a bunch of different types of companies and they were really different ones. I ran a big division for a public company, then I was a private equity CEO, then I did back-to-back startups. The first one didn't get very far, but we sold it, and the second one got really far. When I left the second one, I was like many founders, grossly unhealthy, 25 pounds overweight, wasn't sleeping enough, all the things. I took a few months to get healthy and then reflect on those parts of my career. One of the things that I noticed at the time was all of those companies, when they got to a good place, when they started to run well, they were all run well in the same way. How could this be? How could public company, private equity, startups, early stage, growth stage, when they were run well, they were all run well the same way?

(00:04:35):
I started to obsess about this question, and what it led me to realize is that every well-run company has a rhythm. It's unmistakable, you can't miss it. You can't not see it. You just spend a couple of days through a spy cam watching a business, you'll see the pattern. How come some startups get there and some don't? How does a founder learn the rhythm? How do they learn how to run a company well? I started to ask investors obsessively, and I asked them, Lenny, I asked them all three questions, same three over and over and over again.

(00:05:14):
First question was, well, describe to me your ideal founder. What's a great founder? The answers universally were the same. Investors would use words that meant grit and tenacity and courage and insight, and I'd say, "Great. Question number two, describe to me a great startup CEO," and they use none of those words. How can that possibly be true? Instead, they describe skills. This is a person who knows how to build stuff and sell stuff and recruit people and raise capital and organize humans and financially plan. Question number three, my final one, well, how does a founder learn those skills while doing the job? I got blank fucking stares, over and over again. It led me down this path that I'm now 10 years into with my colleagues of, well, how do we help founders learn those skills so that their venture investors don't fire them, so that they can actually go build whatever company they want to build and stay in the job for as long as they want to stay in the job? That's origin, that's what got me going.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:27):
This episode is brought to you by Pendo, the only all-in-one product experience platform for any type of application. Tired of bouncing around multiple tools to uncover what's really happening inside your product? With all the tools you need in one simple-to-use platform, Pendo makes it easy to answer critical questions about how users are engaging with your product and then turn those insights into action. Also, you can get your users to do what you actually want them to do. First, Pendo's built around product analytics, seeing what your users are actually doing in your apps so that you can optimize their experience. Next, Pendo lets you deploy in-app guides that lead users through the actions that matter most. Then Pendo integrates user feedback so that you can capture and analyze what people actually want.

(00:07:12):
The new thing in Pendo, session replays, a very cool way to visualize user sessions. I'm not surprised at all that over 10,000 companies use it today. Visit Pendo.io/Lenny to create your free Pendo account today and start building better experiences across every corner of your product. PS, you want to take your product-led know-how a step further? Check out Pendo's lineup of free certification courses led by talk product experts and designed to help you grow in advance in your career. Learn more and experience the power of the Pendo platform today at Pendo.io/Lenny. I'm excited to chat with Christina Gilbert, the founder of OneSchema, one of our longtime podcast sponsors. Hi, Christina.

Christina Gilbert (00:07:57):
Yes, thank you for having me on, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:59):
What is the latest with OneSchema? I know you now work with some of my favorite companies, like Ramp, Vanta, Scale and Watershed. I heard that you just launched a new product to help product teams import CSVs from especially tricky systems like ERPs.

Christina Gilbert (00:08:15):
Yes, so we just launched OneSchema FileFeeds, which allows you to build an integration with any system in 15 minutes as long as you can export a CSV to an SFTP folder. We see our customers all the time getting stuck with hacks and workarounds and the product teams that we work with don't have to turn down prospects because their systems are too hard to integrate with. We allow our customers to offer thousands of integrations without involving their engineering team at all.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:37):
I can tell you that if my team had to build integrations like this, how nice would it be to be able to take this off my roadmap and instead use something like OneSchema and not just to build it but also to maintain it forever?

Christina Gilbert (00:08:48):
Absolutely, Lenny. We've heard so many horror stories of multi-day outages from even just a handful of bad records. We are laser-focused on integration reliability to help teams end all of those distractions that come up with integrations. We have a built-in validation layer that stops any bad data from entering your system, and OneSchema will notify your team immediately of any data that looks incorrect.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:08):
I know that importing incorrect data can cause all kinds of pain for your customers and quickly lose their trust. Christina, thank you for joining us and if you want to learn more, head on over to OneSchema.co. That's OneSchema.co. There's obviously this new meme of founder mode. I'm kind of tired of talking about founder mode, but it feels like what you're describing is founder mode and manager mode. You basically have to be good at both. This latter part is almost manager mode. Is that a way to think about it?

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:09:34):
Yes. Founder mode gets me angry. That article just got me hot.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:39):
Do share.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:09:42):
It really felt like an excuse. We were giving founders a permission to not learn the job. If we think about an ascending startup, there's this phase of I have to invent something. I now have to figure out how to get my customer in front of this invention and see if it works, and then I have to build a business model around that to see if there's some repeatable way to attract, win, deploy my customer and thrill them with whatever the solution is. Okay, now I have to go build an enormous amount of demand and then I have to build up an operation that can handle all that demand. Oh, and by the way, at some point, figure out how to turn positive revenues into positive cash flows. The idea that the founder who's writing code by themselves doesn't have to advance their skills to learn how to do all those things, and that in fact what the article even implies is learning how to do those other things is a negative is bananas to me.

(00:10:52):
The things required to launch a company are not the same as grow a company as scale a company as exit a company, and the best startup CEOs learn them all along the way. There are lots of ways to learn them. I'm not suggesting there's only one path, but founder mode was almost an excuse not to. I do think what's unique about a founder that felt perhaps where that article was trying to go is that unlike the professional mercenary CEO that gets dropped in, the founder knows everything about what built this company and they can drop in at the most granular level and play anywhere. They can drop into a product feature, they can drop into a customer conversation or a partner conversation or with a long-time employee that's still in IC and be impactful and then rise back up if they've gone the training and get back into a cockpit to run the company again. That's to me the distinction. It's not manager mode is bad, it's the greatest CEOs know when to calibrate which one is needed.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:57):
I love that. I'm glad we got there. I wasn't planning to talk about founder mode, but I think this is really helpful for folks to hear that are founders and people working for founders too. Along these same lines, you have a really helpful and really funny also mental model for how to think about common failure modes of founders. You have these labels that I love, and this is actually the first thing I heard about Enjoy The Work is these labels that you guys use, and you also, a similar mental model for failure modes for a startup. Can you just share these modes that you've come up with?

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:12:31):
We do take a bit of a comical approach to some of this. As I've shared with you previously, the name of our company is not an accident. If we can't be playful, we can take the work seriously and not ourselves, so we do fuck around quite a bit. I think if I would separate failure modes for companies versus CEOs for a minute, the company ones are not quite as comedic, but they are ones we see all the time. One is you chose the wrong market. I don't think we need to belabor that one. Lots of your prior guests have talked about the importance of getting that part right or nothing else really matters.

(00:13:05):
Second, back to what we were discussing a minute ago, build something people want to buy, got to go build the right thing. Cool. Third one, founder's function. We like to joke that more companies die from suicide than homicide, and it's grim, but also if the two or three people in charge of the business can't get along, nothing else matters. It's all going to break apart. Then fourth, execution, and execution now leads back to CEO. Okay, so now we have a bunch of playful ones here. We have the robot CEO, who believes emotion should not ever exist at a startup, at which point we train them on a very simple formula. Emotions are messy, humans have emotions, startups need humans, therefore startups are messy.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:57):
I love how engineering-oriented that advice is, which makes sense for robots. Yeah.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:14:03):
Also, a little bit more graceful of an answer there is also our CEOs want urgency and passion and excitement from their teams. They want them working enormously hard for below market comp more often than not with this promise of equity that might return value five or 10 or 12 years later. They want them to bring all of that emotion, but they're supposed to figure out how to surgically cut off the emotions that are inconvenient. That's the robot CEO who believes that we can just have several robots working for us and you just press a button and they do a thing. Second one is a pleaser CEO. This is the person who is far more concerned with being liked than running a business, so they can't tell anyone hard news. They can't break ties, they want a consensus on everything, and that's not possible.

(00:14:56):
If you have a group of thoughtful people working for you, they're going to fight, they're going to debate and you want them to. Then at some point you have to call it and say, "No, we're going left not right." Or, "The two of you need to go get in a room and deal with something." Or, "Hey, the way you just showed up is not the way I want you to show up." The pleaser CEO won't do any of that. They will simply hide and pray It goes away and it won't go away. Next one is a perfectionist CEO. I'd like to say that these are the CEOs with the most beautiful product to be delivered minutes before they file for bankruptcy. This is the person who is far more concerned with being right and believing that there's always a right answer than just moving forward.

(00:15:36):
It creates two problems in a business. One is you're just slow and the other one is you'll never take any bets because you will build a team that realizes the CEO is not allowed to be wrong, so you can't disagree, you can't use intuition, you can't use gut. Everything has to be utterly factual and that is simply not possible. In early-stage startups, you have more questions than you do answers. Everything is circumstantial. It's not like watching CSI entrepreneurship and you get to see a video to say, "Oh, look, the guy did it." No, we have a bunch of little data points you have to come to a conclusion. The next one is the angry CEO.

(00:16:15):
I had a founder of mine a bunch of years ago and we were seeing a pattern across the leadership team and he and I get on the phone one morning and I said, "I have a theory for you. It might be a story, I might be wrong, but I want to share." He said, " Okay." I said, "I think you wake up in the morning angry and you don't know it, and then you get to the office and you beat the crap out of the first employee that crosses paths with you over something utterly unrelated because you're angry. You realize that a few hours later and you apologize and your team hasn't quit yet because they believe you're a good human who doesn't have good self-control." Then I shared with him, "And you just had your first child. My guess is because I'm not a psychologist, I'm not a therapist, that you are modeling something that's happened in your life. Is this something you want to change?"

(00:17:09):
His answer is yes, and I said, "Great. I have good news and bad news. The good news is because you said yes, we can do something about it, and the bad news is I don't know what to fucking do. That's not my job." The point being, no one wants to work for the angry person. I don't care what the equity potential is worth, no one wants to work for that person, and the moment they see greener pastures elsewhere, they're leaving. The next one is the one that drives me particularly crazy, it's the laissez-faire CEO, who insanely believes that I can just hire great people and utterly ignore them and let markets take care of themselves and they will do all the right things. I have never met anyone, Lenny, that didn't benefit from good management and the laissez-faire CEO believes that management is not required, and so what they ultimately find is they have really, really good people doing utterly disconnected things and goals are not achieved.

(00:17:59):
Every CEO we can reductively reduce to one of two characters. They're either comfortable with the brake or comfortable with the accelerator. The challenge with those who are comfortable with the brake, what I mean by that is they don't want to spend any money, so they're driving this beautiful sports car and they're just leaning on the brake the whole time. Yes, they won't run any money, and yes, they will also get lapped by everyone else and miss the opportunity. Where their opportunity is, is where can you take bets? Where can you actually downshift that car in such a way where you give yourself a chance in the market? Separate, those who ride the accelerator, we've all met this one. They're going to run out of money really fast, and this connects to one of our other challenging CEO types, the ready, fire, aim.

(00:18:49):
Most CEOs are really bad at planning and that's because there's this little-known secret in the Bay area, most CEOs have never run a business before. Planning doesn't have to be some heavy bureaucratic multi-month exercise that begins in August and ends in February, but a little bit of bottoms up planning to say, what are we trying to achieve? How do we quantify it? What resources are required? What humans are going to do what? How do we shorten feedback loops so we know in a week, in a month and two months, whether we're on the right trajectory? The ready, fire, aim CEO says, "I don't want to do any of that because they're improvisational and they just want to take bets and they want to take shots," and that's what got the company started, and that's also what will have the company go bankrupt. The micromanager one is the opposite of laissez-faire. They believe that no matter how many employees they have, they can do the job better.

(00:19:42):
The challenge with this one is it is massively disrespectful to those who work for you. We think that, and this is a bit insulting, that everyone that works for a founder can be fit into one or two chunks. They're either an adult or a child. I have a three-year-old, my little girl is amazing. I'm utterly in love. If she doesn't have a lot of structure and a lot of supervision, she's going to run into things, man. Into things, off things, through things, but adults don't need to be given utter instruction and watched all the time. In fact, it needs to be the opposite. We agree on what success is, what resources are, and you let them go and they'll come back to you when they have questions. The micromanager CEO doesn't see the difference between those two humans. They don't trust anybody and that's actually the thing under the thing under the thing, so they want to do everyone's work and that will succeed right up into the point everyone quits.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:39):
This is amazing. Okay, so let me recap these labels that you have just for folks. I have them written down here. There's the robot CEO, perfectionist CEO, pleaser CEO, micromanager, laissez-faire, ready, fire, aim, riding the brake and then riding the gas, and as you said, the ever-popular angry CEO.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:21:03):
You got them all.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:04):
As people hear this, I imagine people self-identify a few of these, like I have some of this, I have some of that, and it's not like black or white. No one is like, "I'm a 100% robot CEO, and I need to fix that." It's like a pie chart kind of, I don't know, what's a visual of this? Everyone's got a little bit of this, basically.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:21:24):
That's right. I enjoy giving this talk on stage and watching different founders in the audience cringe at different moments, but it doesn't mean that they're all one or the other. If they were all one of these and then didn't want to even accept the possibility that there's a little bit of a lot of these that they could work on, they're probably not coachable and they're not going to be in the talk anyway.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:45):
It's like I imagine each of these is very particular and it's this journey you go on to work on yourself. Let me just ask, what's the most common issue that you've found across these labels of type CEOs? What's the most common one and what do you often recommend someone to work on specifically to help them through that?

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:22:02):
I think ready, fire, aim is the most common that we've seen, and that has been an affliction that's been growing in the last number of years. It wasn't long ago that CEOs could paper over poor execution with easy access to capital. Suddenly, over the last number of years, we're expecting founders to be better operators. Better operators means eventually being on a path when more cash comes into the business and out of the business. That doesn't happen by accident. The ready, fire, aim CEO has probably suffered this pain where they took lots and lots of bets. Maybe they measured the outcome after the fact and they were wrong and they were wrong and they were wrong in ways that were expensive, and they've raised their hand to say, "I see it. I want to get better at this." Basic, basic business design and business planning is not some corporate effort. It's some thoughtful exercise that starts with what are we working backwards from?

(00:23:02):
Because in any given time, Lenny, companies are working backwards from one of four things, whether they like it or not. I am working backwards from an exit. I'm working backwards from a next fundraise. I'm working backwards from profitability or I'm working backwards from winding down. We don't talk about the fourth one that much, but I got to choose one. I got to choose the top of the mountain. More often than not, they're choosing a fundraise. Then we'll ask that founder, you know your market, you know your investors, you know the next set of investors, we've done some intel. What has to be true to unlock the next fundraise? That's a qualitative and quantitative answer, but we write it down. We need to get better at go to market. We need to land our first partner. We need to launch next iteration of the product and show this level of efficacy, engagement, what have you. Can we codify that? Yes. Can we talk through what actions would be required on what cadence to unlock that quantified set of results? Yes.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:24:00):
... that quantified set of results? Yes. Do we understand what resources would be required to do those things? Recognize we might have to squint through some of it, but again, the answer is yes. [inaudible 00:24:13] now aimed. If we have a culture that has some accountability, that has a communication architecture, so there's some rituals about how we meet and how we share information and how we talk through problems, and how we work through bottlenecks, well, now we have a plan and now we have accountability. I now no longer have to just guess all the time. And this only works for the CEO who says, "My improvisational efforts got me here, but I don't think they'll get me there."

(00:24:47):
There's a guy I worked for a long time ago, and he had this phrase... He had like seven or eight phrases, he would use them over and over and over again. It was hard not to commit them all to memory, and one of them was, "If you keep doing what you're doing, you keep getting what you're getting." And for the ready, fire, aim folks who realize the weakness of that at scale, the way to counteract that, is to start with good planning.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:12):
It's interesting that's the most common type of CO, when with Founder Mode, it feels like it just accelerates that further. The whole meme of Founder Mode, which are what makes you upset. Makes sense. Great.

(00:25:26):
Okay, so I love that you talked about exiting as basically one of these four working backwards paths, because that's where I wanted to go next. I want to talk about some of these specific frameworks and skills and methodologies that you teach, and one of them... I want to almost go to the end of selling your company. And the reason I'm excited to talk about this, is if you think about, and tell me if I'm wrong, but it feels like most startups that succeed end up selling their company. That's the most likely success, right?

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:25:58):
Yes, by far.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:01):
Great. Yeah, because the other option is IPO or just run this privately forever. Or fail, basically, and fold. So of the successful options, the most common is selling. At the same time, founders have never done this before, they don't know what they're doing. The other side, often, has done it many times, and so it's a pretty treacherous and scary and high-stakes thing to do and to learn on the spot. And you've come up with this methodology that you call the Magic Box Paradigm that I love, that helps founders think about how to lead to a successful exit long term. Can you talk about what this is?

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:26:36):
I can, and I want to give credit where it's due. There's a book by this name, it's called Magic Box Paradigm, written by an independent banker named Ezra Roizen. And the book's fantastic, and Ezra is fantastic.

(00:26:46):
What we've done, is we've operationalized it so that we could teach founders over, and over, and over again. If the founder wants to hire a banker for this particular process, because we're not bankers, we're not BD, we don't get paid that way, we're teachers. But if wanted to hire a banker, go hire Ezra. But the methodology itself is a inversion for how venture and venture boards have thought about startups being ready for sale for a long, long time. It's utterly counter to so much advice that founders have heard. There are two ways you can get acquired. This is purposely reductive. One is you put up a for-sale sign. This is a traditional sales process. You build a list of the companies that might want to acquire you. You figure out the categories of buyers, the companies there, the contact list within that. You ping them and say, "We're open to a transaction," or some euphemism the like. You contact them and say, "I'll give you some information now. Sign an NDA. Give me an indication of interest by this date." And you work through a process, and you pray you have more than one person at the end of the game, try and ratchet them up, sign a term sheet. They will then re-trade along the way, right up until the point you die and you hope you get a deal done.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:05):
Sounds very familiar.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:28:08):
And it's one that often will just hit the nervous system of any founder that's been through it a couple of times. Because man, is it a fraught exercise? What Magic Box argues, is that the best outcomes for early-stage startups don't happen that way. You're never for sale. In fact, you have seduced a buyer. You have brought someone in. And there are three stages to Magic Box work. There is learn the fantasy, there's prove the fantasy, and there's quantify the fantasy.

(00:28:43):
All right, so what the hell do I mean by a fantasy? You're an early-stage startup, and you meet a company that is in your space, in your vertical, what have you, and they're much more advanced than you. It's a large business. Generally speaking, another oversimplification here, large companies are interested in small companies because they're technology. And small companies are interested in large companies because they're distribution. And there's someone at the large company who becomes fascinated with you.

(00:29:12):
What's the fascination? What they see in their head is, "Oh, interesting. If I buy your company, this thing happens." The classic example of this is Instagram. This is the number one example of this. Lenny, do you remember how much revenue they had when they got acquired by now Meta?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:33):
I think it was zero.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:29:34):
I think it was zero.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:35):
Okay.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:29:36):
Do you remember the acquisition price?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:37):
A billion dollars, which was absurd at that point.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:29:41):
There was no math Facebook could use, historically speaking, that would justify a billion dollars. It had to be a model on the future. This is Magic Box to a T. They had a fantasy that adding Instagram would expand ad revenue. They figured out some way to prove it. I'll explain more on what I mean by proof. And then their quantification was based on the future. And that's the difference between a Magic Box approach and traditional approaches. Traditional approaches are based on the past, Magic Box is on the future.

(00:30:14):
Let me tell a story. In one of our companies in construction tech, their technology was able to suck in video camera data from construction sites for project planning. No one was doing this yet. And the business was doing pretty well. We helped the founders launch the company. We got first product in market. We raised a couple of rounds of capital. The product mostly worked. But we weren't sure it was venture scale as we were going along. And we had some large construction tech companies and real estate companies and development companies leaning into us. And one particular company then said, "Huh, we're really good at construction planning, and we've collected all of this video data that we don't use at all." And the champion on the other side in the product org, he has a fantasy. "Oh, shit. We take your video analytics platform and plug it into what we do, and this is what happens to my business."

(00:31:18):
Now, the person on the other side is a person. And the reason I'm being specific about that, is because you don't sell to a company. Magic Box is about finding the person. You're finding the champion on the other side, the person who has motivated for their own reasons, career, money, reputation, what have you. They see the fantasy. They fall in love. And this person says, "I am in love with this idea. If I can grab security data into my product organization. Now I have to prove the fantasy."

(00:31:53):
What's different about a champion in this kind of process, is they want to find a way to say yes. They're not looking for a way to say no. And this brings us to the four characters you're going to meet along the path of Magic Box. There might be a fifth. You're going to meet your champion, you're going to meet your advocates, you're going to meet your blockers, and you're going to meet your buyer. You might meet Corp Dev along the way.

(00:32:20):
Let me talk about each of those folks. The champion is the one who's fallen in love. They're the ones with the fantasy. They're the ones who are arguing on your behalf. They're the ones fighting for you when you're not in the room. They are texting you, they're telling you things about the business that they're probably not supposed to tell you.

(00:32:33):
The buyer. All they care about is math. It might be a committee, it might be a group, the IC, the EC, the investment group, what have you. They're the ones who actually can sign off on a deal. They care about business case.

(00:32:45):
Advocates... Lenny, do you play chess?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:49):
I have played chess, yes.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:32:50):
You have played chess. So advocates are pawns. They don't matter at all until they matter enormously. These are folks that, like, you are the CEO doing a meeting with your potential buyer, and there are somehow 12 people on the Zoom call, but only two do the talking. The other 10 might be advocates. They're rooting for you, but they will take no political risk. Their value is in giving you intel.

(00:33:16):
Blocker. This is the person who can't say yes, but they can say no. This is OPSEC, this is Procurement, this is Legal. You're going to meet all these characters during the Magic Box dance. Your champion just wants you to get the deal done so in love. So what happens, is they've come up with a fantasy and you as a CEO need to lean into it. This isn't enterprise selling. I'm not trying to sell you this thing that I have. I'm just trying to find ways to say yes.

(00:33:47):
So when, in my story, the person says, "Could we provide you all of our video data that we've collected forever and you now could enhance our ability to predict whether large- scale construction projects are on time"? I don't want the CEO saying anything other than, "We can do that."

(00:34:07):
Now, phase two, I need to prove it. Okay, because I have a champion who wants to say yes, proof can be really easy. And the reason the proof is so important, is not to convince the champion they're in love with the fantasy. They're already convinced. It's because in almost all cases, big company is buying little company and your champion doesn't have unilateral authority. They're going to socialize the deal. They have to get buy-in from who? The aforementioned buyer. They have to be able to survive the aforementioned blockers.

(00:34:43):
So eventually, when they pitch this to whatever committee is in charge, that committee is going to say, "What proof do we have that it works?" And we just want to be able to provide the champion with enough evidence that it works. So in this case, we said to the champion, " Well, give us video data, and we will provide you the evidence that you need." Because we're dealing with a champion who's not a cynic, because champions aren't, we could tell them, "And provide us the data in this way, in this fashion, and here's what we'll send you after. Are we in agreement?" We know we're already going to win the proof, and it's critically important in these dances.

(00:35:27):
Number three, quantify. At this point, we're not up for sale, but we're spending a lot of calories on somebody, and they know it. So we have our CEOs say the following phrase to them: "My board is asking questions. They're wondering why we're spending so many calories on this when it's not really core and we're not selling you our product. I'm convinced of how exciting this could be, together, but I think we need to do some math. So I can explain to my board why this might matter. So let's imagine all this works, because it's going to work, and it's a year from now or five years from now. What changes about your business?" And the champion will tell you, "Retention does this, or deal size goes like this, or market share goes like this." And you'll say to them, "Fantastic. Look, I'm going to build some shitty verse version of the model. You tell me what I got right and what I got wrong, but I have a board meeting in 16 days, and I need to be able to walk them through the justify why I am spending so many calories on this exercise."

(00:36:34):
You build the model, you hand it to them. If they in any way respond to your model, you've won. Because you have now divorced history from future, and you are now playing in future, you are playing the Instagram game in this case. The ending of the story for the company that I was describing, it was a business sub 2 million in revenue. Our prospects of raising series B felt low. We were not yet profitable, and that was an exit that was generational wealth for the co-founders and their families. The CEO went on and spent two-plus years with the now public company that did this acquisition. The technology did get integrated, but it took a long time and they had to do a lot of changes to it, certainly beyond what was envisioned during the diligence process. But all parties are happy. And if we hadn't done it this way and we had just been up for sale, we'd get a dollar for that company.

(00:37:40):
A couple of other side points that are really important here. For any of you founders out there that are thinking about working backwards from an exit, there are two things that I really want to stress. One is the fantasy is beyond just, "What is the business change you can have?" The fantasy is, "Your books are in order." Your fantasy is all of your investors will sign off on the deal and you will have unanimous consent, that the key members of your team are going to stick around, that you're a joy to work with. Please God, founder, do not puncture the fantasy at any time.

(00:38:21):
So whatever is starting to shape in your buyer's mind, get to know it. Live that everybody wins from that game. Second, Corp Dev, they will probably show up in the stands. Corp Dev make deals. They're not deal sponsors, they're not a champion, they're not a buyer. They are an expert negotiator. Their job is to facilitate deals and get deals done. The most important things to understand is that they can be a leverage point to have a deal move with some process and some pace and some urgency. Because either deals have momentum or they die, and Corp Dev can help there.

(00:39:04):
Second, they are way better at negotiating than you. So anytime dealing with a superior negotiator, the only thing you can do to try and even the scales, is move the negotiation async. So founders, repeat after me, I'm talking to you directly now. You'll say to Corp Dev, "You know I'm not alone in this decision. I love what you just said and I'm excited about this opportunity. Once I see it in writing, I can socialize it with advisors, lawyers, co-founders, whoever." But don't negotiate live. You will lose.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:39):
Let me just say that was extremely delightful to listen to. I've never heard like a M&A strategy be this fun. And it makes me want to sell a company. It's like, "Okay, let's do this. I'm hyped." I think you got it all. I have a few questions.

(00:39:56):
Interestingly, the middle part is... It feels a lot like enterprise sales, which a lot of founders are used to. Understand the stakeholders move things forward. Here's your champion, here's your blockers, here's the buyer. Is there anything there you want to say, what's maybe most different from enterprise sales, which I think a lot of founders are maybe used to? Or is it pretty similar?

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:40:14):
Yeah, I think three things. One is there are a lot of moments in enterprise sales where we're trying to push for a compelling event. That doesn't work in seduction. The playful metaphor that we'll often use, is you've been dating for a while, this person could be the person, but they're not quite convinced yet that it should be a life together, and you're sitting at dinner. And in enterprise sales, you're eager to get it done. You're eager to move the relationship forward and move in and get engaged, what have you. And so you might be inclined to say, "Hey, either we move this relationship the next step, or there are a whole bunch of people eyeing me, and I'm going to go date someone else."

(00:41:06):
That conversation never goes well, and in Magic Box founders are eager to do the same thing, thinking that competition will improve their deal size, when in fact I think more often than not, that is a negative signal until the very end of the dance. So instead in enterprise selling where I'm pushing, in Magic Box, I'm always trying to entice, I'm never, ever trying to push. So instead I might say things like, "Hey, I'm going to raise my next round in Q1, because I've been intending to do this business independently. Now all I really want to do, is win. I just want my product in as many customers' hands as possible. Whether I do that on my own as I was planning, in partnership with someone, or under someone else's roof, honestly I don't care. But I have a company to run and I'm going to go raise my next round in Q1. And if I do that, probably too expensive for this deal to make sense anymore, and my board will want me to move on anyway." I'm enticing. I'm never trying to push.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:15):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta. When it comes to ensuring your company has top-notch security practices, things get complicated fast. Now you can assess risk, secure the trust of your customers and automate compliance for SOC 2, ISO 27001, HIPAA and more, with a single platform, Vanta.

(00:42:36):
Vanta's market-leading trust management platform helps you continuously monitor compliance alongside reporting and tracking risk. Plus, you can save hours by completing security questionnaires with Vanta AI. Join thousands of global companies that use Vanta to automate evidence collection, unify risk management, and streamline security reviews. Get $1,000 off Vanta when you go to vanta.com/lenny, that's vanta.com/lenny.

(00:43:08):
Okay, so I'm thinking about as a founder hearing this, and I feel like what they're probably wondering is that first step of finding that person, starting to build this fantasy. Any advice you could share for a founder that's like, "We probably need to sell this company"? What can they do to start creating these relationships, find this person, create this fantasy in their minds?

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:43:28):
Ezra does this really well in the book. Again, it has to be not solicitous. So one of our companies, we had maybe 20 months of capital left, and the two co-founders and our team were convinced, "This isn't a venture business. We thought it might be a venture business. It's not a venture business. It takes too long to do a deal that's not that interesting with each of our enterprise customers." It was disappointing, but at least we were honest about it. "Okay, so who are we going to sell to? Let's go play this game."

(00:44:04):
So we started with categories, categories of buyers. It could be, for this particular example that was in my head, ERP companies could be a buyer, large banks could be a buyer, the big software companies like Microsoft could be a buyer. There were a few different categories. And we said, "Great. Who are the companies within those categories that make sense?" They're acquisitive, they have the balance sheet for it. There's a Corp Dev department, so we know that they actually know what they're talking about here. Ideally, there's an existing relationship with core team or advisors or board members. Make a list.

(00:44:45):
Now, how do we meet them in a way without selling them? So one of the examples in the book, which I love, is small startup wants to meet the luminaries in a space, and they have their PR agency set up a panel where they contact the CEOs of the potential buyers and say, "We're putting together a panel of the world's foremost experts in X. We're going to put four people on the panel, and it's going to be you and famous person number two and famous person number three, and this fourth person," that is a luminary to us. And it's our startup CEO. And suddenly you're at the table as a peer. It's a completely different conversation.

(00:45:32):
The second one, and this is going to sound a little silly, but I am not exaggerating, it works. If you are a CEO founder and you have that title on LinkedIn, it's amazing the responses you'll get. So we made this list and we just started to send connection requests to the CEOs or CPOs or CFOs on our target list, and said something as simple as this, "You're doing something really cool. So are we. You game just for a 30-minute chat? Because I don't know where it'll go, but I think it'll be fun." Keep it that informal. It's peer to peer. I'm not selling you anything.

(00:46:10):
If you can draw a line to some post that they had or some speech that they gave, even better. But we found without fail, there would be math that would show up, one out of four, one out of five, or one out of six, "Yeah, that sounds fun." There's a lot of those CEOs never talk to startups, and that's fascinating to them, especially when presented with the energy of, "I just want to have a fun, intellectual discussion."

(00:46:37):
What you're looking for in that first conversation, and this is what we ask our CEOs to do, is to ask questions like, "What do you care most about in the next year? What's the mandate? What about for your department? What are the things that keep you up at night? What's the break? What's the thing that could actually kill everything, if you had a pre-mortem for the next year?" Those kind of open-ended questions, because what we want our CEO listening for, is the fantasy to see if there's some intersection between what they care about and what we might be able to squint and say we do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:07):
It's interesting, because it sounds a lot like there's a jobs-to-be-done framework here, or just like, "What is the job they need done?" What is the pain you're going to solve, and then create a fantasy around how amazing it'll be for them if you can solve that problem.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:47:19):
And ideally they'll say it and you just reflect it back in active listening.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:25):
Chris Voss negotiation style. Okay, so you're the kind of guest, Jonathan, where the whole podcast could be about each one of these topics, and so I know there's so much more to talk about here. I want to move to a different topic, but to leave folks with, one is if they want to explore this methodology more, there's a book you mentioned, called Magic Box Paradigm by Ezra Roizen, right?

(00:47:51):
If companies are in this process, starting to think about it, does it make sense for them to come to you and like, "Hey, help me through this process"? I know you said, "Go to an investment banker." Or does it make sense to like, "Hey, let's bring on Jonathan," or someone from your team to help them?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:00):
It makes sense to like, Hey, let's bring on Jonathan or someone from your team to help them.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:48:03):
We meet two types of founders. Founder one says, fix this part of my business, totally transactional. I want to raise the next round, or I'm hiring people badly or my founders aren't getting along, or I want to sell my company. Well, I need to be honest, that's not interesting to us. That's not our work. Go find someone who is, and I don't mean this disparagingly, but like a screwdriver, like fixes one thing, go fix one thing. Then we meet second type of founder and that founder says, most likely to themselves, 'cause it's the only safe audience. There's some gap between the CEO I am and the one my company needs me to be. There are a set of skills that I'm great at and there are these things where I know if I'm really honest with myself, if I listen to the quiet voice, I'm soft at these things or I'm not good enough at these things or I have some imposter syndrome about these things and if I don't get better at them, danger. That's the one we work with. And it's when they care that much about both the hard skill development and maybe the soft skill development in their path to become a great CEO.

(00:49:10):
How to sell the company. It's one of the skills. We teach this to all of our founders as well as hiring and management and planning. I don't care what the thing is. For every one of our founders, we audit them and say, here's what you're great at, here's what you're shitty at, and here's what you've never done before, and which of these do you want to work on next given where the company is in its cycle.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:29):
Great segue to where I wanted to go with this, which is hiring. So I hear all the time that a founder's core job is fundraising and hiring an amazing team. Basically that's their main goal. Just like hire amazing people. The people you hire make your company, create the culture. You got to get that right. But similar to trying to sell your company, most founders have never really hired lots of people, they've never hired for all these different skill sets they're trying to hire for and I know that you guys spend a lot of time helping founders hire and find amazing people. Can you just share some of the advice you share with founders for how to find and hire amazing people?

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:50:06):
Yeah, so we actually think the CEO has three jobs. We agree with the two that you said, but we think there's a third. One is, make sure everyone knows where we're going. The second one, pick the right people for the team. Third one, give those people the tools they need to win. And you can abstract from those what they all mean, but-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:27):
I love that.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:50:28):
... most founders are really bad at hiring. They fall prey to all sorts of pretty common human biases. The lazy ones, back to laissez-faire, think it's just gambling like, oh cool, they worked at Meta and Salesforce already, so hire them, just gambling. There was work done by and then codified in a beautiful book. I'm going to make sure I get the names right, Geoffrey Smart and Randy Street. They had a consulting firm that dates back to the mid-nineties. Then they wrote a book in 2007 or 2008 called Who: The A Method for Hiring. We have operationalized that book and then expanded on it 'cause there are some parts of it that we found a little dated, but it's really still as applicable today as it ever was.

(00:51:18):
And I think there are three core mistakes that founders make all the time, that can be really easily rectified. The first one is, you should hire people who have already done the thing you need to have done next. And I know that sounds simple, but founders don't think of hiring that way. They start with a job description. We've been taught that for a long time. Start with the job description. It's a fucking mistake. Start with, it's 12 months later, you hired the person, they started today, 12 months have gone by, you're clinking champagne because of how great it's been. What's changed about the business? What does success look like 12 months later? Document it. And then when you interview people, look for people that have already done that stuff.

(00:52:13):
Second, the notion of does the person in front of you have a history of creating raving fans? They talk in the book about this idea of you being pulled or pushed in your career. If you were an outstanding performer in Job A, it is a high likelihood that in job B, someone associated with you in job A is going to pull you into the next thing and then pull you into the next thing and pull you into the next thing and you'll never do a job search 'cause you were great. And if you see a history of that, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, really attractive candidate. Third, core values matter a lot. Culture is not an accident. Culture at scale is the codification of what matters to a business and the ritualization of living those values. It starts with whoever the founders are and then it will emanate across as long as the founders are super consistent. But that also means you need a methodology for evaluating the next human in front of you on whether they actually represent your values. We think of these interview stages in a way similar to the book, we use slightly different language, but we think that there is a culture interview, there is a functional interview, and there is a technical interview, but they're designed to get at these notions of have they actually done this kind of work before? Have they been pulled or pushed in their career and are they your kind of human?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:00):
Funny on that last detail actually, [inaudible 00:54:03] at Airbnb, there was actually a core values interview team that was formed around studying what the founders Brian, and Joe, and Nate valued specifically and then they codified them to core values at the business and then there's this team that was a very select handpicked team that at every interview loop interviewed the person for their values.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:54:22):
That is a beautiful example of how interviewing for values is independent of title. 'Cause you'll find people in the company at every stage of a company that are the best ambassadors, the best embodiments of those values. Please use them for interviewing and in addition, they love it 'cause they're protecting their castle. They love where they work, they want to keep it that way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:45):
So true that team is a real special team and it was really honored to be on that team. So let me summarize what you just shared, which I love. There's so much value here, it just keeps going and going. So when you're hiring, your advice is: look for people, one, that have done it before; two, that have been pulled from job to job by someone else that loves their work and wants them to be with them at this new company. And then three, their values match the values of the founder and the business essentially, right?

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:55:11):
Yes. And for the recruiters out there, a really simple way to get rid of a lot of the crap that ends up showing up at the top of the funnel is just to ask the simple question even in the cover letter, of your last ex-bosses, how many would get on the phone and say, you're amazing? If there's any equivocation in the answer, great, move on.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:35):
So a couple of follow-up questions here. One is, this point of hiring people that have done it, obviously this implies don't hire junior up-and-comers as much. Thoughts on just when it makes sense to hire someone more junior that's really ambitious, real smart, you think they can learn the job, thoughts there?

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:55:53):
So one of our companies is hiring a team of reasonably junior account execs. We're looking for folks that have been out of school for two years. Now, that means they are highly unlikely to have had three years of quota achievements and a similar... you get the point. Okay, so how do you hire someone who's already done it? We know what success looks like 12 months later. For that role, they've learned how to hunt, they've been able to create pipeline of X and close Y in business, et cetera. What we are looking for then in their history, if they have any sales chops of any kind. They could be selling Girl Scout cookies, or tickets to some event, or they work for a non-profit for while. I don't care, but I want some evidence that they've sold. I want some evidence that they're comfortable getting on the phone or showing up at meetings or showing up at events. So, that they've done it before should be reviewed or thought of creatively.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:07):
Got it.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:57:07):
Now for more senior roles, I want an explicit. We think of, for example, for executives, Lenny, we think there are three types of executives that startups end up hiring over time. We call them the architect, the optimizer, and the scaler. The architect, let's use sales as an example. This is someone who has to build a playbook. So they're going to uncomfortably stay close to the founder, watch and listen, and listen to recordings and pick their brain to pull the magic from the founder of like, oh, here's the dance that she or he goes through to actually close a deal and they write first playbook. And the goal of the codification of that is so you can bring on a first account exec and the next account exec because account execs back to our language earlier in this adult children dynamic are children. You need to give them structure for them to win. That's the architect. The optimizer, this is someone who's now going from a few account execs to maybe 10, 15 and we now have targets we have to hit. The business is now reaching a different level of professionalism and expectation and you have to optimize that earlier playbook to try and find more efficiency and performance out of it.

(00:58:21):
The scaler is saying, okay, now how do I find leverage? How do I have 10X more account execs or how to get other people to sell for me? They're all going to be called VP of sales or chief revenue officer. They're completely different archetypes, and that same person exists in engineering and in product, et cetera. In those cases, I only would want to bring on an architect if they'd been an architect before. If they'd only been an optimizer, they're going to fail because they've never written playbook from scratch.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:50):
It touches on a conversation I had recently. It was a live podcast recording with Shreyas Doshi at my summit where he talks about a lot of people are really frustrated at work because they're in the wrong one of those buckets, essentially. Like you enjoy certain type of work and your job is not doing that type of work, whether it's in your case scaling or optimizing. And so, it just reminds that if you're frustrated at work, you're in the wrong job in terms of the type of output they're trying to expect from you.

Jonathan Lowenhar (00:59:18):
The story in my head is that talking to me and my colleagues sometimes can feel a little like death by frameworks. We have one for everything and in this example, I think if you're going to be sustainably successful in any kind of job, I don't care what it is, three things have to be true. You have to be good at it, you have to like it, and the market has to give a shit about it. And if one of those is off, you're not staying in that job long.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:40):
Yeah. And this touches on the name of your firm, Enjoy The Work, got to enjoy the work to make it sustainable. Okay, one other thing. So one other follow up question real quick on the hiring and then I want to talk about one other bucket of work. And again, I think each of these could be like an hour, two hour long podcast conversation. I love that there's this recurring theme of working backwards to inform what you do today. So earlier you talked about working backwards from what the outcome you want next for your business, whether it's fundraising or exit or winding down. And for hiring, you have the similar advice, work backwards from what you want this person to achieve in the first year, whether it's drive this sort of growth in the product or drive sales. I guess anything else there of just the power of working backwards versus the typical approach for hiring, you talked about job descriptions.

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:00:26):
Hiring is never the goal and it's often the first thing that we'll hear from a founder, "I have to hire this person." One, that is so dangerous for confirmation bias. The hiring manager is always the one most burdened by that particular bias, but it's also hiring is never the goal. We will pull them back to over and over and over again, which of the three milestones matter, right? Fundraise, exit, profitability. What has to change about the business, for example, to get to that fundraise? How do we quantify that change? Some sort of goal setting framework. OKRs, EOs, I don't care. All goal setting frameworks have the same bones. There's some description of it, there's some quantification of it, there's some work that has to be done. There's some accountability rituals with clear owners and clear agreements.

(01:01:18):
So once I actually have the quantification of here's what work needs to be done, I now know what resources I need to be able to pull that work forward and therefore now I know what kind of humans I need, whether I'm hiring or renting. And that should drive the conversation, not the, "Oh God, I need another PM." It's no, here's the set of features that we've said matter most this year. Here's the gap in the resources we have and the resources we need, that's why we're hiring this role. And here's what success would look like 12 months from now or six months from now. So they're tying back to what would change about the business.

(01:01:57):
And this is this recurring theme of our work with our founders. They're so in it Lenny that they rarely have time to sit above what they're working on. This notion of working in the business versus on the business. And so much of our work is to separate them from the day-to-day, which is enormously important, not in any way denigrating it, and I need to know where I'm headed and why, and how I'm going to measure progress along the way. And so, so much of what we're doing with them is to say, I want to hear from you what you think success looks like. I'm going to push back and pressure test a bunch of things. Can we define that in a way? Can we agree on who needs to do the work along the way, and how we're going to keep checking on it to keep feedback loop short? Now we can go back into business and then we'll check again in a week or in a month.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:54):
I love that. That's actually a great segue to the final bucket I want to spend some time on which is growth and go to market. Another area that many founders have never worked on before. A lot of founders are like, Hey, I have this awesome idea. I'm going to build this awesome product. I know how to do that. I know what market needs. But building a go-to-market motion to get it into people's hands is a whole different skill. We spent a lot of time on this on the podcast, you have a really cool simple framework of just how to think about go-to-market. There's all this like, oh, you need a go-to-market strategy. Talk about how you talk to founders about thinking about what it takes to put together a go-to-market plan and how to make it a repeatable motion versus just I'm just going to go to people and try to sell them.

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:03:37):
Our founders, even the most capable of them find this topic pretty overwhelming because it branches into so many areas. So we do try and distill it to something that is in bite-sized chunks. We think of it in four pieces. The first piece is ideal customer profile. Who do we really want to sell to? What are their qualifications? What are the discovery questions we would use to get to those qualifications? What are the kill criteria to know that this is [inaudible 01:04:10] fool's goal, this really isn't the human?

(01:04:13):
Second bucket, loosely called marketing. But within that marketing is also positioning. So what is our uncommon denominator from the enemies? So who are we competing against? Is it actual companies or is it status quo in some sort? What are they great at? What are we great at? What are we great at that they're not? Then how do we represent that in the world? That's branding and artifacts and identity work, et cetera.

(01:04:44):
Next is demand gen, which we'll simplify to say, how do we go find the humans we want? I've long loved the book Traction that Gabriel Weinberg... I'm going to forget unfortunately the co-author's name right now, Jason Mares? Sorry. Where they talk about the 19 channels that all companies have availability to, they're the same ones. Now the book has got a couple of years on it, so there are a couple of new channels that have popped out since, but what we then try and expand the aperture for our founders is rather than just think about meeting your next customer through however you did at your last company, availability bias, instead, which of these might make most sense next? A simple two by two matrix can work here like some experimentation, some brain writing. Love brain writing, not brainstorming. I know you've talked about that on prior pods. And then high impact, low effort. Can we think of the three or four experiments we want to run by channel? Let's go play.

(01:05:48):
And then fourth, sales. And this is the codification of a playbook. How are we having the conversation? How are we doing discovery? How are we handling objections? How are we doing demo? How are we moving to close? If we can get through those four, then we can start to talk about deployment and customer success and upselling and account management, et cetera, et cetera. Those are good problems to have. Oh my god, my install base is so large, I need to manage it. Great, great fricking problem. But we try and break this complexity of going from individually selling to building a machine into just these four buckets. Who am I selling to? What do we want to say about ourselves? How do we reach them? How do we close them?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:28):
Amazing. I was going to summarize that. You did an excellent job there. Before we follow up on this, you mentioned this term brain writing. What does that mean?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:06:35):
Oh, first time I heard of this was Adam Grant. I don't know if he's the originator of the idea. Brainstorming, you talked about this a bit in your Annie Duke podcast as well of how horribly coercive meetings can be.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:55):
For brainstorming, especially.

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:06:56):
For brainstorming especially. And so, what many of our founders don't recognize because they just see like, Hey, I'm just sitting around a table with a group of folks I respect, so we can just debate things as peers. No, you can't. You're a founder. Your voice has a megaphone attached to it even if you can't hear it. So you have to turn down the megaphone if you actually want to learn what your people have to say. So brain writing is I'm going to expose an idea and I want everyone to now write and weigh in on there... it could be in a survey, it could be in a shared doc, what have you, my preferences in through some sort of methodology, you are now sharing your opinions, comments, edits, dreams, in an async way that no one else can see until it's all combined, maybe even ideally without authorship identified.

(01:07:50):
Then when the founders weigh in, you don't know, they're just a part of the mass. Let everyone read the thing. I even like the Amazon, take the first 10 minutes of a meeting, let's just go read so we're all fully present and then have a debate. What it allows for is the dampening of the founder effect in meetings.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:18):
You're just so full of golden nuggets. That's just like a random tangent that I think could be really transformative for a lot of teams. So the advice here is just when you're trying to ideate and brainstorm, don't go in a big room and put post- its on a wall and talk throughout ideas and have a discussion. Instead, just everyone individually sits and thinks and shares their thoughts and the founder presents, here's a problem, here's a question we're trying to tackle.

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:08:39):
What it also allows for is an evening of the playing field between fast processors and slow processors, introverts and extroverts, because they're all equally potentially talented in your room, but if you do live brainstorming, you have diminished all the folks that prefer to sit and chew on something first.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:02):
That's very much me. That's exactly how I operate. I need to think and process. I'm not on the spot quick thinker person. So 100% fan of this approach. Let me come back to your go-to-market framework. I have the notes pulled up here. So basically if you're a founder or even a product builder and you're trying to think about how do I... people keep telling me I need a go to market plan, I need to grow this thing. How do I think about this? You're basically saying there's these four buckets to think about; who are you selling to? How are you going to motivate them and get them excited to buy your thing? How do you reach them? And then how do you close them?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:09:37):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:39):
Luckily I have podcasts and newsletter posts on every single one of these buckets, if folks want to pursue each one of these. I have templates for ICPs, marketing advice, all these things. So that's good news. There's a lot of content for people to read if they want to explore this stuff. Let me ask you, where do you often find the biggest bang for your buck when you come to a founder or if founder comes to you and they're like, I need to figure out, go-to-market motions? Just start from the top and work your way down. Or is there, here's where maybe you want to spend a lot of time.

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:10:10):
Early stage founders, and this is certainly more true for the first timers Lenny than the veterans 'cause they learn this problem. The first timers are like twenty-something year olds in a bar and they're being social for the first time in their lives, and anyone that makes eye contact with them is enough for them to say, I want to go on a date with you. That's it. There's no discrimination of any kind, like, oh my god, they like me, I'm in. That's the mistake that hounds first timers. The veterans and those we get our hands on. Instead, we say, let's imagine you could build your perfect customer in a lab, like a Petri dish and you grew them, what do they look like? And if you have any kind of install base, I'll ask the question. I just did this with the founder the other day. They are enterprise whale hunting business. They have four large customers.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:13):
Wait, actually whale... okay, whale hunting in terms of large wealth person or actual whales?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:11:21):
The extreme of enterprise selling.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:23):
Okay, okay, got it. I want to see a whale hunting startup. Okay, go on.

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:11:29):
I said, so which of your four customers is your favorite? Which one, if I got them on the phone, they would rave about you. They would be salivating openly with a chance to evangelize what you're doing for them. And they was like, oh, that's clear. It's this one of the four. Great. Tell me about them. And what you start to see and pull apart from that is the founder does have an ideal profile. They do have a dream. Now, there are all sorts of risks about is the world too small? Is it not a big enough market if they get too tight, and founders get so caught up in that and it's a mistake because all we're-

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:12:00):
... so caught up in that, and it's a mistake. Because all we're looking for in the beginning is a white-hot center of opportunity, a small population that is an enormous fan that's getting enormous impact. We can worry about adjacencies and expansion later. I like to remind them that Amazon just sold books. We can start with one thing and be great at it. So where the founders often get hung up on for us is that they've moved towards selling without contemplating ideal customer profile, without contemplating qualifications, without contemplating discovery questions that get to that. And most importantly, kill criteria, if this is true do not sign them, even if they want to go out on a date with you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:48):
I'm glad you said that because that's exactly what I believe and I hear often on this podcast is how underappreciated picking your customers in early leads are. And if you think about this funnel you described, figure out who you're selling to, how do you motivate them, find them and then sell them, all this trickles down from who are you going after. You will know how to motivate them if you know who you're talking to versus the opposite. If you're talking to everyone-

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:13:11):
It's the most expensive mistake of those four.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:15):
Okay. Is there anything else on go-to-market or growth you think might be helpful just to touch on before we close up our conversation?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:13:25):
The one thing I'll share, this goes back to the ready, fire, aim that we talked about earlier, is that there's implicitly a funnel, mathematical funnel, to what we just described. And founders often make the mistake when planning for the year ahead of I need to be at this revenue to justify this multiple. And then all of the funnel math is a plug, and that's death, as opposed to here's what's been true for the last three months, six months, nine months, 12 months. And then what assumptions can I reasonably make with ways I'm going to influence that funnel going forward, to go build up to where I think I'll be a year from now? And it just lowers the bias that your planning process operates with.

(01:14:15):
But when a founder starts from a place of, "I have to get to 3 million or we're dead," you're already dead. As opposed to what do I really believe I can do to get there, changing top of the funnel, changing conversion rates along the way, changing a deal size or deal length, et cetera based on my recent history, and then have a conversation about the gap between where I think the business reasonably can get with some ambition, and where I think I need to be financially, because that's the more mature conversation and that's the one the ready, fire, aim CEO doesn't have. That's the one most founders have only started to learn to have over the last few years when capital dried up.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:57):
I love that. I love just how practical and real talk your advice always ends up being. Speaking of that, I emailed a founder that you work with and asked him, "What should I ask? What should I ask Jonathan when he comes on the podcast?"

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:14:57):
Uh-oh.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:09):
And he said something that was really... That's great. It was really unexpected what he said. He said that the biggest lesson he learned from you is to, as a founder, to trust his intuition more throughout the journey of his startup. Can you just talk about that as something you've learned, something you've seen, that maybe founders under appreciate?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:15:31):
It's impossible not to be a startup CEO and not face many existential moments. Is my company going to survive? Did I make a mistake? Will I ever be hired again? Should I sell the company now? Should I break up with a co-founder? Should I fire this critical employee? They happen to all of us. And fear is not a good decision maker. Our lizard brain is a really bad decision maker in those moments.

(01:16:07):
And so what we'll often share with the founder who's facing one of these scenarios, and I know the CEO you're describing and he's facing one of these scenarios, we'll say to them, "Do you know that little voice when you get really still, the quiet one that says you should marry this person, you should take this job, you should start this company? Watch out for that human, they're a bad one." And most of the time, Lenny, when I frame it that way the person across me says, "Yeah, I know that voice." And I'll ask, "How do you hear it?" And they're usually some version of, "I have to get really alone, really still, really quiet, walk on the beach, listen to music, work out, play with my pet."

(01:17:06):
I said that voice is who you are. It's not your brain. Your brain is a tool. It's our hands, it's our feet, just a tool. It's a pattern recognition machine. But who you are, if you can watch your brain, you know what you're thinking, like, oh, look what my brain's doing. That means you're not your brain. It's something else. And that's the little voice, and that little voice is going to be right. And where we get screwed up in life is when we stop listening to that voice, when the mania of our chaos of our lives get in the way of that voice.

(01:17:42):
And so whenever our founders face one of those moments, it's not a framework, it's not a playbook, or even a directed piece of advice from us to say, "You should just go left. I've seen this before. Go left." Nope. I trust founder intuition. If the founder says this business is still going to work, or this co-founder is the wrong person, or yes, it's time to sell, I'm in. We're just here to support them. And we try and be the only person in their life that is fully on their team because we're not on the preferred side of the CAFS table. We're not fiduciary, we're not board members, not a co-founder, none of those things. And so in those moments we'll just say, "Can you get really quiet?"

(01:18:21):
And the founder you're talking about, I have the story in my head, he was facing a breakup moment with his co-founder, and I asked him, because he's good at getting quiet, "What did the voice say to you way back when?" And the voice said to him, "This is the wrong fit. This isn't going to work. He believes in different things than I do, and that's going to go badly." But the lizard brain didn't want to believe that, and so it took another year.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:58):
Wow. I had tingles throughout that entire piece of advice. I love how it's also very applicable to just life, not even just being a founder. It's a good reminder to trust that voice more. It's interesting that this also connects to founder-mode a little bit, and I'm curious how you think about that where a lot of the founder-mode advice is like trust your judgment, don't hire people to delegate things away. Do you see a difference in the core idea of founder-mode and just like, but you should actually trust your intuition more?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:19:35):
Intuition comes from, in my point of view, a deep understanding of self, and the capacity to get quiet and be well resourced, meaning you've slept well and you've eaten well and you have enough love in your world. And I think what founder-mode can confuse is my intuition says I should just do this job for them and fire these three people. That's not intuition, that's reaction, that's a fear response. And when the founder says, "I sat with this, I felt it out, I can see it. I need to terminate my whole go-to-market team and start over. This isn't working, and I have data that supports it, but I know this isn't working." I'm like, "Let's go with that. I'm in. Let's do it."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:36):
And I think you described a lot of times people feel this, and it takes a year, two years, three years, many years to actually realize that. And your advice here is try to listen to that more and trust it more. Yeah. Wow. Okay. Well, Jonathan to pivot our energy, is there anything else want to leave listeners with, last piece of advice, anything that you think might be helpful before we get to a very exciting lightning round?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:21:04):
To be a founder is a state of being. It's an attitude, it's courage, it's instinct, it's a capacity to push through, despite all sorts of evidence suggesting you're wasting your time. To be a CEO is a craft. The more founders who can accept that those are two separate things and they're both equally important to build an ascendant startup, the better all of us will be. And so what I would encourage every founder out there that wants to go build something substantial, go work on your craft in addition to working on the business. Be honest with yourself about here's the shit I'm bad at. I don't know how to read a financial statement. My board meetings suck. Half my meetings that I have with my leadership team we all walk out of there saying what did we just accomplish right now? Or I get to the end of my workday and I'm like, I didn't get anything done. Those are all examples of just not taking the craft seriously enough. I'll leave with that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:18):
I love that. And I think I've made the mistake during our conversation of confusing founder and CEO and assuming they're the same thing, and I really appreciate you just again pointing out to folks that that's the big distinction you got to start making is there's the founder and there's the CEO. Often they're same person, but different parts of your brain and different skill sets.

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:22:36):
And I'm now fully off the very awkward soapbox I've been sitting on for a long time, so we can go to lightning round whenever you're ready.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:44):
With that, we've reached our very exciting lighting round. Jonathan, are you ready?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:22:48):
I'm ready. I'm ready.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:49):
First question, what are two or three books that you have recommended most to other people?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:22:54):
My number one business book that I've recommended would be Five Dysfunctions of a Team, by Patrick Lencioni. I do think it always comes back to team. The right team can solve all the things. And that book is a beautiful distillation of the most common problematic archetypes that show up in a leadership group. So that's the number one.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:16):
Amazing. Anything else you'd recommend?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:23:19):
The second one, it goes more personal. It's a book called Untethered Soul, by Michael Singer. It was, at least for me, the first introduction to this idea that I am not my brain and that my brain can be a tool that serves me well, and at times doesn't. So that would be number two.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:38):
I've started to read that book and then I never finished it, so this is a good reminder to give it another shot. Second question, do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:23:50):
I just watched and really enjoyed, because by the way, I have a three-year-old at home, so the amount of content I now consume is reduced tremendously. Well, my wife and I just watched Will & Harper. This is the documentary between Will Ferrell and his very dear friend who just recently transitioned. They road trip across the country together, and it was freaking delightful. It was sweet and endearing and one of the better things I've watched in a while.

(01:24:19):
TV show, Slow Horses, I'm utterly addicted. I'm only midway through season two, but I've been voraciously sleeping less and watching more.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:31):
I love both those. I just watched Will & Harper, and completely agree with your sentiment about it. I wasn't planning to watch it. My mother-in-Law started watching. I'm like, wow, this is really fun. It's also funny, meaningful funny.

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:24:43):
There's so many moments in it that are really sweet. As an aside, this was '20, I don't know, April 2020, and a group of our very close friends said, "Hey, how are we going to keep in touch?" And so we started what we called Movie Club, and we routinely either pick a TV show or a movie. We all watch separately and every two weeks we get together on Zoom at night, we talk about what we just watched.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:06):
I love that.

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:25:07):
And some have been great, some have been terrible. But Will & Harper was our most recent.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:10):
Oh, such a cool tradition. Okay, we'll keep going. Do you have a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love? Could be an app, could be something physical?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:25:21):
Two, and one is I'm going to talk my own book, but I still love it. The first one is Aura Frames. These are digital picture frames. They're amazing. The UX for them is incredible, the quality of it, they're pieces of artwork. So grandparents, in-laws, parents, we have multiple in our house, just love it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:46):
Just to clarify, it's a frame that has picked digital photos and you can give it to your mom and show photos of your kid wherever they live. Is that right?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:25:55):
And the combination of the ease of the software and the quality of the imagery is better than anything I've tried, and I've tried a bunch of them. A-U-R-A Frames, and this is not an Enjoy The Work company. This is just one I'm a giant fan of.

(01:26:08):
The second one is an Enjoy The Work company called Augie Studio. A-U-G-I-E Studio. This is Canva for video. It can turn anyone with no engineering skills whatsoever, no code video creation, with full editing tools. So suddenly you can create branded high fidelity, high quality commercial video in minutes, with no effort. It's amazing. It was built by two media tech co-founders that were building this thing pre-ChatGPT, and it's just growing like this, and it's super fun, and the guys are great. So A-U-G-I-E Studio.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:51):
Sounds amazing. Augie Studio, I could use that. That sounds awesome. Two more questions. I feel like this one's going to be a good one. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to find useful and work on in life?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:27:04):
The first one, and the one that I probably most commonly refer to, is that there is only one life. The quick backstory, and I know it's a lightning round, but I'm guilty of these stories. I went for a walk with a girlfriend of mine a bunch of years ago. And we did this once a month and we would always have a pretty typical ritual of giving each other life updates to begin the walk. And so I started the conversation with, "So there's the family update and then there's my work life and then there's my social life." She's like, "No, no, no, no, no, stop. That's all bullshit. It's one life. Stop assuming that there are these pretend walls between them or among them." I've lived that ever since.

(01:27:42):
So I try and show up. That phrase lets me show up the same way, no matter my setting. If you and I were having a beer or a meal, or if I'm sitting with one of my co-founders or clients, it doesn't matter, I show up the same way everywhere. Part of the way I enjoy the work is by having a real friendship, a real intimacy with everyone at Enjoy The Work, and including our clients as well, I want that level of conversation. I don't want the sterile stuff over here with my work environment versus my personal versus my family. It's just one version of me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:15):
And the phrase is, it's just one life.

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:28:17):
Just one life.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:18):
It's just one life. Final question. So you ran a casino at one point, I believe, and it was like a Harrah's Casino, is that right?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:28:28):
My first career was in the casino business.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:30):
Okay.

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:28:31):
But before I go on, what's the question?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:32):
The question is just is there a fun story, or experience, or lesson from that time in your life that might be fun to share? Maybe a mob involvement, or cheating, or something? I imagine that's a unique life experience.

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:28:48):
I'll tell one of my favorite family stories then briefly. But yes, my family goes back in casino gambling in one form or another, several generations. My great-grandmother ran a illicit poker game. My grandfather ran numbers out of a gas station. My father's been in the casino industry since Atlantic City in the 70s. My sister is a prominent gaming attorney, and I worked in the industry for a dozen years, so this is my family. And Lenny, I didn't know any of this was weird until I was in my mid 20s.

(01:29:18):
I turned 21, and I'm old, yes, I'm going to just hide the year. I'm kidding. Anyway, I turned 21 and we take a family trip to Las Vegas because that was normal for us. My father was doing a lot of work out there, so he got us hotel rooms, etc. I'd never been there before, and I was newly 21 and so my parents said, "You have $300 to gamble with. We're going to be here for five days." This is a vacation. My grandparents are coming in. My uncle and aunt were coming in, and they're encouraging me, "This is all up to you, but try not to lose it all on night number one," which was good advice to give me. I was 21 and I was pretty much a schmuck at the time. But also, part of my experience being there was to interview for a summer internship. I was a college going to be junior.

(01:30:06):
So we go and I immediately go sit at some table and start playing some games. And I turn $300 into a few thousand dollars in the very first evening. And that was exciting and it was crazy and it was wild, et cetera. On the third night, which happens to everyone who goes to Vegas for too long, we're all delirious because all of us are staying up all night and being silly and being stupid. And my parents ask me, by the way, this is pre-cell phones, they ask me, "Hey, can you stay awake? Your uncle and aunt are going to arrive late tonight. They'll call the room. You can come down and just greet them and say hello?" Sure. So I get the phone call like 11: 30 at night. Go on downstairs, they're here. I go downstairs in the casino floor. We're staying at the Las Vegas Hilton. It's since been renamed, but I go downstairs and I can't find them anywhere. I think, okay, well I have cash in my pocket and I'm now awake so I might as well gamble.

(01:30:53):
Shortly thereafter, Lenny, I have an experience that happens one in 369,000 occurrences, and I win $35,421.92. For the trip I ended up winning $40,000 that I turned $300 to, and I was just 21 years old, which has left me with one of my mantras that I've had for the rest of my life, which some people roll their eyes at, but that is gambling does pay.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:20):
I love that you remember the exact amount. What games did you end up playing that helped you win so much money?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:31:27):
The primary game that I played was Caribbean Stud Poker, where there's no skill of any kind. You get five cards, the dealer gets five cards, whoever wins wins, and if you have particularly unusual hands you get odds on the hand. And I got dealt 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 of spades in five cards.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:44):
I thought you'd say slots or something. I love that you're just sitting there playing poker and went from $300 to $40,000.

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:31:51):
It's not even real poker.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:53):
That was a great story. I'm glad I went there. Jonathan, this was incredible. I think we've helped a lot of founders through this conversation. Two final questions. Where can folks find you guys? Who would be a good fit? What should people know about Enjoy the Work? And finally, how can listeners be useful to you?

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:32:10):
Love that. So let me unpack those three. The first one is enjoythework.com, or just find me on LinkedIn. I'm not hard to find. Send us a note.

(01:32:22):
Who should ping us is very simple. If you're a founder out there, or a CEO out there, and you know in your heart that there's some gap between how you're running the business and how the company's going, and how it could be going, and how you could be running the business, if there's some gap there, we're here to help. Now our expertise, as we talked about in this call, is company building. So if you just have an idea on a napkin or you have a science experiment that you're not sure, we're useless, that's not us. But if you have some breadcrumbs worth following, like the business is starting to work, you're a series A into B and beyond, and you know that there's better, you can see it, that's where we help. Send us a note. Love to chat.

(01:33:06):
How can listeners be useful to us? So we are ferocious readers. All we try and do is study how do the best startups do X? From tiny things, like how do they run all hands meetings or off sites to the big meta topics of what is going to repeatable go-to-market even mean? Or what is financial planning in a way that's useful? Or how do you set goals that won't make you roll your eyes? We consistently learn from the ecosystem of podcasters and authors and journalists, like, go look at this material. So if your listeners have a favorite X on whatever topic in running a startup, send them my way. All we love to do is read and chew on that stuff.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:54):
Awesome. And the best way to send that is either through Enjoy the Work or LinkedIn.

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:33:58):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:59):
Awesome. Jonathan, thank you so much for being here.

Jonathan Lowenhar (01:34:02):
Lenny, this was so damn fun. Thanks for listening to my crazy casino stories.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:07):
I want to hear more, but we got to go. Bye everyone.

(01:34:11):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast. com. See you in the next episode.

Judd Antin (00:00:00):
User-centered performance refers to customer obsession or user-centered practice that is symbolic rather than focused on learning. It's hugely common, I would argue. It's work we do to signal to each other how customer obsessed we are, not because we want to make a different decision. If your listeners are like, "I don't do that." I'm like, "Think about it for a second. This is extremely common." Every time a PM comes to a researcher at the end of a product process and says, "Can you just run a quick user study just to validate our assumptions," that's user-centered performance. It's too late to matter. We got to ship it. What they want is to check the box. One of my big mantras was, "We don't validate, we falsify. We are looking to be wrong." Many PMs, many designers are not in that place. They do not want to be wrong. They're looking to validate, and that's user-centered performance.

Lenny (00:00:54):
Today my guest is Judd Anton. Judd helped build the user research practice at Facebook. He was a longtime head of research at Airbnb, and his direct reports have gone on to lead research teams at Figma, Notion, Slack, Robinhood, Duolingo, Fair, and other amazing companies. These days, Judd spends his time consulting, helping companies with organizational challenges, product strategy, design, research, hiring, onboarding, and crisis management. In our conversation, we unpack a conclusion that Jud has come to recently about how the user research field is going through a reckoning and what needs to change both within the user research field and how companies leverage user research going forward. 

(00:01:37):
Judd shares what the user research field has gotten wrong over the last decade, how PMs and designers rely on user research too often, and to answer the wrong questions, where user research will continue to provide significant value, and how to best leverage your researchers, why it's important for researchers to think about the business goals more versus just what the users need, what to look for when you're hiring a user researcher, how PMs can be better partners to researchers, and also a phenomenon that I love that Judd describes and often witnesses, that he calls user-centered performance, where everyone acts like they care about the user, but they're just doing it for show and already know what they want to do. This episode has a lot of spicy takes and will probably upset some people, but Judd is sharing some real talk, here, that I think we all need to hear. With that, I bring you Judd Antin after a short word from our sponsors. 

(00:02:27):
This time of year is prime for career reflection and setting goals for professional growth. I always like to spend this time reflecting on what I accomplished the previous year, what I hope to accomplish the next year, and whether this is the year I look for a new opportunity. That's where today's sponsor Teal comes in. Teal provides you with the tools to run an amazing job search with an AI powered resume builder, job tracker, cover letter generator, and Chrome extension that integrates with over 40 job boards, Teal is the all-in-one platform you need to run a more streamlined and efficient job search and stand out in this competitive market. There's a reason nearly one million people have trusted Teal to run their job search. If you're thinking of making a change in the new year, leverage Teal to grow your career on your own terms. Get started for free at tealhq.com/lenny. That's tealhq.com/lenny. 

(00:03:18):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate your growth. Thousands of fast-growing companies like Gusto, KOM, Quora, and Modern Treasury trust Vanta to help build scale, manage, and demonstrate their security and compliance programs, and get ready for audits in weeks, not months. By offering the most in-demand security and privacy frameworks such as SOC 2, ISO 27001, GDPR, HIPAA, and many more, Vanta helps companies obtain the reports they need to accelerate growth, build efficient compliance processes, mitigate risks to their businesses, and build trust with external stakeholders. 

(00:03:55):
Over 5,000 fast-growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2 and these other frameworks. For a limited time Lenny's podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Go to vanta.com/lenny, that's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discounts. Get started today. Judd, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast,

Judd Antin (00:04:22):
Lenny, thanks for having me.

Lenny (00:04:24):
It's my pleasure. So we actually worked together at Airbnb for many years. And as I was preparing for this, I realized how many of the people that you managed went on to do amazing things. So I'm just going to read a list of people that worked for you and what they do now. We had Matt Gallivan, who now leads research at Slack. We have Janna Bray, who leads research at Notion, Celeste Ridlen, who leads research at Robinhood. Rebecca Grey, who leads research at Fair, Hannah Pileggi, who I think was leading research at Duolingo, Louise Beryl, who leads research at Figma, and then Noam, who was leading research at Wealthfront. I think he moved on to something else. What a fricking crazy alumni community and group from this one team that you hired and incubated.

Judd Antin (00:05:11):
No, I've never looked at that list, but I'll tell you, I have been so privileged to work with all these amazing humans. I can't take credit for it. They're just outstanding people. And I'm glad the diaspora is out there, because these people, rock stars.

Lenny (00:05:23):
Okay. The main reason that I wanted to do a podcast episode with you is that you wrote this piece that was titled The User Research Reckoning is Here, which I understand caused quite a stir in the research community and I think adjacent communities. And let me just read one of your takeaways at the top of your post to give people a sense of what it was about. You wrote, "The user research discipline over the last 15 years is dying. The reckoning is here. The discipline can still survive and thrive, but we'd better adapt, and quick." Before we get into the meat of the piece, could you share a bit about just the reaction to this piece and maybe if it was a surprise and what you expected would happen when you put this out?

Judd Antin (00:06:06):
Yeah, I was definitely surprised. I wrote it because I wanted to start a conversation about something I was thinking about. I didn't really know who would read it. And in the end it turned out a lot of people read it. I learned that using the word reckoning may have been a mistake because it inspires a lot of drama in a conversation that I wanted to be really productive and positive. Overall, I would say, though, that the response was very positive. It seemed to resonate with a lot of people who reached out to me. I spent a lot of time talking to teams, to designers, to researchers, but there were also a ton of critiques. 

(00:06:43):
I would say some of it was like people thought I was throwing research or researchers under the bus, like, "It's researchers' fault. We're doing it wrong." Which I don't believe at all. And that I wasn't taking responsibility as a research leader or a design leader myself. And the most interesting one I would say was the anti-capitalist crew, because one of my points that we'll talk about is that I think researchers need to be more profit focused. And there are a lot of people out there who, I think they think that's not cool or not research's job, and I'm like, "Well, what are we doing then, if we're not helping businesses succeed?" But that was the most surprising critique, for sure.

Lenny (00:07:23):
I've worked with some of those people who are just like, "Why are we growing? Why do we focus so much on growth? Why do we need to grow this business?"

Judd Antin (00:07:29):
Yeah. 

Lenny (00:07:29):
So I get that. 

Judd Antin (00:07:30):
Maybe it's the wrong industry for them.

Lenny (00:07:32):
Yeah. I'm not a fan of that. Okay. Let's actually dig into the meat of your message, and the big takeaway, and the conclusion of what you're finding is happening in user research. And I know a lot of this comes from a lot of user researchers have been laid off at a lot of companies. It was one of the hardest hit teams. And so I think a lot of this comes from that. So yeah, so let's just start big and then see where it goes.

Judd Antin (00:07:53):
So yeah, everybody who's paying attention has noticed that there have been a bunch of layoffs. And I think back in the summer I was thinking, "Listen, this seems to be hitting UX and UX research particularly hard. Is there something going on? Is there a bigger picture?" The reason I use the word reckoning is because to me that's like, "Hey, a moment to take stock." And triggered by the fact that a lot of wonderful humans may have lost their jobs, and many more are afraid of losing their jobs. And so if it's a sign, the fact that research has been hit so hard, it's a sign of what? And so the thesis of my article is really, it's a sign that maybe the system is a little more broken than we think and that research is not driving the value or impact that it should or could. And that's for a bunch of reasons, I think. Some of it is stuff that research can do better, and a lot of it is how research is integrated and positioned in companies. 

(00:08:46):
And at the root of all that, I think, is that we're just doing too much of what I would consider the wrong type of research. And what I mean by the wrong type of research is I have this framework, and it's in the article, macro, middle range, and micro research, at least three ways to talk about it. And it's pretty simple, the intuition of what those are. So macro research is big picture, strategic, business focused, forward-looking innovation, look at the market, look at competitors, long-term research to understand where the product should go next, stuff like that. 

(00:09:20):
And then you have micro research, which a lot of really technical usability falls into this, all the beautiful stuff that researchers do to enable a really high quality, excellent, pixel perfect thing to go out the door, laser-focused research to understand AB test results, stuff like that. And then you have this middle range, which is this blobular place where the research questions are middle altitude and a lot of the core, let's say user understanding questions fall here. And a lot of what research is doing is research in that space. It's, "Let's take a group of people and ask some questions about how they think, feel, behave, how they're using a product or not using a product." And it's just this devastating mix of really interesting to many, including researchers, and not impactful enough for the business. That's the core thesis. Researchers do it because it's interesting, but honestly, and a thing we should talk about, Lenny, is researchers also do it because it's the kind of work we most often get asked to do. 

Lenny (00:10:22):
Yeah. That's exactly what I was thinking. As a PM, that's what I want to get answers to, is like, "How should we think about this one product?" And I totally get this.

Judd Antin (00:10:31):
Yeah. The questions turn out to be really interesting and there are many cases at many companies where it's super impactful. But the problem with those types of questions is they tend to, they trigger all the worst stuff that researchers experience. So they yield results which are interesting, but sometimes hard to operationalize. They trigger the post hoc bias, really, really, really well where a lot of people can say confidently like, "Oh, that was obvious. We knew that already." And they fulfill this need for us to feel and be customer obsessed, user-centered, without changing anything. So doing too much of that research to me is a symptom of a broken system, and where companies are really different from each other. I heard from so many after this article and they're like, "Well, my company and my industry is like this or not like this." 

(00:11:24):
But in tech, we spent the last many years hiring, hiring, hiring researchers, but maybe, I'm sure most of your listeners are familiar with the idea of a ZIRP. Maybe it was a zero interest base phenomenon, where it was okay when the money was easy, to hire researchers, even though we were not setting them up properly. We're were going to set them up to fail. We set them up as a service function. We didn't know what research was for. We didn't know how to really drive impact with it. And that's where the reckoning comes from. It's like that era is over. Research, I think, is more crucial than ever. Good, great researchers are more impactful than ever. But it's in a new space. We're in a new space now.

Lenny (00:12:05):
I want to make sure people understand this framework. And specifically, how would you best describe the difference between this middle range research and macro research?

Judd Antin (00:12:16):
Middle range research is usually focused on a more specific set of research questions or a constituency. So if macro is like, "Let's understand the overall competitive landscape. Let's do a concept car type project where we really look ahead. Let's get involved with strategic planning," which is a wonderful thing for researchers to do, do TAM studies, other things like that, that stuff lives in the macro space. 

(00:12:42):
The middle range space is like, what's a good example? "We want to know how Airbnb hosts feel about their payment options." That's a really interesting, reasonable question. And we can go out and do research on that, but it's not that specific. It's not really targeted at a business problem yet. It could be. Maybe that's a result of the research, but it yields these middle range insights in which we've learned things like, "Well, hosts want flexibility about their payment options." I'm making this up. And that's a good example where it's like, "It's not that that's not an interesting set of questions, it's just not quite pointed enough." And it's not framed in the language of the funnel, or the business strategy, or the OKRs. It's not quite enough aligned enough to that. It's too blobular in that middle level and it ends up not driving impact.

Lenny (00:13:38):
I think it also leads to a lot of the things as you described, people don't like about research. It delays everything. You have to wait for the research to be done to have an answer, to make a clear decision. It also creates this issue that people complain about, that PMs and product teams don't want to just make a decision on their own. They're like, "I will get this additional data point and make sure research tells us this is the right answer instead of just trusting there." God, I guess maybe along those lines, this might be going off a little track, but what's your advice there for, say, product managers or PMs or product teams to not necessarily rely on research for that middle research?

Judd Antin (00:14:14):
I think the reason why so many PMs ask for those middle range questions is because they haven't really gotten deep with their researcher in a way which can leverage it for maximum impact. So if the question is like, "Hey, Judd, you just pointed out a bunch of problems, can you be more solutions oriented?" Well, the solution is simple but not easy to me. It's that we need to restructure the way we make products in a way which integrates research much more fully. It looks like consistent relationships in which researchers, and the work, and the insights they provide are a part of the process from beginning to end.

(00:14:51):
And I think, Lenny, you as a PM, that's how you worked. I remember you, I know who you worked with. You worked with great researchers. But honestly, most product processes are not that way. And so that's when research is a service function. It gets called in right at the end. It's reactive in the sense that a researcher in the room listening and participating in the conversation could have a ton of impact on framing exactly the right question that will drive maximum business impact, maximum product improvement at that moment, and then go do it quick, and get back, and we're onto the next. But they weren't there, the relationship wasn't there. They're not engaged in the project from the beginning. And that's the number one root of the problem. As long as research is a service discipline, I think we're going to be stuck in this spot.

Lenny (00:15:37):
When people might be hearing this, on the one hand, it's research has been not as helpful to teams as they thought, and researchers have been spending time on the wrong thing. On the other hand, your advice is integrate research from the beginning, make them more involved throughout. And I think that might confuse people. How should people think about, like, "Research is actually more important? You should integrate them more deeply."

Judd Antin (00:15:59):
There's a vicious cycle that's been happening, is from where I sit, and this is what I hear from many, many researchers and research leaders, which is a lot of companies hired a lot of researchers with great intentions, didn't quite know how to integrate them. And UX research is a newer discipline, so maybe that's not surprising. We're still learning how to use it. "Cool, let's evolve." But a lot of companies hired these people, but they hired them into kind of like a service discipline, very reactive, not in the room, not integrated in the way I said. 

(00:16:30):
And so they had less input on the questions to ask, or they're included, but only at the end. And then they're unable to build those direct relationships, to be there in the room to actually drive the questions and insert insights. Because a good researcher is like the repository of insights you need for growth, but they're not there. They don't participate in the decision. So they end up doing research. They have jobs to do, so they do research that is too reactive, it doesn't matter, and then it's less impactful. Executives conclude that therefore researchers are not as impactful and then they get sidelined or laid off and the cycle continues. 

(00:17:07):
So I think the short circuit is the constant engagement. If you take a great researcher and you insert them consistently in a product process, I feel confident that researcher will drive a product improvement, metrics impact, growth, all the things that you want to see as a PM and a product leader. It's just that's the exception, not the norm these days.

Lenny (00:17:31):
This may be a hard question to answer, but when people hear, "If you have a great researcher, here's how you approach it." What are signals that your researchers is great versus not great? What are some things people could look for to tell them, like, "Oh, maybe I have the wrong researcher on my team."

Judd Antin (00:17:44):
The best researchers I think are first of all, multi method. The first iteration of user research was primarily a qualitative discipline. But a strong opinion that I have is that is largely one of those models that needs to evolve. It's not that qualitative user research is no longer important. It's that the best researchers have five tools. I think they have five tools. And those five tools are number one, what we would call formative or generative user experience research. So looking ahead, innovation focused, really open-ended, maybe more ethnographic, "Let's go out into the field and talk to host and guests on Airbnb. Let's see people using our product in the field," stuff like that. So that's formative. 

(00:18:27):
The second type is evaluative, so more like usability testing. The third tool is a basic rigorous survey design. It's the best scaled way to get responses from communities small and large. You can get a lot out of really well crafted surveys. But to do that, you have to have the fourth tool, which is applied statistics, the best research, know a little bit of stats. You can't interact in a world of AB testing without knowing basic statistics. 

(00:18:56):
And then in the old version of this, the fifth tool was SQL, because I think good researchers need to be able to run their own queries. These days, so much of that is dashboarded, that the fifth tool may now be prompt engineering, which is a thing we could talk about, but I think maybe that's the fifth tool is somewhere, is it technical skills that fall in between querying your own data, understanding it very well in companies that are awash with data and then interacting with generative AI.

Lenny (00:19:24):
Amazing. That's such a cool list. Okay, so just to playback, formative, generative, innovative skills to think bigger and come up with new ideas, usability.

Judd Antin (00:19:35):
Yep.

Lenny (00:19:35):
Yeah, usability. How did you describe it? I have a different word, here. Evaluate? Evaluative?

Judd Antin (00:19:41):
Evaluative, right.

Lenny (00:19:41):
Okay.

Judd Antin (00:19:41):
So we're evaluating products and doing more. Really that's the micro level of research. 

Lenny (00:19:47):
Survey design, being really rigorous about it, applied statistics, and then SQL/dashboard/prompt engineering. 

Judd Antin (00:19:53):
Right. 

Lenny (00:19:54):
Maybe just one last question along this thread, also a big question, but any advice for how to evaluate these skills/interview for them? I know this is its own deep topic, but any advice for someone trying to find this person?

Judd Antin (00:20:05):
I've interviewed hundreds or thousands of researchers, and the way I usually approach that is you want a researcher who's got a Swiss army knife, because if all you have is a hammer, then everything looks like a nail. And so if you give in the context of an interview, let's say, a researcher, a pretty juicy, open-ended research question, and you want to see how they handle it, and a good answer is usually multi-method. We're not going to handle it in any one way. We're going to say, "Well, here's a couple of ways we could deal with this. Here's how we could do this in a day, or a week, or a month." We usually don't have a month, but sometimes big research projects go on for that long. "And here are the different sets of methods that we can use." 

(00:20:44):
So see where they go. It's actually pretty simple. Most researchers are deeper in one than the other, and sometimes you can make up for those five tools with the team. So you have experts who are t-shaped, but maybe deeper in one or several of those ways. But when I built a team at Meta and at Airbnb, that was my goal, is individually as researchers build up those tools and then as a team build deep expertise that would fill all the gaps.

Lenny (00:21:10):
Coming back to the main premise of your post, one of your big takeaways is, "Researchers need to be much more business oriented, thinking about what helps the business versus the user." Which I think to a lot of researchers will feel really weird. Can you just talk about your takeaways there?

Judd Antin (00:21:25):
So much of user experience practice, not just research, but design too, is focused on empathy and very user-centered. This is beautiful. I'm not saying that we should abandon that. I think what I'm saying is there's an overlapping event, where you have the user and profit or the business. And what researchers need to do is be way more explicit about finding that overlap. So one thing, when researchers ask for advice, they're like, "Well, what should I do to be more business or profit focused?" I say something like, "Did you read the last quarterly report, If it's a public company? Did you listen to the shareholder call?" And they're probably like, "No, it's full of a bunch of language I didn't quite get." 

(00:22:12):
And I'm like, "Yep." So there you go. That's the language you need to learn. Scour your Google Drive folder, your internal folder and look for all of the documents that are about this quarter, or this halves, or next half strategy. What are the OKRs? Understand the metrics and the conversion funnel, know it back and forward, because then what you're doing is you're proposing, if you're in the active conversation, you're saying, 'Cool, I hear you asking that research question. I've identified this is exactly the spot in the funnel where I think we need to do work. There's an opportunity here. Or that competitor is eating our lunch with this group of users. I know that because I read the competitive report and I understand it deeply.'" So those are skills that some researchers have and a lot are building these days, but historically, last 15 years, it hasn't been a thing we've been as focused on, and I think that's an evolution that needs to happen.

Lenny (00:23:06):
I think a lot of PMs listening to this are going to be like, "Hallelujah." This is exactly what I've been trying to convince people of. It's what I've been trying to convince my researchers of, and design often falls into this.

Judd Antin (00:23:17):
But Lenny, the opposite is true, too, because you got to take the average PM who lives in that land, all day, every day, and what they do is not in the Venn. I think those are people who are also performing customer centricity and performing user-centeredness a lot, when they're really not interested. And so this is not about researcher. This takes two sides. Fixing this broken system takes everyone, researchers, PMs, designers, everyone at a company, but also the way that organization is structured, and integrating itself in a different way. Everybody's got to come to the table.

Lenny (00:23:55):
Such a good point. And you have this actual term that you call user-centered performance, where it's the performance of being user-centered. Can you talk about that and then just what advice you'd give to PMs that, hearing this, are like, "Yes, I love everything you're saying," and then not realizing maybe they're too far in that extreme?

Judd Antin (00:24:11):
User-centered performance is a term I made up, because it's fun to make up terms. And it refers to customer obsession or a user-centered practice that is symbolic rather than focused on learning. So it's hugely common, I would argue. It's work we do to signal to each other how customer obsessed we are, not because we want to make a different decision. And if your listeners are like, "I don't do that." I'm like, "Think about it for a second." Because this is extremely common. It shows up in explicit ways and implicit ways. 

(00:24:52):
So explicitly, I would say every time a PM comes to a researcher at the end of a product process and says, "Can you just run a quick user study just to validate our assumptions?" That's user-centered performance. It's too late to matter. That PM is not interested in being wrong at all. It's too late in the game for that. We got to ship it. What they want is to check the box. So any check the box style research is a wild example of user-centered performance. 

(00:25:22):
I would argue every researcher has probably had to do executive listening sessions because a lot of PMs, founders, product people, but designers, too, they want to get close to the customer. And so, like, "Can I do some focus groups? I want to be there. I want to ask them questions." This is 97% performance. It's well-intentioned, but it isn't focused on learning. It isn't going to drive better outcomes or more impact. 

(00:25:49):
And then there's all these implicit ways that people engage in that kind of user performance, too. A lot of it comes down to cognitive biases, confirmation bias, ego. One of my big mantras was, "We don't validate, we falsify. We are looking to be wrong." That is the mindset you should use when you're approaching insights and research. "I want to be wrong. I want you to do research that shows we were off base in the following ways. Tell me exactly how and why in a way that allows me to fix it quickly." But many PMs, many designers are not in that place. They do not want to be wrong. They're looking to validate. And that's user-centered performance.

Lenny (00:26:29):
Oh, man. I think a lot of people are hearing this and feeling exposed.

Judd Antin (00:26:33):
Exposed.

Lenny (00:26:35):
I feel like you're like this Deep Throat person coming from sharing these things people don't want to talk about at the office.

Judd Antin (00:26:35):
I know.

Lenny (00:26:42):
There's this quote in your post I'm going to read. "Product managers love to ask for middle range research that they can use to justify decisions they're reluctant to make on their own. User designers love to ask for middle range research because it fits their model of what proper design process should look like. Executives love to ask for middle range because they don't really understand what research is for, and helps them do performative user-centeredness. In the end, they will decide based on their own opinions."

Judd Antin (00:27:07):
There is an important place for intuition in product development, of course. The best designers, researchers, product people develop strong intuition for the product. But you got to understand, intuition is where all of those biases lie. It's where all your blind spots are. And what great insights people do, what great researchers do when you're next to them all the time, is they'll expose you. I don't have to be the Deep Throat, because you have somebody who's professional job is ... Keeping you honest is probably the wrong way to put it, but as somebody whose capabilities are about expanding your horizons, making it so that your intuition is constantly improving, you don't have to rely on it when your intuition and the evidence sort of collide in a way that either affirms or falsifies the product decision you made. Now something really good is happening. 

(00:28:00):
And the other thing that is inherent in that quote is I, at Airbnb, wore many hats over the years. I was head of research two different times. I was head of design for guest products. And my last job was I was head of the design studio, so UX research, UX design, writing, localization, they all reported up to me. So I've seen this from many disciplinary angles in the UX field. And researchers aren't the only ones who are guilty of this. I would say design has a ton of performance. And it comes from the fact that we have figured out user-centered design, this process, or design thinking, which IDEO popularized. Like, "That's what we're supposed to do, right? Bezos told us that we, as PMs, had to be customer obsessed. So that's what we're supposed to do."

(00:28:48):
It's a really common and damaging thing when we don't genuinely have that growth learning mindset, and it's easy to sideline researchers. We don't need them in that situation. We've got our guts. Isn't the gut where a great PM, a great founder needs to have that gut? And they do, but they need to be open to the fact that your gut, is limited, and biased, and narrow, and wrong sometimes.

Lenny (00:29:13):
The two sides of this is trust your gut opinion, "I don't need research, I don't need data. I have opinions, and my own experience, and I'm going to use the product, and let's just go with what feels right to me." Versus pure data-driven research driven for designers that are maybe listening for product managers. Do you have any advice for just where to fall on that spectrum and just how to best leverage research to inform that opinion?

Judd Antin (00:29:36):
Yeah, I taught a class at UC Berkeley this semester on leadership, and we talk about that a lot, because great leaders develop intuition. It's the pattern matching part of experience, where you develop heuristics which allow you to make good judgments even if you can't quite explain where that judgment came from. That's what the gut is. But it's also, like I said, where bias comes from, where all the cognitive biases, there's a list of 151 of them on Wikipedia, I won't name them, but all those thorny things that lead us astray, the behavioral economists and social psychologists study, those live in the gut. And so the advice is when you are looking to check your gut, you have to do that thing. A lot of your listeners have probably read Thinking Fast and Slow, System 1, System 2. Right? 

Lenny (00:30:29):
I have it here, right under my laptop, actually, holding up my laptop screen. 

Judd Antin (00:30:32):
That's so appropriate, Lenny. So the secret is not that sexy. It's System 2. So you engage that slow, methodical process in which you do analytic thinking as a means of checking your gut. Slow in the grand scheme of things. Slow meaning not a split second decision, not like months of analysis. That's not what I mean. 

(00:30:54):
The other thing you can do, and there's really great research on this, is you bring in the wisdom of the crowd. So the wisdom of the crowd is a phrase a lot of people are familiar with, and it works in a specific situation. The wisdom of the crowd works when the people involved with the decision are bringing diverse sources of information and judgment to the table. Obviously, if everybody has the same sources of information, then it doesn't matter how many people are out there. So if you want to check your gut, get a bunch of different guts together, get a bunch of different people in the room who can bring evidence and intuition to bear, and have an open, direct end kind conversation in which we might disagree. You know who's great at that? Researchers

Lenny (00:31:38):
Leading those discussions essentially, and getting a bunch of people's opinions.

Judd Antin (00:31:41):
Yeah, this is the structural solution I'm talking about, Lenny, is like, "I never asked for research teams to have their own separate OKRs." I said two things, "Number one, what's the teams? Shouldn't the PMs, the engineers, the designers and the research, everybody should have the same set of metrics for success because either we're doing it together or we're not." And then I said, "My metric for success is when they won't have that meeting without you." That's my metric for success. If they cannot have that decision making meeting without the researcher there, that means you've developed influence, strong, trusting relationships, you're an active participant in the process, not just somebody who provides input into someone else's process. And that is when researchers can have huge impact.

Lenny (00:32:29):
I think of the PM role in a similar way, even though people won't have these meetings with PMs, because they're often at the center of lot of the stuff, but you want to be a PM that people want on their team. There's a lot of teams that are like, "We don't want and PMs, we don't need product managers. They just get in the way." And I find that that's only the case when the product manager's not great, and not really good at their job, because most great PMs just make everyone's life easier.

Judd Antin (00:32:50):
They do. The grease, I-

Lenny (00:32:51):
The grease.

Judd Antin (00:32:53):
... love it.

Lenny (00:32:54):
You mentioned also, before we started recording, that the biggest challenge for user researchers is in their relationship with their product manager. Can you speak to that and what you've seen there?

Judd Antin (00:33:04):
I'm wary of overgeneralizing, but I can tell you that from my experience and from what I hear, the product research or product insights relationship is one of the most challenged. And I think it comes from the fact that fundamentally, many researchers are just not included in the process that PMs are running. And then, actually, I did some asking around before this podcast, and so I thought, "There are some tropes that researchers have about PMs that are worth PMs knowing, just like four or five of them, the things that researchers know PMs say, which drive us nuts because they're not true." 

(00:33:51):
So the first one is that research just slows us down. Research is too slow. This is bullshit. A great research team can do research in a day, a week, or a month. It just depends on what you want to get out of it, like, "How much detail do you need? How many people do we need to talk to? What is the depth or breadth? Do we need to go to seven different countries to talk about our constituencies in Latin America?" Well, that's not going to happen overnight, but we don't often need that. The other way to look at that is that is it slower to get it wrong and fix it than to take a hot second to do the work to get it right the first time? So that's BS. Good research doesn't slow us down, it speeds us up.

Lenny (00:34:36):
And also just along those lines, a big part of your premise is you don't need to do as much research as people are doing, like this middle research that a lot of the time is put into. 

Judd Antin (00:34:45):
Yeah. Research can go super fast. I think especially, so the macro level research, I hope what it is tied to things like annual planning processes. We did a thing at Airbnb several years that we called, it was like Insights 2019, Insights 2020. They were concept car projects. And we spent quite a long time synthesizing the entire year's worth of insights from every place we could get them and then developing with designers and engineers like a concept car for five years in the future. So that's a long process. 

(00:35:16):
But the micro level, there's so much business value to be derived there, so much business value, and it can go so fast, Lenny, it can go so fast. You can have results in 48 hours on these things. We did a thing at Airbnb. There's a famous story which I'll only tell in the abstract, because I don't want to out anything, but we call it the multimillion dollar button. And basically we did research which revealed that people weren't going down the purchase funnel because they were afraid. The calls to actions on the button was making them afraid that it would initiate a purchase when really it was just taking the next step. 

(00:35:58):
We changed the text on the button with help from our amazing content design, our UX writing team. We basically changed seven characters and made Airbnb millions of dollars, because what we found out was really simple. It was just like, "Hey, this button feels scary. The CTA on the button feels scary." So that's a great example of how micro ... And that happened in like 48 hours, we would discover that insight, or overnight, basically. And we were like, "Hm, maybe we should test some other CTAs." We did the conversion, we added like 1%, which is really, really hard to do. So that's a quick example of how that type of quick research can drive a huge amount of business value.

Lenny (00:36:39):
This episode is brought to you by Ahrefs. Many of you already know Ahrefs as one of the top tools for search engine optimization. It's used by thousands of SEOs and companies like IBM, Adidas and eBay. What you may not know is that there's a free version that was made with small website owners in mind. It's called Ahrefs Webmaster Tools. It's free and it can help you bring more traffic to your website. Ahrefs Webmaster Tools will show you keywords that you rank for and backlinks that you can get. It also performs automated site audits to find what issues prevent your website from ranking higher on Google. Every detected issue comes with a detailed explanation and advice on how to fix it. Visit ahrefs.com/awt, set up a free account, connect your website, and start improving it. That's A-H-R-E-F-S.com/A-W-T. 

(00:37:29):
So just to make this even clearer, I think this middle research zone is the stuff that does slow people down, I imagine. It's like, "What are the challenges hosts have with payments on Airbnb?" What you're basically saying is, "Spend your time doing the micro stuff like usability research and then the bigger stuff that's part of overall planning. That's part of the planning cycle. It's not like every project you're working on, you need to have a whole research project on."

Judd Antin (00:37:55):
Exactly. The micro research should be much more common. A lot of researchers think that that's scut work, that usability is something junior researchers do. I completely disagree. I think we need to get back there as an industry and be like, "When you make a product easier to use, when you discover problems with functionality, business metrics we care about will go up." I've seen it happen. But that's not just work for interns and new grads, that's for sure. 

(00:38:24):
And then the planning process, absolutely. If we're integrated from beginning to end, we can help. And the thing about that middle range, I think you're right. That's the stuff that makes the stereotype that research is slow, and a lot of times it's also because it's just not pointed enough. The researcher can also say in that moment, "I have studied the business plan. I know exactly where, I've seen the metrics trend, I have an idea about exactly where that's going to go." We still need to do that middle range research. The question is valuable, but it's now very pointed and the time is worth it.

Lenny (00:38:58):
Amazing. Okay, I want to cure the rest of these tropes.

Judd Antin (00:39:01):
Okay, research is too slow is the first one. The second one, I can do my own research. Why do I need researchers? And that's true, as product people, I hope you are engaging with customers and listening well. But no offense, garbage in, garbage out. The thing is, anyone can talk to a user. That does not constitute research or insights work because one user can be powerful, but one user can be idiosyncratic. And a researcher knows how to get to the heart of that really quick. They know how to take that conversation, and understand, and situate it in a way which means like, "Sure, democratize research. That's happening. There are tools out there that will let anybody get customer feedback, voice a customer type stuff." But a researcher is there to help you turn garbage into something that's not garbage and avoid the bias that can come from you just reaching out to your cousin's family and then doing whatever they thought you should do to the product. So that's the second trope. 

(00:40:08):
The third one is AB test everything. And AB tests are great, but one of my most painful things to do is to sit in a room full of PMs and data scientists who have just seen the results of an experiment that flipped a stat sig, and then they're like, "Cool, I was significantly down over this course of time for these users." And then they just start speculating about why that is, because the AB test rarely tells you why it changed in the way it did. And then this endless flywheel of AB testing goes and I'm like, "Hey, you don't have to guess. I know somebody who can get you an answer or at least evidence that addresses the question of why did we see the test result we did in a very short amount of time? Or you could use your customers as Guinea pigs, and throw more experiments at them over and over, and spend a long time on it, and come to the same place in the end."

Lenny (00:41:03):
I think a similar critique that PMs often have is AB testing is conclusive scientifically, statistically, user research is just talking to a bunch of people. Why would I trust that? What is your best way to help PMs realize that this is actually very valuable data and you should listen to it? It's not just, you know, a story here and there. 

Judd Antin (00:41:26):
Yeah. No, I think they're both right. AB testing is as close as we can get to making causal claims about products. Research is usually not oriented towards making causal claims or it should not be, but those causal claims rarely tell you how and why things happen. And if you want to not make that mistake again in the future, you need to know how and why. If you want to build a better product in a way that doesn't just answer this narrow question that an AB test answered, you need to know how and why. And so you need both. Beautiful partnerships between data scientists and research and insights people are, I think what we're going to see in that next evolution. And if you set that virtuous cycle up, if you set up the engagement where those people are involved from the beginning, you don't make those mistakes. You get the causal relationship, which is valuable for one reason and the hows and whys, which are valuable for other reasons. 

Lenny (00:42:19):
Awesome. Okay. I think there's two more tropes you had. 

Judd Antin (00:42:23):
One of them is a simple one, which is like everyone loves to quote that it turns out a totally apocryphal Henry Ford quote about, "If I'd asked my users." It turns out to the best of our knowledge, he did not say that. And-

Lenny (00:42:35):
Really? What?

Judd Antin (00:42:36):
Yeah, I know. Isn't that sad? 

Lenny (00:42:36):
I didn't know that.

Judd Antin (00:42:38):
I know. Sorry to burst your bubble, Lenny. 

Lenny (00:42:40):
Oh, wow. 

Judd Antin (00:42:41):
Who was-

Lenny (00:42:41):
Does anyone say anything? I feel like every quote is-

Judd Antin (00:42:44):
Is apocryphal, now? I know. 

Lenny (00:42:46):
Yeah. What is reality? Geez, can we? Well, let's just- 

Judd Antin (00:42:49):
Okay, maybe he said that. He certainly believed that. That's what the historians say. But the reason that makes researchers so angry is because that's not research. That's not what researchers do. A researcher who's going to ask customers what they want is a bad researcher. You need a different researcher. I've never done that in my career. No one on my team has ever run a study that's like that. So that just makes researchers mad.

(00:43:16):
And then the last one is about post-hoc bias. It's, "We knew this already. That was obvious." And I think a lot about this book, which I would recommend to your listeners. The author is a sociologist at UPenn named Duncan Watts, and the title is Everything is Obvious If You Already Know the Answer. And it's about hindsight bias. He makes the argument that we rely too much on intuition, heuristics, and pattern matching in a way that is inappropriate to our experience. And it's like it leads us astray. It's like a form of self gaslighting. And it happens because we end up selectively remembering things and then constructing narratives around them in a way which makes us feel like we already knew that, when we in fact did not.

(00:44:05):
And he talks about this other, one of those cognitive biases called the narrative fallacy, which is the idea that people love to make convenient, simple stories about the past. If I asked you about your career, Lenny, and how you got to be this amazing podcast host, you'd be like, "Well, let me tell you about this series of events." And we do that. It's part of how we make sense of our lives and the information around us, but it would probably be a lie in the sense that we all twist the evidence we have to fit the narrative we want to be true, because it's simple, and lovely, and makes us happy.

Lenny (00:44:36):
This is going to sound self-serving, but I find I'm the opposite. I'm like, "I have no idea how this all came about. Here's some things that happened, and somehow I ended up here." But maybe I'm being very modest and try to not give myself any credit.

Judd Antin (00:44:49):
That's beautiful.

Lenny (00:44:50):
Thank you for these tropes, by the way. This was fun. I didn't know you were going to do that. So that's a fun, little collection we've got, here. 

Judd Antin (00:44:54):
Thanks.

Lenny (00:44:56):
I wanted to ask about, there's this tweet by Patrick Collison that I've brought up a couple of times on this podcast, that I think is really interesting. And his tweet is this, "In my opinion, the best product will stem from a very strong mental model of the domain and user. User research can help you get such a model and validate it along the way. But it's important to view the syllogism of UXR as model of user research, to improving your mental model of the user, to what product you should build versus user research tells you what product to build." Does that resonate in any way thoughts on that way of thinking about user research?

Judd Antin (00:45:34):
Yeah, there's a double-edged sword we talk about a lot in the research community, which is about making recommendations for design. So the best research doesn't leave it at that. It tells you, and it's like the what, the so what, and then the then what. But the problem with that is some researchers go too far in the other direction, where they're like, "We ran this study, it yielded these insights, and therefore this is what we should build." And everyone else on the team is like, "Whoa, whoa, whoa. Glad to hear your thoughts on the matter, but there's a lot going on here. Maybe we should talk about it." And that makes perfect sense. That's a failure of communication. 

(00:46:19):
And I think that speaks to the thing that Patrick is saying, is like, "Good research can sometimes tell us exactly what the problem is and exactly how to fix it." An example of that is the multimillion dollar button I told you about. But in a lot of the bigger picture questions, especially the macro ones and maybe also the really pointed middle range ones, the point isn't really, "This is exactly what we should do and this is exactly what we should build." It is, "Let us develop a framework which is based on actual evidence, and then together as a team figure out how we want to experiment our way to a successful product."

Lenny (00:46:53):
To close the loop on this specific thread, what is your advice to teams, researchers to help move out of this reckoning, and to move forward, and help the field, both from a user researcher perspective and also from just a company that maybe laid off a bunch of user researchers or is trying to decide what to do with their researchers?

Judd Antin (00:47:14):
Thank you for asking. I think I said to you earlier, and I feel some pressure as maybe the first conversation that you've had specifically about research on this podcast.

Lenny (00:47:23):
Yeah, I think so. 

Judd Antin (00:47:25):
And I want to help. I believe so much in this discipline of research and insights, and I think when I said, "The UX research discipline of the last 15 years is dying," I didn't mean that I think research is dying, far from it. I think that there's a version of it, which we're now moving past and into a new version. We're going through an evolution, as many do. And so the question for me is like, "How can researchers, and the companies, and the other people with whom they work create a new version, a different version, an evolution, which is hugely impactful for the business?" 

(00:47:57):
And so the advice I'd give to researchers about that is develop diverse research skills. Remembering the five or five and a half tool list that I mentioned earlier, really go deep on that business knowledge, so speaking the language of product, and business, and metrics, and understanding exactly how to use your insights like a scalpel, building those strong relationships, which is not a thing that researchers can do by themselves. It requires two-way engagements, and also in a way which allows researchers to do fewer things better. 

(00:48:30):
So most researchers that I know are working on teams where they're like, "I'm the only researcher, and I have seven PMs and 20 designers, and I'm trying to do 10 projects." And no one's going to do a good job that way. So researchers have to learn with their partners about how to say no and focus on the most important things. But that's only half of it, right? That's the research side. 

(00:48:51):
I have two thoughts about what companies should be doing. The first one, it's a little bit of an aside, but not really. One thing I learned by through the responses to the article was everybody came out of the woodworks from the variety of insights disciplines that are out there. Because I come from a tradition of user experience research or user research, but there are many insights disciplines in many industries, and they all wanted to claim one type of research or another, and say, "Oh, well, we overhear in consumer insights or market research have been doing that well for years." And there are many insights disciplines. And generally I think creating silos is stupid. 

(00:49:33):
Actually, I'm curious what you think, because here's the number one thing I heard when I joined Airbnb and you were there, is I did it a quick listening tour where I talked to a bunch of product people. And they all said the same thing. They were like, "Listen, we have all these different people throwing insights over the transom. And it's great. We want to hear from the data scientists, from the product specialists, from the customer service people, and the voice of the customer, whatever, all that stuff. But they're all coming over the side and we don't know what to make of it. It's too much."

(00:50:03):
And that, as much as anything, is an argument for companies to stop siloing research disciplines. So when I joined Airbnb, I set out to create an integrated insights function where it's like, "Let's do UX research, let's talk about the market and competitors when we have to. Let's integrate smartly with data science functions. Let's integrate all the stuff we're getting from customer service feedback." We brought over what was then the NPS program and said, "Hey, if we're getting customer feedback there, let's all just use it all to fuel this one insights machine." So that's the first piece of advice I'd give companies.

(00:50:38):
And the second one, without being a broken record, is to think differently about the broken cycle. So integrate researchers into a unified, lean process. So if the researcher is not there from beginning to end, if there are not strong relationships between product people and design people at every level, engineering people at every level, and somebody who's their insights partner, we're going to fall back into this problem where we're just a service discipline, we're not extracting the maximum value, it comes too late, we don't know what questions to ask, we're ignorant about what research can do. And so creating that integrated, lean process where a researcher is arm in arm from the beginning, is the most important advice I'd give.

Lenny (00:51:19):
That last piece may be the answer to this next question, but the question is how can product managers be better partners to user researchers/get more leverage out of user researchers?

Judd Antin (00:51:31):
I think that is in many ways the answer, making sure that they are creating a process for the product, for their products, that it integrates user researchers and insights from beginning to end. Also, being willing to partner with the research on the roofless prioritization. I used to say that, "A full plate for a researcher was probably three things, two big projects and a small project, like a side project. More than that, your researcher is probably not doing a very good job. And a project may take 48 hours. That's okay. But so they need your help to prioritize, they need you to participate. Great PMs will take the time to be with researchers to go into the field, even to travel." Did you ever do that, Lenny?

Lenny (00:52:15):
I did. I went with Louise, who introduced, we came up with this, basically told me to chat with you about this topic. 

Judd Antin (00:52:23):
Thanks, Louise.

Lenny (00:52:24):
Thanks, Louise. We did a whole tour to Paris, our whole team, or the leads of our team went to Paris to do a bunch of focus groups and a bunch of user research behind actual mirrors. I've never done that before that trip, and it was amazing. We learned a ton.

Judd Antin (00:52:38):
Can I tell you a quick story about behind the mirror? 

Lenny (00:52:40):
Please.

Judd Antin (00:52:41):
This is back from when I was at Facebook. And there was the high times there, it was like 2012, '13, and newsfeed is really taking off, ads are going into newsfeed. And I was a leader of a team that was working among other things on how to address post quality. Like, "How do we think about what's a good post and how do we get feedback about it?" And so there was a team of engineers that thought, "One thing that you can do on Facebook is hide a post." So they were like, "This is easy. Let's look at the posts that are hidden the most and use that as the signal of what's a good post on Facebook?" Seems reasonable. And something tripped me on this one. And so I did two things.

(00:53:26):
So the first thing I did is I looked at the distribution of hiding by user, and found out that it's power law distributed, like everything on the internet. There are a few people on Facebook who hide a ton, and then most people don't hide at all. And so then what we did was, we call these super hiders, we called them super hiders. And so we said, "Let's find super hiders around the office, and we'll get a super hider in, and we'll do a really traditional user interview." We just wanted to see. So literally the first person who walked in, I remember, because this was a person who had those fingernails that are so long, you don't know how they can do touchscreens, but they did. They were amazing at it. And it was one of those rooms with the glass. And I insisted that the ENG directors, the product people, and they were willing, whatever.

(00:54:20):
So everybody's behind the glass, and I'm there with them, and the excellent researcher is in the room, and they come in, and we're just doing a traditional think aloud study. And so they go, "Hey, can you open up your Facebook app? We would just love to see what your experience is like." So they open up Facebook, and were looking, and they look at the first story, and they hide it. They go to the second story and they hide it. And this went on for a while. 

(00:54:43):
And she's definitely using Facebook, but every time she'd finish with a story, she'd hide it. And the people in the back room were starting to chatter. And they're like, "Wait, what? What is happening right now?" And like the good researcher that this person was, they let it continue, and they're like, "Whoa, can you tell me what you're thinking right now?" Come to find out that she was like, "Well, I hid that story because I'd seen it already." The model she was going for was inbox zero, which was sad, because it was infinitely scrolling. She would never get there. 

(00:55:16):
And the reason I liked that story is because the people in the back room had their minds blown. It was not that we assumed that was common behavior, like this person could have been unique, but it was enough, because those people were there, experiencing the research, that N of one allowed them to burst their own bubble and realize, "Okay, we can't think so naïvely about hides as a signal anymore." And we came up with a better solution.

Lenny (00:55:47):
That is an awesome story and such a good example of you don't need statistical significance to get massive insights. One example just gives you a, "Wow, this might be exactly what's happening. Let's go validate that." Versus, like, "We are confident, 100%, this is what happened." I love that. It reminds me actually in the mirror study that I was talking about in Paris, there's a Facebook element to it, too. We were trying to convince hosts how to feel more comfortable accepting guests who are booking instantly. And one of our theories was if they were connected on Facebook, they would be more comfortable letting someone book instantly. 

Judd Antin (00:55:47):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:56:21):
And we're just like, "Hey, what if you were to connect Facebook and see if they're friends?" And everybody in Paris was very afraid of connecting and giving Facebook any data, way ahead of what the US hosts were feeling. 

Judd Antin (00:56:34):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:56:34):
So it just made it very clear nobody wants to actually give Facebook any data. So it was very anti-Facebook at that point.

Judd Antin (00:56:40):
Yeah, that's so interesting. Germany and France were always our bellwethers for what the rest of the world would be thinking with data privacy concerns.

Lenny (00:56:49):
Oh, man. Okay, a couple more things. A lot of this started with a lot of layoffs within user research. And I think between the lines, there's a sense of teams don't need as many researchers as they hired during the ZIRP era. I think a question in everyone's mind is just like, "How many researchers do we need? What is a good ratio?" I imagine there's not a simple answer, here, but just what's your general advice to companies of how many researchers is it right?

Judd Antin (00:57:15):
This is a thing I've thought a lot about, especially in my role as the head of the design studio, that was my fundamental question. It's like, "You have all these writers, designers, researchers, how do you structure them, how many, and where, and who works on what?" And the organizing principle for me was always relationships. You know you have enough when the people who need to have a concept research partner have them. And I would much rather create pain in that situation than spread someone too thinly. So my advice was always like, "Don't try to create a researcher to cover this entire product space. Pair a researcher up with somebody who's going to involve them in a consistent, engaged process, and let them go to work, and see the impact they're going to have, but protect their time. And then other people are like, "Wait a second, that person's doing great work. I want some of that."

(00:58:02):
And creating that pain for them, because it's a pain of loss, is the number one way to grow headcount. That's how I always approached getting more headcount, was not arguing abstractly for why research is important, but by asking partners who wish they had it, to do the arguing for me. And so you're right, there isn't a clean answer for like, "Hey, this is the right ratio," because it really depends on the nature of the product. Like, "Is it a early stage product? Is it a late stage product? Are we talking about a startup or a late stage company?" But I would argue there's always room for a researcher. Lenny, I'll tell you, and I used this in a keynote talk I gave lately. You published recently a list of, I think it was about 20 B2B companies and their first 10 employees. Do you remember doing that?

Lenny (00:58:51):
Absolutely.

Judd Antin (00:58:52):
Do you remember how many researchers are anywhere on that list? I'll give you a hint.

Lenny (00:58:57):
Not too many.

Judd Antin (00:58:57):
It's between zero and two. It's one. There's one researcher on that list, anywhere. Anywhere. And that's messed up to me. Now, look, it's just these 20 companies, and each is in their own space, so I'm not going to overgeneralize. But a researcher can drive incredible value no matter what stage a company is at, because a good researcher makes you go faster, not slower, and they drive impact because they answer questions which are impossible to answer in any other way. That's true if you're a startup. It's true if you're a late stage company. Now, if it's your first 10 employees, one researcher is going to go a long way. As you grow, making sure that you're matching up researchers so that they have strong partners in the key parts of the business is the best way to figure out if you have enough.

Lenny (00:59:45):
Interesting. So your advice is, as you're starting a company, your pitch is that you'll have a lot more leverage and move faster hiring a researcher versus generally an engineers, but you'd be trading off, essentially. That's what most of the hires end up being.

Judd Antin (00:59:58):
I am reluctant to overgeneralize, and I would say I know many founders who are in startup mode are like, "I know what I need to build. The problem is that I need people who can help me execute." And I think that's right. And so everything's a trade off. But remember, imagine that you could have that Swiss army knife at your disposal. Maybe you've got an MVP out the door, and you're looking to make your first major iteration, or like many startups, you need to pivot. This is where it's like, "Hey, you don't have to do that alone." We deify startup founders who pivot appropriately, but I think that is what we would might call moral luck, where we deify the ones who got it right, and even though they made exactly the same decisions as the one who got them wrong. 

(01:00:46):
And the fact of the matter is, if you have an insights person with you who has that Swiss army knife of tools, you're not in it alone. You don't have to guess. Ultimately, it will still come down to a tough decision that you and founders have to make, but you can have evidence that bears on that decision, which you wouldn't be able to get any other way.

Lenny (01:01:05):
To close out on this, and I have just a couple more questions on this thread, I think one of your big messages to researchers is, "You can be empowered. It's up to you to do the right sort of research and to move your career in the right direction, not become a researcher people don't need." And there's this quote that you have at the top of your post, where a lot of the reaction, or I guess the way you put it is, "I know what you're thinking, they just don't get it. We're so misunderstood. Our plight is to deliver insights that users use to drive business value while we're forgotten, never driving the roadmap, no seat at the table, consistently miscast, only to be laid off in the end." And what I'm hearing from you is like, "You can change that. You can push back on doing research that isn't actually contributing." But let me ask you, what's your lasting, I don't know, advice you would leave researchers with to be successful?

Judd Antin (01:01:56):
Yeah, it's tough to be operating in a broken system, and so I feel that response, where you feel kind of powerless, but I think that's not likely to lead us past this moment to the next evolution of research. So that's where it's like I don't blame any researcher at all for being in the spot they're in. It's been a tough go. However, crying about our lot is not going to get us anywhere. So I think the point of the article for me, and this is advice I give companies all the time when I do consulting with them, is like, "Hey, we can set this up in a different way, which responds to the current environment in a way which will drive a huge amount of impact." Now, that takes companies making the right choices. It also takes researchers owning up and developing skills, pushing back, understanding what research can have the most value, developing the skills, and the knowledge, and language around the business, becoming more influential, being excellent communicators.

(01:02:55):
It's one of the things I would evaluate the most in hiring, especially research leaders, because I needed them to show and teach by example, is like isn't just rigorous research. It's like if a tree fell in the forest and no one was there to hear it, you need to communicate it effectively, and you need to do it in a way that's appropriate to the audience. Because If I'm talking to you, Lenny, it's different than I'm talking to Brian Chesky at Airbnb. And so I got to be able to give that presentation effectively, and get right to the heart of it, and speak the right language. And so if you're a researcher, it's not hopeless. Actually the discipline, the future is so bright, and we can help it along by continuing to develop these different skills as companies build a model that's more inclusive.

Lenny (01:03:38):
Awesome. Okay. I have one just random, tangential question about NPS. You have strong opinions about NPS, and I just wanted to hear your perspective on the value of NPS, your experience with NPS. 

Judd Antin (01:03:50):
Yeah. I do have a strong opinion about NPS. I like to say, "NPS is the best example of the marketing industry marketing itself." And the problem is this threatens many people's livelihoods, because there's an entire industry of consultants and software providers that want you to believe NPS is a useful and accurate metric. The problem is, the consensus in the survey science community is that NPS makes all the mistakes. So it's a garbage in, garbage out problem. So the likelihood to recommend question is bad for a whole variety of reasons. So it's bad because it's a zero to 11 scale. It's bad because it's usually unlabeled. So we label the polls, but that's not the gold standard for research. It's bad because it's 11 items. 

(01:04:37):
And there's a couple of problems with that. Number one, we find that precision goes down after five items on average, maybe seven. Number two, especially on mobile, if you're taking this survey, what percentage of those options are below the fold? We are not going to get accurate survey data. And so from a survey perspective, it's really bad. There's also this intuition, which is like, "How likely are you to recommend Windows 11 to your friends and family?" I am not a person who goes around recommending operating systems. The question is fundamentally flawed. 

(01:05:11):
The argument is that that question is a good indicator of loyalty, but there's a really simple solution, Lenny. Customer satisfaction, a simple CSAT metric, is better. It has better data properties, it is more precise, it is more correlated to business outcomes. I wanted to prove this. This is something that survey scientists know and marketers don't want you to know. And so we did the work with Mike Murakami, who led survey science at Airbnb, and he's still there, great researcher. And we basically redid all that work to find out if all that stuff was true just for Airbnb. And it is. It's simple. Don't ask NPS, ask customer satisfaction

Lenny (01:05:50):
And the customer satisfaction question, what's the actual question for people to make sure?

Judd Antin (01:05:54):
Overall, how satisfied are you with your experience with Airbnb? Or it could be some version of that, which is like, "Overall, how satisfied are you with your experience with customer service when you had a problem?" So there could be a more specific version of that question, but those questions have better properties. And a lot of people say, "Well, hey, everybody's using NPS. So at least it gives me a benchmark because I can compare my NPS to industry NPS." The problem with that is the research shows that NPS is idiosyncratic, so it goes up and downs in ways that we don't understand, and there's a lot of inconsistency in how it's asked, that creates variations in the data, which means it's not apples to apples, so you can't even compare your NPS meaningfully to somebody else's.

Lenny (01:06:37):
I love these hot takes. I'm curious to see who comes out of the woodwork, too, when-

Judd Antin (01:06:41):
People are going to be so mad, Lenny.

Lenny (01:06:42):
I love that. I think, yeah, I've heard this many times and people don't talk about it. Okay. Is there anything else you want to share or leave people with before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Judd Antin (01:06:54):
Can I? Yeah, I want to add one thing if I could, because this has come up on your podcast a few times recently, which is about the idea of people doing their own product walkthroughs. So should a PM just rely on their own dog fooding of the product and their own walkthrough to figure out how to fix it? And a couple of times recently this has come up, and I think the consensus seems to be, "Yes, this is a good thing." And I have a contrarian opinion there, too, which is that I think it is really important for everyone to dog food their own products. The problem is related to relying on your intuition about those products, which is the thing most PMs have trouble with is realizing, "You are nothing like the user. You are nothing like them in ways that will bias the way you think about what's good and bad in your product in ways that you can't necessarily recognize. Some things with a product, some problems with a product, you need a pulse to recognize."

(01:07:57):
And most good PMs that I know have a pulse and so cool. But a lot of them require context of use, priorities, constraints that you just don't have and you can't imagine purely on the basis of your own usage. So what I think that means is that you should definitely dog food your own product. Doing product walkthroughs to identify lists of potential issues is a great thing to do. Prioritizing that list, figuring out which ones are more or less a problem, and for whom is an area where you should be extremely wary of relying on your own opinion, expertise, or intuition when you are dog fooding your own product.

Lenny (01:08:39):
Thank you for sharing that. It's definitely come up a bunch on this podcast, so I think that's an important lesson for people to take away. Anything else before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Judd Antin (01:08:49):
I appreciate you, Lenny. Thanks for having me on. 

Lenny (01:08:51):
I appreciate you, Judd. Well, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Judd Antin (01:08:56):
I am ready.

Lenny (01:08:57):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Judd Antin (01:09:02):
I recently read a business book by Barbara Kellerman called Bad Leadership. And what I love about it is that we spend a lot of time talking about good leaders, and she really dives into the worst leaders and what makes them bad leaders in a way that I think is really valuable for everybody. 

(01:09:19):
I'd also recommend, I read a lot of fiction, so two recommendations, there. One, a recent Pulitzer Prize winner, Demon Copperhead by Barbara Kingsolver. It's an outstanding read that also is really sad, and moving, and illustrative, especially if you want to understand rural poverty. And then completely other side of the fiction spectrum, if you're interested in science fiction, which I am, read the Murderbot Diaries, it's about a sarcastic killer robot. And who doesn't love them?

Lenny (01:09:48):
I love these fiction recommendations. I feel like we need more of these on the podcast, so thank you. 

Judd Antin (01:09:52):
Yeah. Everybody goes to business books.

Lenny (01:09:53):
Yeah, absolutely. What is a favorite recent movie or TV show that you really enjoyed?

Judd Antin (01:09:59):
We recently watched The Last of Us and it blew our mind. I watched it after I played the video game after long last, if you are a person who plays video games and you haven't played The Last of Us, play it. If you don't know, the show is based on the video game, not the other way around.

Lenny (01:10:14):
Do you have a favorite interview question you like to ask candidates that you're interviewing?

Judd Antin (01:10:19):
Think of a topic that you had to explain lately that was the most complex, and then explain it to me like I'm five. And there are a lot of ways to vary that question, but the reason I like it is because I think, and I've asked this question to VP and C-suite candidates in multiple disciplines, and sometimes it's related to a conversation, like I might ask them to explain something complicated about quantum computing, or music theory, or it could be a complex business decision, but I want to see if somebody can break a complex problem down in a really simple way, and give me an intuition for it in a short amount of time. I think that is a differentiator between good and great for many people.

Lenny (01:11:02):
Do you have a favorite product you recently discovered that you really like?

Judd Antin (01:11:06):
Yeah, this is a really weird one, but my whole family started indoor rock climbing recently, and there's a challenge you have when you top rope, which is that you're looking up all the time. So they make these glasses, which are called belay glasses, and they have an angled mirror embedded in the lens, so that you can look straight ahead, and the view you see is up towards the person who you're belaying. And I just thought that product is so perfect for that. That's a niche problem and there isn't a better way to solve it.

Lenny (01:11:37):
Do you have a favorite motto that you often come back to, that you share with friends either in work or in life that you find useful?

Judd Antin (01:11:44):
Yeah. This is going to seem like pandering, Lenny, but I don't know if you remember a conversation that you and I had, it must've been eight years ago. I remember where we were sitting. And it was about stoicism. Do you remember this? Anyway, we had this conversation.

Lenny (01:11:59):
I don't, but I was into stoicism for a while.

Judd Antin (01:12:01):
I know you were, because we talked about it. And so the motto comes from stoicism, which is basically, "Focus on the things you can control and ignore the rest." And a lot of people think of this as the serenity prayer or the serenity saying, that was a 20th century invention, but Epictetus was writing about this BC, and I think about it all the time. So much of the stress, and pain, and worry that we have in life comes from things we can't control. So I try to let those things go.

Lenny (01:12:34):
Amazing. I learned that lesson from 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, and just the importance of thinking about these circles of you can control, you can influence, and you have no control over, and there's no reason to think about those other things.

Judd Antin (01:12:46):
Absolutely.

Lenny (01:12:47):
Judd, this was everything I hoped it would be. We got into some really good stuff. I'm excited to hear how people react. Two final questions, where can folks find you if they want to learn about what you're up to, actually share what you're up to these days, and how people can find you, and then also how can listeners be useful to you? 

Judd Antin (01:13:01):
Yeah. Thanks for asking those questions. People can find me at juddantin.com. That's the best way to find out what I'm up to. These days, I'm a consultant. I help people with UX strategy, org design, and crisis management. Somehow I love dealing with other people's dumpster fires, and I've found that I'm constitutionally good at it somehow. So juddantin.com is the place to find out. I also write. I write a medium post that you can find at onebigthought.com. And you'll find a lot of the topics we talked about today, including the original post that started this at onebigthought.com. If there's one thing I could ask your listeners to do is to get next to your researcher. I just think if you build those relationships and involve a researcher and insights person early and often, beautiful things will happen for you and for the business. So that's the thing everyone can do for me.

Lenny (01:13:56):
I love that. I've always done that. I loved my researchers that I've worked with, many of them reporting to you, and so beautiful takeaway. Judd, thank you so much for being here.

Judd Antin (01:14:07):
Lenny, thank you. It's been a pleasure.

Lenny (01:14:09):
Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Kim Scott (00:00:00):
If you say, "Do you have any feedback for me?" You're wasting your breath. The other person's going to say, "Oh no, everything's fine." The question that I like to ask is, "What could I do or stop doing that would make it easier to work with me?" Do not write down my question because if you sound like Kim Scott and not like yourself, then other people are not going to believe you want the answer. It needs to sound authentic to you, and if everybody can write down their question, who they're going to ask it of and then pop it into their calendar right now, this will be one of the most productive podcasts in all of podcast land.

Lenny (00:00:33):
Today my guest is Kim Scott. Kim is the author of Radical Candor, which is the single most referenced book on this podcast. The book has sold over 1 million copies, has been translated into twenty-three languages. It was such an honor to have Kim on the podcast. Prior to this book, Kim was a CO coach at Dropbox, Qualtrics, Twitter and many other tech companies. She was a member of the faculty at Apple University. Before that, she led AdSense, YouTube and DoubleClick teams at Google. Prior to that, Kim managed a pediatric clinic in Kosovo and started a diamond cutting factory in Moscow. She's also working on a new book that you can pre-order now called Radical Respect. In our conversation, we get very practical and very tactical about practicing radical candor. Kim briefly describes the core idea, shares, language and phrases and words you can use to get better at practicing radical candor.

(00:01:24):
She shares tips for people-pleasers like myself. Also, a lot of very concrete advice for how to get feedback. Also, what to do if your culture is on the ruinous empathy side of the spectrum, or even worse, obnoxious aggression and so much more. I guarantee listening to this episode will make you a better leader and a better employee. With that, I bring you Kim Scott after a short word from our one featured sponsor for this episode.

(00:01:50):
You fell in love with building products for a reason, but sometimes the day-to-day reality is a little different than you imagined. Instead of dreaming up big ideas, talking to customers and crafting a strategy, you're drowning in spreadsheets and roadmap updates, and you're spending your days basically putting out fires. A better way is possible. Introducing Jira Product Discovery, the new prioritization and road mapping tool built for product teams by Atlassian.

(00:02:17):
With Jira Product Discovery, you can gather all your product ideas and insights in one place and prioritize confidently, finally replacing those endless spreadsheets. Create and share custom product roadmaps with any stakeholder in seconds. And it's all built on Jira where your engineering team's already working. So true collaboration is finally possible. Great products are built by great teams, not just engineers, sales support, leadership, even Greg from finance. Anyone that you want can contribute ideas, feedback, and insights in Jira Product Discovery for free, no catch. And it's only $10 a month for you. Say goodbye to your spreadsheets and the never-ending alignment efforts. The old way of doing product management is over rediscover what's possible with Jira Product Discovery. Try it for free at atlassian.com/Lenny. That's atlassian.com/Lenny.

(00:03:13):
Kim, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Kim Scott (00:03:17):
Thank you for having me. I'm excited for our conversation.

Lenny (00:03:20):
Your book, Radical Candor is the single most recommended book on this podcast. I don't know if you know this podcast well, but at the end of the podcast, I ask every guest, "What are two or three books you recommend most to other people?" And your book has come up the most of any book mentioned on the podcast.

Kim Scott (00:03:37):
Amazing. Well, tell your listeners I love them and I'm grateful to them.

Lenny (00:03:45):
Okay, they'll hear this. So I'm really excited to have you on chat about all the things that you teach and your book. For people that have heard the term Radical Candor, have maybe skimmed the book, maybe even read the book a while ago, but don't truly remember or understand the concept. Could you just spend just a few minutes giving a high level overview of the concept of Radical Candor?

Kim Scott (00:04:04):
Absolutely. Radical Candor is just what happens when you care personally and challenge directly at the same time. And I think it's probably best understood by what it's not because we all fail on one of those two dimensions or both of them multiple times a day. So you can think about it as a two by two framework. On the vertical axis is care personally, the horizontal axis is challenge directly. What happens when we remember to challenge directly, but we forget to show that we care personally. That is what I call obnoxious aggression, and it's really important to distinguish between radical candor and obnoxious aggression. I think one of the mistakes that people often make about, and I've gotten a lot, you write a book about feedback, you're going to get a lot of it, and I've heard a lot of feedback that sometimes teams will be rolling out the idea of Radical Candor and someone will charge into the room and say, "In the spirit of Radical Candor," and then they act like a garden variety jerk.

(00:05:00):
And that is not the spirit of Radical Candor. That's the spirit of obnoxious aggression. And obnoxious aggression is a big problem. It's a problem because it hurts other people. It's also a problem because it's inefficient. If I'm a jerk to you Lenny, then I'm going to send you into fight or flight mode and then you literally cannot hear what I'm saying, so I'm wasting my breath. But I don't know if this is true for you, but for me, there's a third problem. And the third problem is that when I realize I've acted like a jerk, when I realize I've landed in obnoxious aggression, it's not actually my instinct to go the right way on care personally. Instead, it's my instinct to go the wrong way on challenge directly and to pretend that I agree when I disagree, and then I wind up in the worst place of all, manipulative insincerity.

(00:05:48):
And it's kind of fun to tell stories about obnoxious aggression and manipulative insincerity. If you watch The Office or any show about problems at work or problems in any kind of relationship really, you're going to see a lot of episodes about obnoxious aggression and manipulative insincerity. But I think the real rub comes and the fact that these, even though this is what we like to talk about, these two problems are what we like to talk about, these are not the most common problem. By far and away the most common problem occurs when we do remember to show that we care personally because you know what? Most people try to be nice people. So we do remember to show that we care personally, but we're so worried about not hurting someone's feelings or not offending them, that we fail to tell them something they'd be better off knowing in the long run. And that is what I call ruinous empathy. So that is Radical Candor in a nutshell. That's the TLDR. But please do read.

Lenny (00:06:40):
Amazing and we'll link to a diagram of this two by two for people that aren't visual thinkers and want to actually see it. So just to make it super clear, if you're challenging directly, basically being very candid with feedback, but it's not clear you care deeply about the person, you call that obnoxious aggression.

Kim Scott (00:06:40):
Yes.

Lenny (00:06:57):
And if you make it clear, you care a lot about the person but aren't actually giving them direct candid feedback, you call that ruinous empathy.

Kim Scott (00:07:05):
Yes, exactly.

Lenny (00:07:06):
Which of these buckets do you find most people fall into? Is there a percentage of people or companies?

Kim Scott (00:07:11):
Yeah, I mean, I would say 90% of us make 90% of our mistakes in that ruinous empathy bucket. It's by far and away the most common problem. But I think all of us make mistakes in the other quadrants as well. And very often we kind of, I think one of, if I'm going to offer some self-criticism of this framework, it's much easier to notice when one has been ruinously empathetic. It's almost like, give yourself some critical feedback. "I work too hard." But it's much harder to notice when we've been manipulatively insincere and obnoxiously aggressive. And maybe I could have named those things because very often manipulative insincerity is sort of self-protective insincerity. Very often obnoxious aggression is just extreme frustration. So I want people to use this framework not to judge themselves or other people harshly, but like a compass to guide specific conversations with specific people to a better place and to help us understand when we're going in the wrong direction, which we are all bound to do on a daily basis.

Lenny (00:08:26):
I want to talk about all those things and also how to get better at these things. But before we do that, it's very hard to change. And it's also hard just to challenge directly innately, it's hard for people to be candid, just to give people a little motivation to invest in this skill. What sort of impact do you see when people develop the skill of being better at radical candor?

Kim Scott (00:08:48):
When we get better at radical candor? I mean, I'll tell you a story in fact about the impact it had on my life, some radical candor, but the sort of abstract answer to your question is we build better relationships and we do better work and we're more successful and we're happier. You ready for a story? Let's do it. Love stories. Okay. So shortly after I joined Google, this was now a very long time ago, 2004, I had to give a presentation to the founders and the CEO about how the AdSense business was doing. And I walked into the room and there in one corner of the room was one of the founders on an elliptical trainer wearing toe shoes and a bright blue spandex unitard, super tight, not what I was expecting or frankly wanting to see in the room. And there in the other corner of the room was the CEO doing his emails like his brain had been plugged into the machine.

(00:09:49):
So probably like you in such a situation, I felt a little bit nervous. How was I supposed to get these people's attention? Luckily for me, the AdSense business was on fire. And when I said how many new customers we had added, the CEO almost fell off his chair. "What did you say? This is incredible. Do you need more engineers? Do you need more marketing dollars?" So I'm thinking the meeting's going all right. In fact, I now believe that I am a genius. And I walked out of the room, I walked past my boss and I was expecting a high five a pat on the back. And instead she said to me, "Why don't you walk back to my office with me?" And I thought, Oh gosh, I screwed something up in there and I'm sure I'm about to hear about it. And she began not by telling me what I had done wrong, but what had gone well in the meeting, not in the feedback sandwich.

(00:10:37):
I think there's a less polite term for that. I'm not sure how you feel about cussing on your podcast.

Lenny (00:10:37):
It's acceptable, fully acceptable.

Kim Scott (00:10:43):
Not in the shit sandwich since the word, but really seeming to mean what she said. But of course, all I wanted to do was hear about what I had done wrong. And eventually she said to me, "You said um a lot in there, were you aware of it?" And with this, I braved a huge sigh of relief if that was all I had done wrong who really cared. And I kind of made this brush off gesture with my hand. I said, "Yeah, I know, it's a verbal tech. It's no big deal, really." And then she said to me, "I know this great speech coach. I bet Google would pay for it. Would you like an introduction?" And once again, I made this brush off gesture with my hand.

(00:11:14):
I said, "Oh, I'm busy. I don't have time for a speech coach. Didn't you hear about all these new customers?" And then she said to me, "I can tell when you do that thing with your hand, then I'm going to have to be a lot more direct with you. When you say um every third word, it makes you sound stupid." Now she's got my full attention. And some people might say it was mean of her to say I sounded stupid, but in fact, it was the kindest thing that she could have done for me at that moment in my career because she knew me well enough to know that if she didn't use just those words with me, and by the way, this is a really important point, she never would've used those words with other people on her team who were perhaps a better listener than I was.

(00:11:56):
But she knew me well enough. She cared personally enough to know that if she didn't use those words with me, I never would've gone to visit the speech coach and I wouldn't have learned that she was not exaggerating. And this was news to me because I had raised millions of dollars for two different startups giving presentations. I thought I was pretty good at it. And it really got me to thinking sort of why had no one told me. It was almost like I suddenly realized I'd been marching through my whole career with a giant hunk of spinach in between my teeth and nobody had had the common courtesy to tell me it was there. So why had no one else told me. But what was it about her leadership style that made it so seemingly easy for her to tell me? And as I thought about that, I realized it really came down to those two things.

(00:12:41):
She cared personally and she challenged directly. She cared about me not just as an employee but as a human being. For example, when my father was diagnosed with late stage cancer, I was devastated and she could tell that I was devastated. And she said, "Kim, look, you go to the airport, fly home to Memphis, you need to be with your family. Your team and I will sit down and write your coverage plan." That's what great teams do for one another. And those were the kinds of things, that was the kind of thing that she did. She couldn't do, of course, for all 5,000 people in her organization, no matter how talented you are, relationships don't scale. But she did do those things for her direct reports and the people who she worked most closely with, all of us.

(00:13:27):
And when a leader treats their team, the people who they interact with on a day-to-day basis with that kind of real care, then it's much more likely that their direct reports in turn are going to treat their teams with real care. And that creates a culture of caring. And even though relationships don't scale, culture does scale. So that was part of it. But of course there's also this challenge directly part which is equally as important. And I learned very quickly beyond a shadow of a doubt that if I screwed up, she was going to tell me and she was going to keep telling me until it penetrated my sometimes thick skull.

Lenny (00:14:07):
I had a manager that was also very good at this. He was very good at just giving me very direct feedback, and I knew that he was only doing it because he cared about my future. To kind of follow this thread and get a little tactical, is there language or phrases or ways of communicating that you recommend people use to either challenge directly and avoid people getting defensive or make it clear you care deeply?

Kim Scott (00:14:31):
People always want me to give them a script. And the problem with the script is that if I write it, you're going to sound like Kim Scott and not like yourself. And then people won't really think you mean what you're saying. But I do think there are some important things to consider when having these conversations. I think you want to go into the conversation, and by the way, everything I'm about to say applies to praise as much as it does to criticism. And I want to pause for a moment. That story is helpful because that's the kind of thing that has happened to so many of us, that's not unique to me. However, praise is even more important than criticism in terms of radical candor. Radical candor is not all about the boss giving the employee criticism. It should always start with soliciting feedback and it should include more praise and criticism, but anyway, way without offering up shit sandwiches.

(00:15:31):
So anyway, I think that the important thing for these conversations, these sort of two-minute impromptu moments of management, is to go into the conversation being humble. To me, I call it candor and not truth because if I march into a room and I say, "Lenny, I'm going to tell you the truth." I'm kind of implying I've got a pipeline to God and you don't know anything. And that's not what this is all about. This is a dialogue, not a monologue. So to me, candor implies here's how I understand the situation. I'm also curious to know how you understand the conversation. So you want to go in being humble, you might be wrong, and that's totally fine. Omniscience is not a requirement for radical candor, thank heavens. So you want to be humble. You want to state your intention to be helpful. You want to remember in your own head and you want to make it explicit to the other person that you're telling them this to help them.

(00:16:25):
You're not trying to be dominant or kick them in the shins or anything like that. You're telling them this because you care about them. So you want to state your intention to be helpful. You want to have these conversations right away, almost immediately. I mean, there's exceptions to everything I'm saying. None of this is absolute. But usually if I'm telling myself and Lenny, you can tell me if you have the same problem, but if I tell myself, Oh, I'm going to wait for a better moment to tell this person this thing, what I'm really saying is I'm never going to say. So if the purpose of praise is to tell people what to do more of, and the purpose of criticism is to tell them what to do less of, why wait. So you want to do it immediately unless you are so upset that you're going to say it in a terrible way or the other person is so upset that they can't hear you. But usually that's not the case.

(00:17:16):
You also want, and in the before times I used to say have these conversations in person. Now I say have these conversations synchronously and I'm going to recommend phone over video. There's a lot of evidence coming out of University of Chicago and probably other places, but that's the article I've read that there's more noise than signal in facial expressions and body language, especially if somebody is just a little square on a computer screen. But it also may be true in real life, like the phone actually may be one of our best communication innovations of all time because when you're talking to someone on the phone, you're listening to the words that they are saying to you, and that is really what you want to do in this moment. So make sure that you're having these conversations synchronously, because what you want to do next is gauge how it's landing.

(00:18:15):
So I'll talk about that in a minute. And you can't gauge how something is landing if you're sending an email or a text, and Slack is just a feedback train wreck waiting to happen. I once coached someone who kept giving feedback over Slack and I finally just quit coaching him. I was like, "If you keep making this mistake, I can't be your coach." So don't do that. Take a moment to pick up the phone and call the person. Go back to those old AT&T commercials when I was a kid. Reach out and touch someone. You want to show you care.

(00:18:52):
So let's review. You want to be humble, you want to be helpful, you want to do it immediately. You want to do it in person or at least synchronously. If you can't do it in person. You also want to praise in public and criticize in private, and you don't want to give people either praise or criticism about their personality. So if you want to remember all that, it's HHIIPPP, two H's, two I's, kind of three P's depending on how you count.

(00:19:21):
And so let's double-click though on this not about personality point. I think it's really important to remember that for both praise and criticism, you want to use sort of context, observation, result, next step. So context, in the meeting, observation, when you said um every third word, result, it made you sound stupid. Next step, go to the speech coach. Also is important for praise, in the meeting context, when you offered both sides of the argument, observation, result is it earned you credibility. Next step is do more of that. So you can call it CORE, you can think about that as CORE. I used to call it CORN, but I got some feedback that corn is like some shorthand for porn on TikTok. So I call it CORE instead, HIP CORE.

Lenny (00:20:16):
Wow, that is amazing. Thank you for sharing all that. So the E at the end stands for?

Kim Scott (00:20:20):
Next step, big E.

Lenny (00:20:21):
Oh, I see the E is the next, you skipped the N, clever.

Kim Scott (00:20:26):
Yes. I don't know, clever or ridiculous. Maybe I should just call it HIP CORN,

Lenny (00:20:31):
Right? No, I think either one's great. So you share this example of the speaking example. Maybe if we can do another example just to reinforce this framework.

Kim Scott (00:20:43):
Let's do a little ruinous empathy.

Lenny (00:20:47):
Okay, great. Let's do it.

Kim Scott (00:20:47):
How about that? That is the mistake. I think that I am really focused in the book Radical Candor and also in my next book Radical Respect. That's the mistake I really want to eliminate.

Lenny (00:21:00):
Let's do it.

Kim Scott (00:21:00):
Because ruinous empathy creates this false harmony, which is really bad. So here's my ruinous empathy story. I had just hired this guy, we'll call him Bob, and I liked Bob a lot. He was smart, he was charming, he was funny. He would do stuff like we're at a manager offsite playing one of those endless get to know you games. And everybody was getting more and more and more stressed out. So start up, we've got a lot going on. And Bob was the guy who had the courage to raise his hand and to say, "I can tell everyone is getting stressed. I want to get to know all of you. I've got an idea. It'll help us do that and it'll be really fast."

(00:21:41):
Whatever his idea was, if it was really fast, we were down with it. And Bob says, "Let's just go around the table and confess what candy our parents used when potty training us." Really weird but really fast. And then for the next 10 months, every time there was a tense moment in a meeting, Bob would whip out just the right piece of candy for the right person at the right moment. And we all remember that was the weirder thing. Like Hershey Kisses right here. That was what my parents used to potty train me.

(00:22:16):
And so Bob was quirky, but he brought a little levity to the office. Everybody kind of loved working with Bob. There was one problem with Bob. He was doing terrible work. He would hand stuff into me and there was shame in his eyes. He kind of knew it wasn't good enough. He was very creative, but riddled with sloppy mistakes. And I would say something to Bob along the lines of, "Oh Bob, this is such a great start. You're so awesome. We all love working with you. Maybe you can make it just a little bit better." So let's pause for a moment. Why did I say such a banal thing to Bob? I think part of the problem was that I liked Bob and I really didn't want to hurt his feelings.

(00:23:05):
So that was the ruinous empathy part of why I said that. But also part of the problem was something more insidious, a little bit of manipulative insincerity, because Bob was popular and Bob was also sensitive kind of. And there was part of me that was afraid if I told Bob in no uncertain terms that his work wasn't nearly good enough, he would get upset. He might even start to cry and then everybody would think I was a big, you know what? So the part of me that was worried about my reputation as a leader, that was the manipulative insincerity part, the part of me that was worried about Bob's feelings, that was the ruinous empathy part. And this went on for 10 months, 10 long months, and I was so puzzled the whole time I couldn't understand what was going on. I learned much later that one of the issues perhaps was that Bob was smoking pot in the bathroom three times a day, which maybe explained all that candy that he had at all times.

(00:24:11):
But I didn't know any of that at the time. All I knew is that Bob was consistently doing bad work, but I wasn't really dealing with it. And eventually the inevitable happened. I realized that if I didn't fire Bob, I was going to lose all my best performers because not only had it been unfair to Bob not to tell him, I also had been unfair to everyone on the team. And they were frustrated. Their deliverables were late because his deliverables were late. They weren't able to do their best work because they were having to spend so much time redoing his work.

(00:24:46):
And the people who were best at their jobs were going to quit because they wanted to be able to do their best work. They were going to go to a different company where they could do their best work. And so I sat down to have a conversation with Bob that I should have begun frankly 10 months previously. And when I finished explaining to him where things stood, he kind of pushed his chair back from the table. He looked me right in the eye and he said, "Why didn't you tell me?" And as that question was going around in my head with no good answer, he looked at me again and he said, "Why didn't anyone tell me? I thought you all cared about me." And now I realized that by not telling Bob, thinking I was being so nice, I'm having to fire him as a result. Not so nice after all. But it was too late to say Bob because at this point even he agreed he should go because his reputation on the team was just shot.

(00:25:46):
All I could do in the moment was make myself a very solemn promise that I would never make that mistake again, and that I would do everything in my power to help other people avoid making that mistake. It was so painful. It was painful for me. It was painful for Bob, much more painful for Bob actually, and it was bad for the whole team and it was bad for our investors. We weren't getting results because of my ruinous empathy and ruinous empathy slash manipulative insincerity. It's much harder to admit the manipulative insincerity part. And that is really why I'm here talking to you because I want all of your listeners to avoid making that mistake because it's the most painful and the most common mistake that I think leaders and not just leaders, I mean all of us make this mistake in all of our relationships.

Lenny (00:26:41):
I love that this also gives an example of the impact of getting better at this point of you'll lose not just the people that are not necessarily great, but also other high performers on the team because they're seeing people slip through the cracks that aren't amazing. And if you're not practicing this early, your team basically becomes not high performing.

Kim Scott (00:27:00):
Yeah, exactly. You're going to lose your top performers. And I think very often people are afraid to tell someone on their team when their work isn't good enough because they're afraid of losing them. But that's not a good reason. You should be helping this person to improve. This person deserves to have a job where they can excel and you either help them excel on this team or you help them find a different job where they can excel, because everyone can do great work somewhere. And Bob could have done great work. Maybe I would've helped him keep it to the weekends because he's very creative and very smart, but the floppy mistakes just got in the way of his ability to do his best work.

Lenny (00:27:50):
So following that thread, I imagine the reason you didn't tell him early, and most people don't do this well, is many people are, you can maybe call them people pleasers. I'm a recovering people pleaser, I'll say. It's just hard to give people hard feedback. You want people to like you. It's not a natural state for a lot of people. What do you find helps people get over this kind of need to be liked as a leader and helps them be more candid?

Kim Scott (00:28:15):
I think that one of the things that was helpful for me anyway, so you can tell me if it's helpful for you, was realizing that my job was not to be liked. My job was to care about other people and to get out of my own head and to become others focused is what helped me kind of let go of the need to be liked. I think that also as a woman, I think there was something extra, as my teenage children would say, there was something extra for me because the sort of likability- competence bias that a lot of women face pushed me, especially early in my career, in the wrong direction on challenge directly.

(00:29:04):
And it made it much harder for me to, because often I would say something and I would say it even more gently than my colleagues who were men, but people would say, "Ah, Kim is a real whatever." And they weren't saying, Kim is obnoxious. I was being unjustly accused of obnoxious aggression and it wasn't obnoxious or they were accusing me of being bossy or or abrasive or whatever. And it's really hard. I would also say when it comes to eliciting feedback, it's really important to be open to it and it's really important to separate the wheat from the chaff from the feedback you're getting.

Lenny (00:29:41):
So in this example of Bob, say you were to do it now, what would you do differently other than give him feedback earlier? Is there something you've learned about just how you would've phrased it or approached it?

Kim Scott (00:29:58):
I think probably what I would do, and I would love to hear what you would've said to Bob too, I certainly don't have all the answers, but probably what I would've said is let's go back to the first time Bob handed work into me with shame in his eyes. I would've said, "Bob, maybe I'm misinterpreting the expression on your face, but it looks to me like you are not happy with this. What's going on?" And so I would've asked him to diagnose it himself and I want to pause on that because that can be very risky. He might have said to me, "I think this is awesome. This is my best work," and now I've kind of made my job of giving him feedback a little bit harder. So it's not always the right thing to ask questions, but I would've tried to ask it before I had examined the work when I noticed that he looked uncomfortable himself.

(00:30:47):
And I think also another thing I've learned about noticing, I said earlier that there's a lot of evidence that we often misinterpret each other's facial expressions and body language. So I would've tried to say that with some humility, it seems like you're not, maybe I'm wrong, but you don't look to me like you're happy with this. And I would've given him an opportunity to say, "Yeah, maybe I need to do it again." Let's imagine though that he said, "Oh no, it's awesome. It's ready." So then I get it and I look at it. I would have not been shy about pointing out very specifically every problem that I saw in that piece of work, every single one. Sometimes it can be tempting when you're giving someone feedback to say, "Oh, there's a number of careless mistakes here. Can you go back and look at it again," and the person will notice a few of them and then you got to go, sometimes it's useful to show someone a pattern.

(00:31:53):
All of the careless mistakes, especially if someone is defensive or if you think they're likely to be defensive, if you think they're likely to do to you what I did to my boss, oh no, everything's fine. It's no big deal. You need to move out on the challenge directly dimension. You need to be prepared to keep going until you have communicated with a person. And that was really the problem with Bob. He probably would not have started to cry. I think my fear around his tears was probably more about my fear than what was actually likely to happen. But I think we do fear someone else getting upset more often than they actually get upset. We have kind of a negativity bias when it comes to part of the reason why we're reluctant to give feedback.

Lenny (00:32:42):
And I think to your point, that we want to be liked, like you said, that you should get over that. I think that's obviously very hard just to be like, "Nah, I'm not going to worry about that." But I think your point is really important that you'll be liked later if you don't do the hard thing now. It'll only get worse if you just let it continue happening.

Kim Scott (00:33:01):
And I think also for me to say to myself going into that conversation, it's more important for me to demonstrate care, that I care about Bob than it is for Bob to like me, and if I demonstrate that I care about Bob, then I'm going to do the right thing that will ultimately create the conditions for a good relationship with Bob. Me pulling my punches did not create the conditions for a good relationship with Bob.

Lenny (00:33:31):
I actually did that and I learned this from a manager of mine is just almost work backwards from ask them, what do you want to achieve in your career? Where do you want to go in this company and make sure they know you know what they want, and then basically work backwards from to get there. Here's the things you need to get, and here's the thing you did recently that isn't necessarily on the track and here's what we should be working on if you want to get to the skull that you have.

Kim Scott (00:33:57):
Yeah, I think one of the really important things that all managers can do for their direct reports to show that they care is to have real meaningful career conversations, where you talk about their life story, sort of their past, whatever part of it they're comfortable talking to you about so that you understand what motivates them at work. And I would have three separate 45 minute conversations, so one about their past, one about their future, their dreams for the future, and it's not just the next couple of years. It's like imagine at the height of your career you have everything you want. What does it look like? And give me three or four different pictures of that because very few of us know what we want to do when we grow up.

(00:34:40):
Then the third conversation is to sort of sit down with your director report and come up with a career action plan. So given what motivates you and where you want to go, what are the skills that it would be useful for you to develop so that you can get where you want to go and who can I introduce you to? What are the educational opportunities? Can we tweak your job so that you're gaining those skills so you're at least taking a step in the direction of your dreams, even if you're not there yet?

Lenny (00:35:11):
Awesome. I have a post about this. I'll link to in the show notes that gives people a guide to having these conversations, and there's a spreadsheet I share with people like, here's an action plan you can come up with your teammate and here's what you're going to work on these next six months.

Kim Scott (00:35:24):
Did you read the book When they Win, You Win by Russ Laraway?

Lenny (00:35:24):
No.

Kim Scott (00:35:29):
Oh, he has a hundred pages on career conversations and he's also built sort of some tools that help people. So check that out.

Lenny (00:35:39):
And it's called When You Win... When They Win, You Win.

Kim Scott (00:35:41):
When They Win, You Win.

Lenny (00:35:42):
Amazing.

Kim Scott (00:35:42):
Yes, by Russ Laraway, he and I worked together at Google and then we started a company together.

Lenny (00:35:48):
Oh wow. Okay, cool. We'll link to them in the show notes. Maybe I'll get him on the podcast too. Great.

Kim Scott (00:35:51):
Yeah, he'd be great.

Lenny (00:35:53):
Okay, so we've been chatting about ways individually to get better at some of these skills. Another area that I think people struggle with is the company culture often isn't welcoming of direct feedback. So there's a question, so you probably saw this on Twitter. I asked people, what should I ask you? And a lot of people came in with a lot of questions and there's one that came in from Pete, so I'm just going to read it along these lines. So this question is just how do you practice being radically candid in a culture? And most cultures are like this where people aren't ready for direct feedback. Since company culture is often closer to ruinous empathy and being radically candid is more of a long-term good than a short-term good. You could potentially risk retention with your employees if you're too direct with them. So how do you think about finding this balance of being candid but not pissing people off, or do you just hire people that are open and ready for direct feedback and that's kind of how you solve that problem?

Kim Scott (00:36:45):
I don't think you can only hire people who are open and ready for direct feedback because it's hard for all of us. I just want to acknowledge that, it's hard for me. I mean, I wrote the book, I believe in it to my core and sometimes it's still hard for me. It's hard for me to hear it and it's hard for me to deliver it. This is a really difficult thing to do. The good thing about that two by two is it makes it look easy, which is useful, but it's not easy. So anyway, I think there are, to answer Pete's question, I think there are a few things that can help. There's really an order of operations to radical candor, and if you begin with soliciting criticism, then you take the first and most important step to improving your relationship with that person enough that it becomes easier for you to give it as well as to get it.

(00:37:35):
So I want to leave folks with some sort of steps on how to solicit feedback, and this is true, especially if you're a boss, but it's true in all your relationships. You can use this at home as well. So if you say, "Do you have any feedback for me?" You're wasting your breath. The other person's going to say, "Oh no, everything's fine." Nobody in your life accepts your teenage children. If you have teenage children, they'd really want to give you some criticism, but nobody else in your life really wants to give you criticism. And so you want to think about how you're going to ask the person that's going to be most likely to elicit a response. The question that I like to ask is, "What could I do or stop doing that would make it easier to work with me?" But do not write down my question because if you sound like Kim Scott and not like yourself, then other people are not going to believe you want the answer. It needs to sound authentic to you.

(00:38:33):
I was working with Christa Quarles when she was CEO of OpenTable and she said, "Kim, I could never imagine those words coming out of my mouth." She said, "The way I like to ask is tell me why I'm wrong." Okay, that's fine too. It demands an answer to her question. But of course there were a couple of people on her team who felt that that was too aggressive, that shut them down, so she had to adjust her question. Being authentic does not mean ignoring the impact you're having on others. So you want to think about your question, you want to think about who you're going to ask that question of, and if everybody can write down their question, who they're going to ask it of and then pop it into their calendar right now, this will be one of the most productive podcasts in all of podcast land.

Lenny (00:39:22):
Let's spend more time on this actually. So what is it you recommend, that they pick? How many people would you recommend they pick, and ask feedback from?

Kim Scott (00:39:28):
Well, I think if you are a manager, you need to be soliciting every week feedback from each of your direct reports, and you need to sort of, I would budget five minutes at the end of your one-on-one to solicit feedback. So mostly a one-on-one should be your employees setting the agenda and your employee's time and don't by the way, save up when you have to give feedback. Don't save it up for your one-on-one and definitely don't save it up for a performance review. You want to give that in the moment. We can talk more about that in a second, but when you're soliciting feedback, save five minutes at the end of your one-on-one and ask that go-to question. And you also want to ask that go-to question of your cross-functional peers who you work most closely with and of your boss. And I think you don't want to ask the same question every single time. It'll start to sound like you don't really want the answer, but you want to make this part of your daily weekly routine with the people who you interact most closely with.

Lenny (00:40:34):
So you added to the end of this your one-on-one agenda, and two versions of this question are, what am I doing wrong? Which is that one I guess you iterated.

Kim Scott (00:40:43):
Tell me why I'm wrong or what am I doing wrong or what could I do or stop doing that would make it easier to work with me? Or what should I stop doing? What should I start doing? What should I continue doing? Those are some common ones. What do you like to ask Lenny?

Lenny (00:41:00):
I think it was something along the lines of like, what's one thing I could be doing better or what's one way I could be helping you be more successful?

Kim Scott (00:41:07):
That's a really good one. What's one way I could help you be more successful? Or Jason Rosoff, my co founder at Radical Candor likes to ask, "What could I have done this week?" So he time, he time bounds it. "What could I have done this week to better support you in your work?" In fact, Jason told me after we had worked together for about a month, he was like, "Kim, I really hate your go-to question." He said, "It's too open-ended for me. If you can tell me what you're working on and ask me at the end of a meeting specifically what I noticed then that is much better."

Lenny (00:41:48):
How often do you accept no answer? Just like, no everything's great.

Kim Scott (00:41:52):
Never,

Lenny (00:41:53):
Never,

Kim Scott (00:41:53):
Never. I mean, there are some people who really don't like to be put on the spot. So if I can tell that I'm inflicting a cruel and unusual punishment on the person, I'll say, "Look, you know I'm not perfect. I know I'm not perfect. Next time we meet, I want you to think of something, notice something. It's the thing that you can do that would help me more than anything else that you could do is to tell me when I'm wrong because I need to know that." In fact, Andy Grove, who was the CEO of Intel said he used to at the end of his one-on-ones say to people, "There's one more thing. And he explained to me that that was coded Intel for like this is the most important thing." I was working at Apple at the time and I said, "Oh, did you get that from Steve Jobs?"

(00:42:47):
That was always how he introduced, "Just one more thing, the iPad." And Andy got immediately very grumpy and very offended, and he said, "No, we both got it from Colombo. The detective show." You can get tips from anywhere. So you want to make sure that you're though letting the person know that you really do care about what they say and that it's really when they give you this critical feedback that you're going to reward it. But that's not the end. Asking that question is only the first step, the bad news about your question, no matter how hard you think about it, and no matter how good a question it is, the other person is still going to feel uncomfortable. There's no such thing as emotional Novocaine. That's why I don't believe in scripts. People believe if I just say the magic words like the door will open, that's not how it works. It's a give and take. So you want to sort of be prepared to embrace that discomfort. The only way out is through. Simplest way to embrace the discomfort is to close your mouth and count to six.

(00:43:59):
Only made it to three just there, and your eyes were popping out.

Lenny (00:44:03):
That is so long.

Kim Scott (00:44:04):
Six seconds is a really long time. Almost nobody can endure six full seconds of silence. So they'll probably tell you something. So now you've dragged this poor soul out on a conversational limb that they never wanted to go on. They're probably going to say something. The third step is to make sure that you listen with the intent to understand not to respond, because you're probably going to feel defensive and that's okay. It doesn't mean you're a lesser mortal or that you're shut down the feedback. All it means is that you're human. And that's all part of this. You want to figure out how to manage your natural defensive reaction to critical feedback, which you're probably going to have. The simplest tactic I can offer folks there is to think of some follow-up questions.

(00:44:56):
So at breakfast, my daughter not too long ago said to me, "Mom, I wish you weren't the Radical Candor lady." And immediately this wave of parental guilt washed over me and I thought, ah, I'm spending too much time at work. She wants more of my time. I shouldn't be traveling so much. But then I thought, well, I should ask her, make sure I understood. I'm jumping to conclusions here. I'm not listening with the intent to understand. So I asked a follow-up question. I said, "Well, who do you wish I were?" And she said, "I wish you were the lady who minded her own business," so I could go spend a little more time at work as far as she was concerned. So you want to make sure you really understand what a person is telling you. And once you feel certain that you really do understand and that you've been open to it, the last and most important step is to reward the candor.

(00:45:46):
A person takes a huge risk, especially if this person is your employee. A person takes a huge risk to give you critical feedback. And if you do not reward that risk richly, you're never going to get any feedback again. So if you agree with the feedback, fix the problem and make your listening tangible, be loud. So-and-so told me that the tea in the break room is terrible, and now we have thirty-five different kinds of tea. Thank you for telling me. And that can demonstrate to people that they're not wasting their breath to come to you. That if you become aware of a problem, you'll fix it. And you also want to, by the way, you want to ask for feedback after you fixed it. Did I over-correct or did I under-correct?

(00:46:31):
My boss at Google, the same boss from the um story also told me when she gave me some feedback that I tended to move too fast. And she said, "Kim, until people and giving you feedback that you're going too slow. You won't have corrected this problem." So you kind of want to shoot to over-correct if you get some critical feedback. I also want to though pause on what to do when you get some critical feedback that you disagree with because it can be easy to feel wedged here. And if all you do is say thank you for the feedback, the other person is going to hear something much less polite than a brush off or worse.

(00:47:10):
And so what you want to do is you want to look for that five or 10% of whatever the person said that you can agree with, and you want to give voice to that. And then what you want to do is you want to say, "As for the rest of it, I want to think about it and get back to you." And then you've got to get back to them. You got to offer a respectful explanation of why you disagree. And it's tempting to feel like a disagreement poses a risk to our relationships, but it's not disagreement that poses a risk to our relationships. It's unspoken disagreement. Many, I don't know about you Lenny, but a lot of my best professional relationships began with a good respectful disagreement.

Lenny (00:47:51):
Interesting. That reminds me of just watching Squid Games, the reality show on Netflix. Yeah. Have you seen this at all?

Kim Scott (00:47:56):
I haven't watched it, but it's on my list.

Lenny (00:47:59):
There's this guy who makes a huge bad decision on behalf of his whole team and they hate him in the show. And then on TikTok, he shared that they're best friends now, even though they called him a big idiot.

Kim Scott (00:48:09):
Yeah, no.

Lenny (00:48:09):
So funny.

Kim Scott (00:48:10):
It can happen for sure.

Lenny (00:48:12):
You fell in love with building products for a reason, but sometimes the day-to-day reality is a little different than you imagined. Instead of dreaming up big ideas, talking to customers and crafting a strategy, you're drowning in spreadsheets and roadmap updates, and you're spending your days basically putting out fires. A better way is possible. Introducing Jira Product Discovery, the new prioritization and road mapping tool built for product teams by Atlassian. With Jira Product Discovery, you can gather all your product ideas and insights in one place and prioritize confidently. Finally, replacing those endless spreadsheets create and share custom product roadmaps with any stakeholder in seconds. And it's all built on Jira where your engineering team's already working. So true collaboration is finally possible. Great products are built by great teams, not just engineers, sales support, leadership, even Greg from finance. Anyone that you want can contribute ideas, feedback, and insights in Jira Product Discovery for free.

(00:49:11):
No catch. And it's only $10 a month for you. Say goodbye to your spreadsheets and the never ending alignment efforts. The old way of doing product management is over, rediscover what's possible with Jira Product Discovery. Try it for free at atlassian.com/Lenny. That's atlassian.com/Lenny.

(00:49:32):
So to recap the steps roughly for how to get feedback from people, it's ask your question like what's one thing I could have done this week to make you more successful? Wait six seconds potentially or try to, it's very hard. Ask a few follow-up questions to make sure you understand what they're saying and then find a way to reward them. Say thank you.

Kim Scott (00:49:53):
Do more than say thank you.

Lenny (00:49:55):
Especially if you disagree, which is a really interesting nuance of this. I had Jules Walter on the podcast. I always think of him when I think of getting feedback. He shared this advice. When you get feedback, just be so appreciative so that people keep giving me just like, "Thank you so much for that feedback." The way he phrases it. Even if you're melting inside and really hate this feedback, just like, "thank you, I really appreciate it." But I think your nuance there is really key is if you do disagree, I really like this tip of just like, let me think about this element of it and then actually follow up.

Kim Scott (00:50:25):
Even if you're melting inside, if you say thank you and you're melting inside, I mean maybe it's a terrible actor, but usually people know. And that's why I say it's not enough to say thank you. You got to fix the problem and then show what you did to fix the problem and get more feedback. Did I over-correct? Did I under-correct. And if you disagree, you got to say that you disagree, but you got to say, so respectfully.

Lenny (00:50:48):
As a leader, this sounds like a lot of work to be doing every week. If you have a one-on-one following up correcting things. Is there anything you'd recommend there? Or is it just, this is really important, you got to make time.

Kim Scott (00:50:58):
It's not as much work as failing to do this as we saw from the Bob story. So I think that the important thing that I have found is that this is part of why it's so important to do it immediately. It's important for the other person, but it's also important for you. If you're doing this in a one-on-one, which you should be having anyway. So you're saving some time in a one-on-one. So it's not adding time necessarily to your day. And when you hear about problems, you should fix them. Yes, it takes time, but that is your job. And when you disagree with something, you can disagree in your next regularly scheduled one-on-one. So I'm not talking about adding meetings to your calendar, so it doesn't actually take more time. I have found that in fact, it saves tremendous amounts of time, but it does take emotional discipline.

(00:51:52):
And I think it also requires you, especially when it comes to giving it, which we talked about before, where the humble, helpful, those are impromptu two-minute conversations, giving the feedback that you should be having in between your meetings. In the um story, walk to my meeting with me, it didn't take any extra time for my boss to give me that feedback. She had to walk to her meeting anyway, and I had to go in the same direction. So it didn't even take extra time from me. But it is, I think one of the most common reasons why people don't do this in addition to fear of retaliation and just sort of existential dread, which are both factors, which hopefully we've helped alleviate, but is that you're scheduled back to back to back and you don't have those two minutes in between meetings.

(00:52:42):
And that's why I think it's important either to schedule slack time in your calendar, make your 30 minute meetings, 25 minute meetings, make your hour-long meetings, 50 minute meetings, maybe give yourself a few breaks in the day. But if it's not possible, and often it was not possible for me in my career to sort of schedule my time that way, I just decided that these moments of management were more important than being on time to my next meeting. And so I was just late sometimes. So I wish I had a better answer than either control your time, which is really annoying advice because it's impossible to follow or be willing to be late to your next meeting. But those were the things that I tried to do.

Lenny (00:53:34):
That was super helpful. I think your point of just, if you're not making two minutes to do this thing now, it'll be a lot more time intensive later.

Kim Scott (00:53:40):
Oh yeah. It's stitch in time takes nine on all these two minute, and really it should be brushing and flossing. This is not like a root canal. These are like, this is relationship hygiene that you should be doing all the time.

Lenny (00:53:55):
I was just reading Charlie Munger's book and there's a quote that he references of just the classic, an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.

Kim Scott (00:54:03):
Yes, absolutely.

Lenny (00:54:04):
Same idea. So we've talked about a leader getting feedback. What if you're the employee? Do you also recommend the same thing in the one-on-one, have an agenda item and ask this question? Or is there a different approach you'd recommend?

Kim Scott (00:54:16):
I think yes, if you're the employee, you should also be soliciting feedback on a regular basis from your boss. So there's sort of an order of operations you want to solicit at first, no matter who you are, it's the same up, down, and sideways, even though it feels very different, the order of operations is the same. So start by soliciting feedback. Then you want to give both praise and criticism. I think sometimes it feels like you're kissing up if you give your boss praise, but bosses need praise too. And if there are things that your boss does that you appreciate and you want your boss to do more of those things, praise is a better tool for that than criticism. When it comes time to offering your boss some critical feedback, you want to make sure, and by the way, this is also true when it comes time to give your employee critical feedback or your spouse or anybody else in your life, you want to be sure that you are prepared to gauge how it lands.

(00:55:09):
So you want to start in kind of a neutral place. You don't want to go to the outer edge of challenge directly because then you're going to wind up in obnoxious aggression. So if we go back to that story, my boss started, "You said um a lot, were you aware of it?" "Nah." That was my response. And then "I know this great speech coach, would you like an introduction?" "Nah," was my response. So she had to keep going out on that challenge directly. She didn't start out by saying, "When you say um I'm every third word, it makes you sound stupid." But she realized she had to go that far. So you want to keep going out if you think they're brushing you off. But if you find that your boss looks either sad or mad, that is your cue to move up on the care personally dimension.

(00:55:51):
And so to take a moment, and if you find your employee looks sad or mad, if they look sad, pause and say, "I feel like maybe I didn't say that in the best possible way. How could I have said it differently?" And so that means you're going up on the care personally, dimension, but you're not going the wrong way on challenge directly. I don't know about you Lenny, but if I say something to someone and they look sad, it's so tempting for me to try to pull the words back. "Oh no, it's no big deal. I didn't mean it," but it is a big deal, and I did mean it, that's why I just said it. And so if you go the wrong way on challenge directly, you wind up in ruinous empathy, and then you leave the person both sad and confused, so you make it worse.

(00:56:34):
So you want to take a beat to pay attention to the emotions in the moment, but not to go the wrong way on challenge directly. Same thing if they're mad, although if somebody's mad, that maybe is even harder. If somebody starts yelling at me, it's tempting for me either to start yelling back and wind up in obnoxious aggression or to crawl off to a self-protective, manipulative insincerity. And so instead, what I try to do is get curious, not furious, and why is this person so mad? So say like, Look, maybe I didn't say that in the right way, but this is an important issue and we need to resolve it.

Lenny (00:57:14):
This comes back to the point you made about when you're giving feedback to try to do it in person or on a phone call to do exactly what you're saying, to read them as you're giving this feedback and figure out which axis you want to go down.

Kim Scott (00:57:25):
Yeah, you want to gauge it. I mean, when we communicate with other people, we communicate on an emotional level and on an intellectual level at the same time. And if we ignore the emotional signals that are coming at us or say don't take it personally, then we're just not going to communicate very well.

Lenny (00:57:43):
Along these same lines, another question that came in is from a coach of yours that works I think for you or somehow with the program. She asked this question of many top leaders have very low self-awareness. They believe obnoxious aggression is the only way to give feedback, or they just ignore the problem and fire people with no feedback. Is there something you've learned about how to change their mind about this is the way to operate?

Kim Scott (00:58:05):
Yeah, I think the most important thing with leaders like that, that you can do is to explain to them the impact that they're having and to also show them that there is another way that is going to help them succeed. Very often the leaders who are low on the care personally dimension, they do care about their results and they do care about their own careers. And so when you sort of explain this to them in terms of enlightened self-interest, they tend to get better at it. And also, I mean there I can think of maybe one or two people I've worked with who are truly low on care, who truly don't care. Very often people are bad at showing they care, but they do actually care. And also sometimes there are leaders who think they're not supposed to care. And so unleashing that capacity that they innately have to care and telling them this is actually part of the job can make them a much better, more effective leader. But look, if someone is a psychopath and they truly don't care, they shouldn't be a manager. That's the solution.

Lenny (00:59:27):
I totally get that one. So I really like that takeaway. Just basically show them the impact they're having because to your point, they want the company to succeed. They want their team to succeed. And if they're not realizing there's downsides to the way they're operating.

Kim Scott (00:59:38):
And they want themselves to succeed. That's why I say part of the problem with obnoxious aggression is that you harm other people, but it's also inefficient because when you act like that, people can't hear what you're saying, so you're wasting your breath.

Lenny (00:59:56):
And the way you show them that impact. Do you recommend interviewing people, getting stories, seeing, I don't know, how do you collect this impact so that they're like, oh, wow, I didn't realize this.

Kim Scott (01:00:07):
I think that the best thing to do is, for me anyway, is I start by sharing stories from my career and stories when I was a jerk. I've acted like a jerk too, plenty of times, unfortunately. And I show the impact that I've had and then I ask them for a similar story. And usually sort of me holding up the mirror to myself is useful for them to be able to hold the mirror up to themselves to realize you want to help these people adopt a growth mindset around this stuff. I am not telling you that you're an asshole. I'm telling you that we all behave like assholes sometimes. And it's a big problem for us as well as for the people around us. And here's my story, when I acted like a jerk, what's yours? And people, that kind of self-awareness, sometimes people talk about inflicted insight like it's some kind of burden, but usually that kind of self-awareness makes people feel lighter. They're like, "Ah, now I know what's wrong and now I know what I can do about it."

Lenny (01:01:14):
Yeah, I've definitely noticed that about your stories. They always are you making the mistake, which I think is very disarming.

Kim Scott (01:01:20):
We all make mistakes.

Lenny (01:01:22):
Yeah. Maybe the extreme of this obnoxious aggressiveness is Bridgewater. Their whole approach is like theirs.

Kim Scott (01:01:31):
Oh my gosh. Did you read the book The Fund?

Lenny (01:01:34):
No, not yet.

Kim Scott (01:01:35):
You must read it. It's all about Bridgewater. I always thought it was problematic. I had no idea just how problematic it is. Put that book in the show notes one of the best business books I've read in the last decade.

Lenny (01:01:48):
Wow, that is high praise. Yes, I will read that. And so I guess for people that aren't familiar, like Bridgewater, they encourage, they have a system called Dots where they tell people, you must give hard critical feedback after every meeting, publicly.

Kim Scott (01:02:01):
Not after the meeting, in the meeting, publicly. And it's recorded on, it was, I think they changed it since, but it was recorded for posterity on video. And sometimes, in fact, true story, shortly after I left Google, I was approached to work at Bridgewater in a management capacity, not in an investment capacity. And so I called someone I knew who worked there and he said, "Let me give you an anecdote." He said, "The other day there was a meeting and there was a woman who in the meeting who had made a mistake and everybody just piled on. The criticism was very personal. There was no core about the criticism. It was like, these are your personality attributes that make you a useless human being. Kind of terrible feedback until she started to cry and the whole meeting was recorded and then they emailed a recording of the meeting out to the whole company, including all the people who were not in the meeting saying, this is an example of how to have..." So I would say that is deep, dark, obnoxious aggression. That is not radical candor. That is horrible.

Lenny (01:03:24):
So it's safe to say you're not a fan of that approach?

Kim Scott (01:03:26):
No. In fact, I did an analysis of Dalio's book Principles and it's like a, I don't know, 3 or 400 page book. And there were I think four or five pages about caring about people. There's very low care personally.

Lenny (01:03:44):
I imagine many people see that, they see Elon, they see Steve Jobs, and the perception is they're very challenge directly people, they're not clearly care about you people, but they're very successful. What do you say to people that are like, but it works. Why wouldn't I be that if that's the way I want to do it?

Kim Scott (01:04:00):
Well, first of all, I would not put Steve Jobs in the same category as Ray Dalio and Elon Musk. I mean, Steve Jobs could be obnoxiously aggressive, but mostly I would say he built such good relationships with his direct reports that when he got cancer, Tim Cook offered to give him half his liver. And I don't know of a word to describe that other than love. These were real human relationships. When I worked at Apple, you could see Steve and Johnny talking. You could tell these people cared about each other. Now, radical candor gets measured not at the speaker's mouth, but at the listener's ear. And I think that Steve had built a team around him of people who didn't mind rather what other people would consider obnoxious aggression. But I think in the context of their relationship, it was understood as care.

(01:05:03):
I'll give you an example of that from my own career, not that I am comparing myself to Steve Jobs, I think I'm a much gentler person, but sometimes I develop relationships with people. And part of that relationship is that we push each other pretty hard. So there was a person who I had worked with for a long time, for many years. He had followed me from one company to another, and we were localizing a product and he kept conflating Slovakia and Slovenia, and I corrected him once. I corrected him twice the third time, I was like, did Slovakia, not Slovenia dumb ass.

(01:05:44):
And he started laughing, and that was fine in the context of our relationship, but I realized that the people around me, I was silencing them. They were like, "Oh my gosh, I don't want to make a mistake. Kim's going to call me a dumb ass." So I had to pause and say, "Look, I respect this person enormously, and I like this person enormously. We work very well together." And so I think that sometimes people have relationships with others and they have those relationships in public and other people misinterpret those relationships.

(01:06:19):
Steve Jobs was not perfect. He made all kinds of mistakes, but he was no Ray Dalio or Elon Musk, who I would say make far more and worse and more egregious mistakes. And I think you're raising a really important point. You're raising a point, which is that there's this false dichotomy. In fact, the new biography of Elon Musk falls into this category. I like Walter Isaacson's work a lot, but he falls prey to this in his biography of Elon Musk, which is there's this notion that we have to choose between being a total jerk but really competent or really nice but incompetent. And those are not our two choices. That's the whole point of radical candor is that there's this other way that works better and doesn't hurt people.

Lenny (01:07:13):
I think that's the key takeaway there is you can be even more successful if you lean into the care deeply. In theory, they could have gotten more out of their people if they made it clear they really care about them.

Kim Scott (01:07:26):
And there's plenty of counter examples of incredibly successful people who are very caring leaders, and it's not as much fun to tell stories about that. And so we don't as often.

Lenny (01:07:40):
Along the same lines, there's someone that you worked with that suggested I ask you about investing in your authentic leadership style, Melissa Tan. I don't know if you remember her.

Kim Scott (01:07:50):
Yes.

Lenny (01:07:51):
Okay, great. And she was on the podcast in the past, and she just said how when she met you, she was a very people-pleasery person and just wanted to be like, and you helped her develop her natural leadership style. Can you just talk about what you suggest to people to figure this out and how to find that for yourself?

Kim Scott (01:08:06):
I mean, I wonder what Melissa would say, but my memory of conversations with her, and this is an issue that I talk about a lot because a people pleaser too. I grew up in the South and I'm a woman. I was not brought up to challenge directly. That was not part of the culture that I was brought up in. I was brought up to be polite but also brought up to be kind. And for me, the thing that is most important to hang on to is that fundamental kindness and to realize that it's actually unkind not to say the thing. And so that is part of the reason why I encourage people. I tell the Bob story so often and I encourage other leaders who I work with to think about what their Bob story is that you realize it's not nice in the long run.

(01:09:00):
It's unkind in the long run, not to tell someone if they're making a mistake. There's nothing nice about that in the long run. And so that I think at least for me, that's been helpful. And then another thing that is helpful is again, to get others focused, to focus not on pleasing people, but on doing the right thing for those people, on truly caring about those people more than you care about your own discomfort in the moment. And that is something that is easier for people to do than just to challenge directly. I think in many ways it's about what is getting in the way. That's why I call it ruinism. Empathy is a good thing, but sometimes empathy can paralyze at least me because I'm so acutely aware of how what I'm going to say might impact the other person, might hurt their feelings that I don't say it.

(01:10:01):
And so when I push myself to be, and you can call it compassionate candor if you like that better than radical candor. But when I push myself not to feel so acutely what I think the other person might feel, and by the way, I could be wrong about what I think the other person might often, they're like, it's no big deal. They're like, oh, thank you for letting me know. But when I can let go of that and think about the other person and what I care about and what they care about for their future, going back to your point, if you know that it's really important for someone to get promoted and they won't get promoted if they keep talking to people in a particular way, then you're focused on what they want. That is really helpful to move past that.

Lenny (01:10:47):
Just a few more questions before we wrap up. Your book sold something like half a million copies.

Kim Scott (01:10:47):
A million now.

Lenny (01:11:00):
A million copies.

Kim Scott (01:11:00):
Million copies. Million in 23 languages. Yes.

Lenny (01:11:00):
23 languages. I had a stat of 20 languages. Jesus Christ. So a lot of people have read it, a lot of people have been using it. What's something that people often just get wrong that super frustrates you about the system, the recommendations that you just wish people come on, here's what I really wanted to say, or here's what you should change.

Kim Scott (01:11:17):
There's two things. I mean, as I mentioned earlier, when you write about a book about feedback, you're going to get a lot of it. One is this, in the spirit of Radical Candor and then the person acts like a jerk. That is not the spirit of Radical Candor. That is the spirit of obnoxious aggression. But shortly after the book came out, I was giving a talk at a tech company in San Francisco and I got some feedback from the CEO of that company that was so impactful that it caused me to write my next book, which is called Radical Respect. And in many ways, Radical Respect is kind of the prequel to Radical Candor because if you don't respect the other person, it's impossible to care about them and you're not going to bother challenging them directly. So what happened in this meeting? I walked in, I was really excited to give this talk.

(01:12:04):
The CEO had been a colleague of mine for the better part of a decade. She's a person I like and respect enormously, and she's one of too few black women CEOs in tech or in any other sector. And when I finished giving the talk, she pulled me aside and she said, "Kim, I'm excited to roll out Radical Candor. I think it's really going to help me build the kind of career I want." But she said, "I got to tell you, it's much harder for me to roll it out than it is for you." And she went on to explain to me that as soon as she would offer folks even the most gentle, compassionate criticism, they would call her an angry black woman. And I knew this was true as soon as she said it, and I knew how unfair it was because she's like one of the most even keeled, cheerful people I've ever worked with.

(01:12:49):
And I realized a bunch of things at the same time when she told me that, the first was that I had not been the kind of colleague that I aspire to be, that I imagined myself to be. I had failed even to notice the extent to which she had to show up unfailingly, cheerful and pleasant in every meeting we had ever been in together even though she had what to be ticked off about as we all do at work. So I had failed to be an upstander, a good colleague. The second thing I realized was that I had also failed to acknowledge when I was experiencing different versions of bias, prejudice and bullying. And I think part of the reason it's kind of hard for the author of a book called Radical Candor to admit she was in denial. But I had been in denial about a bunch of experiences I had had in the workplace.

(01:13:41):
I had pretended that a whole host of things were not happening, that were in fact happening. And I think part of the reason why I did that was that I never wanted to think of myself as a victim, but even less than wanting to think of myself as a victim did I want to think of myself as the culprit. So I'd been even more deeply in denial about the times that I had said or done things that hurt other people who I worked with, said or done things that were biased or worse. I had bullied people before. And by the way, when you become a leader, you're much more prone to bullying even if you don't think of yourself as a bully, which I certainly don't think of myself as a bully, but that doesn't mean I never bullied anyone. And then the last thing I realized was that as a leader, I imagined that I was creating these BS free zones, but I had allowed all manner of BS to pass. So that was what prompted me to write the next book, Radical Respect, which you can pre-order right now and please do.

Lenny (01:14:41):
That was my next question. Talk more about this book. What is it about? Where people find it?

Kim Scott (01:14:46):
Radical Respect comes out in May. You can pre-order it now. Anywhere you buy books, at your local independent bookstore, I'm speaking at a conference of independent bookstore owners soon you can pre-order it on Amazon or Barnes Noble or anywhere else you buy buy books.

Lenny (01:15:05):
And who would you say it's most for?

Kim Scott (01:15:08):
So there are chapters in that book about things leaders can do. There are chapters in the book about things you can do if you're harmed by bias, prejudice, or bullying. There are chapters in the book about how to be a great upstander, how to be a better colleague, and there are chapters in the book about how to become part of the solution, not part of the problem when you're the culprit. And I think we all find ourselves in all four of those roles at different moments in time, and I don't think there's any one group who can solve this problem. Everyone is responsible for creating a more respectful work environment.

Lenny (01:15:48):
Awesome. We'll link to that in the show notes.

Kim Scott (01:15:50):
Amazing.

Lenny (01:15:51):
To leave people with a very tactical next step. What's one thing they could do this week today to get better at Radical Candor, to start building that muscle?

Kim Scott (01:16:00):
I would love it if everyone would write down their go-to question what are the words that will come out of your mouth and practice it. Practice it in front of the mirror and then practice it with a friend and refine it. Just figure out what, because it is uncomfortable to solicit feedback from others. They don't want to give it to you and you don't really want to hear it. So if everybody can write down their go-to question and then put five minutes in your calendar of someone you're going to ask that question of.

Lenny (01:16:31):
And that calendar entry, I was going to come back to it actually. So you do the one-on-one agenda, adding the question, the calendar entry is for people you don't have a one-on-one with, pick someone that you're going to ask that you're not meeting with regularly.

Kim Scott (01:16:42):
Absolutely. Or add it to the bottom of your next one-on-one agenda. That's fair too. Either one.

Lenny (01:16:44):
Amazing. Kim, is there anything else you want to leave folks with before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Kim Scott (01:16:52):
I think just remember, you do not have to choose between being successful and being a jerk. You can be a successful kind person.

Lenny (01:17:00):
Oh, I love that. Amazing. Okay, well with that, we've reached a very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Kim Scott (01:17:07):
I'm ready.

Lenny (01:17:08):
What are two or three books you've recommended most to other people? You've already mentioned a few but what do you want to share?

Kim Scott (01:17:14):
Yes, I've mentioned a couple. Please do buy Radical Respect, I believe that the more novels people read, the better. People often ask me, what can I do to move up on the care personally dimension of Radical Candor and read more novels? This is the best way I know of to build compassion for other people, to understand the emotional signals that might be coming at you. I mean, some of my favorite novels are Middlemarch. I try to reread that all the time. Anything that Toni Morrison wrote, the Bluest Eye is one of my favorite, but also Song of Solomon. It just such a brilliant writer and will help you enter into the lives of people that you haven't entered into. I think that Orlando by Virginia Woolf is another one of my favorites. And Robertson Davies, the Deptford Trilogy is an incredible set of novels to read. I'm cheating now and giving you three.

Lenny (01:18:27):
The more the merrier.

Kim Scott (01:18:27):
Yes, Alice Walker, the Color Purple is another one of my very favorite books, so I recommend reading more novels.

Lenny (01:18:34):
I love this leaning into fiction that doesn't come up often on this podcast, so this is great. What is a favorite recent movie or TV show that you really enjoyed?

Kim Scott (01:18:47):
I watched all 19 seasons of Grey's Anatomy with my daughter during and after COVID. That was really fun.

Lenny (01:18:55):
Actually. I did the same thing with my wife. We didn't do all the seasons, but we watched a lot of Grey's Anatomy.

Kim Scott (01:18:59):
We watched every single one. It's still coming out.

Lenny (01:19:04):
Yeah, it's funny to see which characters continue and which I die off, leave.

Kim Scott (01:19:07):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny (01:19:09):
Oh man. Okay. Funny

Kim Scott (01:19:10):
And Shonda Rhimes, I mean, watch her TED Talk, amazing person.

Lenny (01:19:14):
All right, we'll link to that in the show notes. Do you have a favorite interview question that you like to ask when you're interviewing people that might be helpful to folks interviewing?

Kim Scott (01:19:22):
The question that I like to ask is just tell me the story of your career. And I know that's kind of, maybe it's a hard, it seems like a softball, but it's actually can be unfairly hard or not. I don't know, unfairly hard, but I always learn a lot about people from how they tell the story of their life and their career. And then what I try to do is they'll say a couple of things that really interest me and I sort of double-click down into the details of a couple of aspects. I love people's life stories, so that makes it a more fun conversation for me. Often people like talking about themselves so it's not too painful for them, but you also learn all kinds of unexpected things.

Lenny (01:20:13):
And is there anything you're looking for in an answer that's like, this is a good person to hire or is it mostly information? I'm just gathering a lot of background.

Kim Scott (01:20:22):
I find that I learn how the person approaches setbacks from a story, from the way they tell a story. I learn whether a person is able to identify mistakes they made. I mean, if you say, "Tell me the story of your career," if there's not a couple of mistakes in there, I also find that when they talk about accomplishments and then I double click on it, I learn a lot about what a person really did. Sometimes a person will claim credit for something that just happened that they had very little to actually to do with, and I learn about very often. I find that a good way to learn about people's skills and depth of knowledge.

Lenny (01:21:10):
Is there a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really like?

Kim Scott (01:21:14):
Yes. I love my new it's called Attitude, and they're shampoo bars and conditioner bars, so it comes in cardboard, wrapped in paper. There's no plastic. It's much more environmentally friendly, and I have long hair. It gets very tingly and the conditioner works, so I recommend.

Lenny (01:21:35):
Very unique suggestion. Is there a favorite motto that you often repeat to yourself, share with people, find useful to come back to in work or in life?

Kim Scott (01:21:46):
"It's not mean. It's clear." This is something someone told me on the streets of Manhattan. It's actually the origin story of Radical Candor. I was walking my dog, almost got hit by a cab, and this man, a perfect stranger, looked at me and he said, "I can tell you love that dog." That was all he had to do to move up on the care personally dimension, but he says, "You're going to kill that dog if you don't teach her to sit." And he pointed at the ground this kind of harsh gesture. He said, "Sit." The dog sat, had no idea she even knew what that meant. And I kind of looked up at him in amazement and he said, "It's not mean. It's clear." And then the light changed and he walked off leaving me with words to live by. So I think about that stranger all the time.

Lenny (01:22:30):
Such a good story. Final question. I read online that you started a diamond cutting factory in Moscow at some point in your life. Can you please explain this part of your life?

Kim Scott (01:22:41):
Yes. So I studied Russian literature in college, very practical major. And then I moved to what was then the Soviet Union in 1990 when I graduated from college, and I wound up taking a job with, first of all, I was with an investment company and then they pulled out of Russia and put the money in China. And so I wanted to stay in Russia and through a friend of a friend, I got a job working for this diamond company called Lazare Kaplan, new York-based diamond company, and they were trying to figure out what they should do in Russia. And I found out there was an opportunity to start this diamond cutting factory. And it was actually my first management job because I had to hire these diamond cutters and I had to hire them away from these Russian diamond cutting factories and I knew nothing about management or business or anything.

(01:23:44):
I'd studied Russian literature. I knew a lot about Dostoyevsky, so I thought it was going to be easy though. I was like, well, the ruble is collapsing. I'm going to pay them in dollars. Of course they'll come work for me. But they didn't take the job right away. To my surprise, they wanted to have a picnic. And at the picnic we brought a bottle of vodka, and there's a rule in Russia, if you open a bottle, you got to finish the bottle.

(01:24:07):
So by the end of the bottle of vodka, I realized that what I could offer that the state could not offer them was to give a damn about them. They wanted to know that I would be a manager who would get them out of Russia if things went sideways there. And as you can imagine, I've been thinking a lot about, they were all men, about these men because I haven't been able to get them out. And I'm devastated by what Russia has done to Ukraine, but that was the moment when I realized that management really matters, and that to be good at it, you have to care about other people. And that was what made it interesting to me.

Lenny (01:24:53):
Man, that is a heavy first job as a manager.

Kim Scott (01:24:56):
Yeah. Yes, it was.

Lenny (01:24:58):
Wow, Kim, this was awesome. I think we're going to help a lot of people become better leaders. I think we're going to help a lot of companies change their culture. I'm so honored that you agreed to do this. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to follow up and learn more about your stuff? And then two, how can listeners be helpful to you?

Kim Scott (01:25:18):
Radicalcandor.com is our website, and I'm not much on Twitter slash X anymore, but you can find us. We do a lot of posting on LinkedIn. I think that the thing that people can help me do is to send us a note. You can also email us radicalcandor@radicalcandor.com and let us know what could we do in podcasts like this or in our materials? What could we do that would make it easier for you to put these ideas into practice? Because Radical Candor is, it's about behavior change, and it sounds easy, but it's really hard, and we're always trying to figure out how to help people walk the talk here.

Lenny (01:26:02):
I think doing this podcast is going to make a dent in that goal.

Kim Scott (01:26:05):
Oh, good.

Lenny (01:26:06):
Kim, thank you so much for being here.

Kim Scott (01:26:08):
Thank you. I really enjoyed it.

Lenny (01:26:11):
Same. Bye everyone.

Kim Scott (01:26:12):
Take care everyone.

Lenny (01:26:15):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lenny'spodcasts.com. See you in the next episode.

Lauren Ipsen (00:00:00):
Regardless of whether or not you're hiring, you should always be keeping a pulse on the market. That is the most important thing. And I think that should be the case for both candidates and folks that are hiring. Like, you never want to put yourself in a position where you have no idea what good looks like, whether that's from a company standpoint or from a candidate standpoint. So, both parties should always be having a good understanding of which companies are thriving, which individuals are building great things and are well known commodities in their organizations and get great references.

Lauren Ipsen (00:00:35):
Oftentimes, I encourage founders to simply chat with what good looks like and get a really good sense of what benchmark candidate profiles could be, and who knows where that person will be in a year or what have you, but staying really, really close to really great people and using them from an advising capacity or getting them ingrained in some type of involvement in the product prior to actually having that specific need, I think, is really important.

Lenny (00:01:05):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast. I'm Lenny and my goal here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. Today my guest is Lauren Ipsen.

Lenny (00:01:15):
One of the most important skills for founders and senior product leaders to develop is the ability to hire great people. You won't be able to build the best company or the best product if you can't hire the best people. And Lauren is one of the most experienced and successful people in the world when it comes to hiring product leaders. She's placed over 80 senior product leaders across tech companies and has worked with some of the biggest companies out there. When I asked a bunch of really smart product leaders who their favorite product recruiter was, Lauren's name came up a ton.

Lenny (00:01:46):
In our conversation, we get super tactical about what founders need to do to find the best product talent, what product managers should be doing during their career to give themselves the most opportunity, and we also touch on what recruiters themselves often get wrong when trying to attract great talent. This episode is rich with actionable advice for basically everyone, and I am really excited to bring it to you. With that, I bring you Lauren Ipsen.

Lenny (00:02:12):
Who has an opinion on internal tools? Internal tools are something you probably don't think about until you have to, or it probably didn't even occur to you to think about them, but if you work at a big company, you probably have a bunch of one-off custom apps or dashboards that are laser focused on just one job to be done for one specific team or just one role, and they're always such a huge pain to build and maintain. And that's why I'm such a big fan of Retool, and why I think Retool is so popular. Retool allows teams as small as just one person to build a suite of custom internal apps in a fraction of the time that you think it takes. The productivity gains of custom apps is now within reach, not just for large enterprises, but for small teams as well. And as you scale your company, Retool scales with you.

Lenny (00:02:57):
Snowflake saves about 26 hours a week of manual spreadsheet work with custom internal apps built on Retool. Amazon uses Retool to handle GDPR requests. Thousands of teams at companies like Coinbase, DoorDash, and NBC collaborate around custom-built Retool apps to operate with greater efficiency.

Lenny (00:03:17):
Maybe you've thought about using Retool before but just haven't, and I'm here to tell you that now teams of up to five can build unlimited Retool apps for free. Get started today at retool.com/lenny.

Lenny (00:03:31):
Today's episode is brought to you by Miro. Creating a product, especially one that your users can't live without, is damn hard, but it's made easier by working closely with your colleagues to capture ideas, get feedback, and being able to iterate quickly. That's where Miro comes in. Miro is an online visual whiteboard that's designed specifically for teams like yours.

Lenny (00:03:53):
I actually used Miro to come up with a plan for this very ad. With Miro, you can build out your product strategy by brainstorming sticky notes, comments, live reactions, voting tools, even a timer to keep your team on track. You can also bring your whole distributed team together around wire frames where anyone can draw their own ideas with the pen tool or put their own images or mock-ups right into the Miro board. And with one of Miro's ready made templates, you can go from discovering research to product roadmaps to customer journey flows to final mocks.

Lenny (00:04:24):
Want to see how I use Miro? Head on over to my Miro board at miro.com/lenny to see my most popular podcast episodes, my favorite Miro templates. You can also leave feedback on this podcast episode and more. That's M-I-R-O.com/lenny.

Lenny (00:04:45):
Lauren, thank you for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Lauren Ipsen (00:04:47):
Thanks so much. It's great to be here.

Lenny (00:04:50):
I've been meeting to do an episode on product hiring and recruiting product people for a while, and when I asked a bunch of smart friends who should I have on to talk about this stuff, your name came up a bunch, and so I'm really happy that we're finally doing this.

Lauren Ipsen (00:05:03):
Me too. Absolutely. I'm grateful that you asked.

Lenny (00:05:07):
So, to help listeners get a sense of just your background and kind of the journey you've been on to get to where you are now, can you just spend maybe just a minute kind of talking through the wonderful things you've done in your career and what you're doing now?

Lauren Ipsen (00:05:19):
Yeah, absolutely. So I started my career in broadcast. I originally thought that I wanted to be on the news and quickly realized I didn't necessarily want to be the face of sadness. There's a ton of that happening in the world.

Lauren Ipsen (00:05:36):
So, made a pivot pretty early on and thought, where could I use the communication skills that I've been working so hard on and do something that's impactful in a big way, but maybe just with a little bit of a different angle? And stumbled across executive search.

Lauren Ipsen (00:05:52):
Exec search is not really something that people major in college by any means or think they're going to end up doing. So it was something I found fascinating. I had applied to all of these different companies like Twitter and Snap and Pinterest, hadn't heard back from any of them, was a name in the resumes, and thought, well, how cool would it be if I could work with all of them and have an opportunity to play a part from a different lens?

Lauren Ipsen (00:06:18):
So, got into exec search, was really focused early on on consumer mobile build outs. Was doing a lot of work with Twitter and Reddit and TaskRabbit and Nextdoor, Postmates, you name it, and that was probably 85% of the work I was doing. And then as, on the agency side, 15% was obscure, autonomous helicopters selling into the Department of Defense and then retail and robotics, and it was all very fascinating, but for me, who has wicked bad ADD, it was amazing to be able to be so stimulated by so many different industries and feel like I couldn't really master this.

Lauren Ipsen (00:06:57):
So, long story short, had an awesome career at Daversa Partners, which is a boutique executive search firm, and thought I was going to be there potentially forever. Was tapped by a awesome individual, Abe Shafi, who was founding a company. I had been doing a lot of work for them. They were a client of mine at the time. Placed a couple great hires and they said, "We're either going to kick off a head of talent search with you or you can come over and join us." So I was the first recruiting hire over there, built out the talent function in its entirety.

Lauren Ipsen (00:07:27):
I definitely think there was a part of me that I loved the operating experience, learned a ton, worked side by side some amazing people, but was really missing working with founders, and lots of them, and keeping a pulse on the market. So General Catalyst tapped me most recently, and been working here for the past couple months, and it's been great thus far, and I'm specializing in our consumer and crypto investments.

Lenny (00:07:51):
Awesome. The fact that you're at GC now makes me think about another recruiter that I know who's awesome, Austin Brizendine, and it's interesting that a lot of the best recruiters seem to be heading to VC funds, and I'm curious why that is happening. Is it like a comp thing? Is it other things that are pulling everyone away into funds?

Lauren Ipsen (00:08:09):
It's a great question. It's definitely not a comp thing. I'll say that. I think it could be a stability of life thing. Search is incredibly volatile, and you have to hustle so hard, and as soon as you have three wins, you've got four more things to execute on. And so, there's aspects of it that can be tough, especially in a market like right now where you really do have to chase business and you can't be selective about what you take on, so you could be pitching things that maybe you don't necessarily believe in in its entirety or what have you. So, I think that's one component.

Lauren Ipsen (00:08:39):
In house is obviously difficult right now as well for talent leaders. It's really scary to take a bet on one single company right now and know what it's going to look like six months from now. And so I think those things combined might be the reason for an influx in folks leaning more towards venture, and I think it's just timeliness.

Lenny (00:08:59):
Got it. That makes sense. The downside is it's hard for people to find awesome recruiters because once you're in a fund, you're just going to help those startups. And so we're going to talk later about just how do people find awesome recruiters, what do you look for? But there's roughly three things I want to spend our time chatting through today. One is for founders and hiring managers, just how to find the best talent and what they could do to be successful finding the best talent. Two is for product leaders and PMs, how to give themselves the most opportunity from the flip side. And then third is just for recruiters, what do they often do wrong? How do they miss out on the best product talent? Does that sound good?

Lauren Ipsen (00:09:37):
Yeah, that sounds great.

Lenny (00:09:39):
Okay, cool. So on the hiring front, just diving in, say you are a founder, you're someone really early at a company, and maybe you've got a couple PMs and you're starting to think about we need to hire a really senior product leader or first senior product leader.

Lauren Ipsen (00:09:52):
Sure.

Lenny (00:09:53):
What do you find is often the biggest mistake that founders make when they're trying to hire their first senior product leader?

Lauren Ipsen (00:09:59):
I think especially for founders that haven't hired for this caliber of talent in the past, it's really easy to be distracted by shiny objects and look at huge names. You want to find the CPOs of Google and YouTube or what have you because that seems like it would be such an incredible opportunity for brand recognition. And to an extent, it is. But the fact of the matter is, oftentimes those individuals are pretty far from the work and have a great team of executors that they've put into place that are actually the ones that are in the weeds.

Lauren Ipsen (00:10:33):
And so I think that's the biggest mistake I see people make, especially on the hiring front where they have limited resources, and maybe they're an early stage company and trying so hard to bring in big names is not always the best way to go about it because the fact of the matter is they need to go then hire a team. So, I think looking for someone that's a little closer to the work, maybe someone that can step up into that type of role and do so in a way where some days they might actually be operating like a PM and then other days they might be able to build from a leadership perspective, that's more of the DNA that people should be targeting.

Lenny (00:11:09):
Do you think the source of the issue with that going wrong, that they no longer can do that work as well because they've been shielded away from the tactical day to day? Or is it that they're not as hungry as they used to be and they're just like, "I already, I'm a YouTube 10 year super success, I don't need to prove myself anymore," and they're just not as hungry, or something else?

Lauren Ipsen (00:11:29):
I mean, I'm not going to sit here and say that all senior leaders aren't hungry. I think that there's some folks that really lean into the work in a different way and miss that, and often go to startups because they crave building.

Lauren Ipsen (00:11:41):
So it's not necessarily that, but I do tend to lean towards folks that have a chip on their shoulder or have something to prove and want to build a name for themselves. All of that to say, there's a reason that a lot of those people got to where they are, and some of the best talent are some of the senior folks, but just maybe not necessarily the best talent for where this company is today. Right? It could be great for 10 years down the road, but the past five years of that individual's career could have been far more focused on camaraderie, team building, operational components, performance reviews, and then aspects of product vision, which just might not be the innovative AB testing type of profile that you typically look for in these pre-IPO companies.

Lenny (00:12:27):
Got it. I imagine there are stories that you can share about people you've placed like that, that have not worked out. If you can share one, that'd be awesome. But maybe a side question is the general advice, just don't assume someone that's been successful at a big company with a fancy background is going to be great. Sometimes they work out, but not always, is that kind of the takeaway?

Lauren Ipsen (00:12:46):
Yeah. I would say the general advice is who is going to be best for this specific role at this specific time, not necessarily who is the best talent in the world or in the market. Those are two very, very different questions to ask. And I think early on in my recruiting career, I was often just trying to recruit these whales of executives to try and prove myself and say, "Oh, I got this person to entertain this opportunity, how sick is that?" But naturally, that's not necessarily the person that actually can move the needle. And so you need to think very specifically. Just because this is the best talent, that doesn't necessarily mean they are the best talent for this role today.

Lenny (00:13:25):
So to double down on that, say you are hiring and you know you're going to start hiring a senior product leader, what is it that you suggest founders nail down and iron out when they're kicking off the hiring process, either on their own or with a recruiter? Like, in the job description, what else do they have to get right to find the right person?

Lauren Ipsen (00:13:48):
It's a number of things, like product leaders can come in a lot of different flavors, and so I think it's trying to determine where this person should major and minor, where they should spike. Is this someone that's going to really lean into the design efforts? Is it someone that actually kind of needs to just operate like a very senior PM and continue to build out a team? Is this someone that really should be focused on product vision for the long haul? And then thinking more holistically about how to build the rest of the team.

Lauren Ipsen (00:14:12):
There's so many different ways in which you can hire for a product leader. So I think it's trying to work a little bit backwards and think about, what is the actual outcome that we are trying to solve for with this hire? Or are we just hiring a head of product because we feel like we need to hire a head of product? That's so often what I see is the board's telling me we need to hire a head of product and I don't necessarily think that we do, or I'm not exactly sure what we need in this role. And so whenever you're starting a search in that regard, it's kind of doomed from inception, so you need to get incredibly granular on the front end around, what is this person going to be coming in to do? What's their mandate? And if we think about someone that's just absolutely hitting it out of the park and crushing it, what does that look like? So I think just trying to be really specific on the front end.

Lenny (00:14:59):
I love that last piece, just what does success really look like for this person? On the first piece, that's exactly the same advice I give founders when they're looking for a PM is like, what do you concretely need them to do day to day? Not like, "We need someone to help us with product." And that often helps illuminate, okay, I see. We need someone to help us ship more consistently. We need someone to help us hire engineers. Yeah, just make a list. What are they going to do in the first month or two or three?

Lauren Ipsen (00:15:24):
Yeah, yeah, absolutely. I think those are the most important things. Like the 90 day plan is something that's overused but so necessary, and that's just the tip of the iceberg. So that component and then, okay, a year from now, what should this person be doing? Two years from now? Do we want them to grow up into a CPO role? Do we think about that in a different way? How are we thinking about the product direction today, 12 months from now, 18 months from now, through IPO? I think it's really difficult to think about things that way, and so often you're thinking about the task in front of you and just trying to iterate quickly, but that is the type of thought process that needs to be happening from the CEOs and founders.

Lenny (00:16:06):
Are there archetypes of PMs, if you just bucket like here's the three maybe most common types of product leaders that founders hire, because there's an infinite list of skills and things they could do, but just to make it even simpler, like here's probably one of these three you're looking for. Do you have something like that in your head?

Lauren Ipsen (00:16:25):
Yeah, there's platform product leaders or folks that are kind of more indexed on the infrastructure components. There's folks that are typically focused on core product, or consumer product if it's on the consumer side of things. And then you'll have folks that are really indexed and that can include UX individuals, design folks. And then there's also typically specialists, so individuals that are really hyper-focused on growth or monetization or what have you. Those are the three buckets that I would say I see most often.

Lenny (00:16:57):
Do you feel like founders sometimes pick one of the wrong buckets and that's a common mistake, or is it generally it's the wrong bucket but then maybe it's not the right spikes of skills within that bucket?

Lauren Ipsen (00:17:08):
Well, it's kind of twofold. I think sometimes people just bring in a head of product to do everything, so that's probably not the best way to go about things. I think that ends up being a unicorn, which you hear often in the search world, and it becomes really difficult to hone in on what good looks like.

Lauren Ipsen (00:17:25):
And so I think again, it just comes back to having a clear org chart on the front end and determining, are we hiring someone specifically to build out our walled garden ads approach, or are we hiring someone to run product marketing, or are we hiring someone to help from a product perspective to build a better core user experience? Those are all very, very, very different roles, and if you bring in one person to try and do it all, the facts of the matter is, they're going to have to bring in some key lieutenants to help them, so is that something you want to do or are you more focused on bringing in someone imminently to help on the ad side of things, and then we can find that head of product to help them out down the road?

Lauren Ipsen (00:18:05):
That's kind of the way in which I would architect it and think about it, is what's most imminent, and what do you actually need to hire for today, as opposed to just hiring for the sake of hiring and bringing in that leader.

Lenny (00:18:17):
And part of the discussion there is maybe they grow up into this head of product long term, maybe not. Maybe we just need someone to ship the ads platform, right?

Lauren Ipsen (00:18:24):
That's exactly right. Yeah.

Lenny (00:18:26):
You mentioned this title of head of product. There's also VP of product, CPO. There's all these titles and I feel like people sometimes use them interchangeably, don't know which one to use when they're putting out a job description. Do you have any kind of heuristic rule of thumb of just, here's how to think about when to use each of these titles? Or is it not even a big deal for, say, a founder, hiring the first senior product leader?

Lauren Ipsen (00:18:48):
It's a great question and it definitely leads to confusion across the board because I'll have candidates come to me and they'll say, "I'm only looking for a CPO role," when I'm working with a startup where, maybe on the venture side of things, we've actually advised that startup to not hire C-level executives at this point. And so that naturally could eliminate a candidate that could be amazing for the role.

Lauren Ipsen (00:19:15):
Similarly, people could feel that way if it's a VP of product role, but that in their mind is the most senior product leader within the organization running everything from end to end who they intend to be the CPO down the road but are not in a position where they're ready to hire C-level execs. So, it's tough, and it really depends on the organization and the way in which they're thinking about org charts and leveling.

Lauren Ipsen (00:19:39):
A lot of startups at this point are almost allergic to C titles or VP titles or are just more title agnostic than I've seen in the past, so you see a lot more of these head ofs, and that is sector leaders, up until probably C plus or D stage. And then you get to D and E, and you'll see more of the VP, director, CPO type. And I think that is the way that people should be thinking about it is, if I'm joining a company very, very early days and it's called head of engineering, that is intended to be the most senior engineering leader within the organization.

Lauren Ipsen (00:20:19):
The fact of the matter though is there's good reason sometimes why they're not throwing out that C title, and could this person be layered down the road? Potentially, because maybe the talent they need right now is different than, just as we had spoken to earlier, is different than the talent that they might need from a massive CPO in two and a half years.

Lauren Ipsen (00:20:37):
And so I think that rubs people the wrong way because they want a bit of a promise that things are going to, if they join at this stage, that they'll be in it for the long haul and be that chief product officer that takes a company through an IPO. But companies are so dynamic and things change so quickly.

Lauren Ipsen (00:20:52):
So, I guess a long-winded way of me saying there's different breadth and depth to each role, but I think for the most part, unless it's a very siloed company with multiple different VPs, if you're coming into a company and they say this is the head of product, the VP of product, or the CPO, that all means the same thing dependent on the stage, for the most part.

Lenny (00:21:14):
And the other takeaway there, which is awesome, is if you're early stage startup, probably just start with head of product. Keep it simple.

Lauren Ipsen (00:21:19):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:21:19):
Don't over promise. Everyone understands.

Lauren Ipsen (00:21:22):
Yeah. Because the last thing you want to do is have to demote someone. But once you get to a place of having C-level executives, like that's not going to do any good, but maybe you start as a head of product, and then as the company continues to grow, you lean into the growth side of things more, and so you become that head of growth or an SVP of growth. Like things iterate and change, but you just never know and you can't predict the outcome of a company on the front end, so.

Lenny (00:21:49):
A lot of people listening to this probably aren't hiring senior product leaders right now, but plan to and will in the future, and so I wanted to ask, what should founders do when they know they will hire a head of product, say, in the next year, that could set them up for success down the road? What should they be doing ahead of time?

Lauren Ipsen (00:22:07):
Regardless of whether or not you're hiring, you should always be keeping a pulse on the market. That is the most important thing. And I think that should be the case for both candidates and folks that are hiring. Like, you never want to put yourself in a position where you have no idea what good looks like, whether that's from a company standpoint or from a candidate standpoint. So, both parties should always be having a good understanding of which companies are thriving, which individuals are building great things and are well known commodities in their organizations and get great references.

Lauren Ipsen (00:22:43):
Oftentimes, I encourage founders to simply chat with what good looks like and get a really good sense of what benchmark candidate profiles could be, and who knows where that person will be in a year or what have you, but staying really, really close to really great people and using them from an advising capacity or getting them ingrained in some type of involvement in the product prior to actually having that specific need, I think, is really important.

Lenny (00:23:11):
That sounds awesome and it makes sense. How do you, as a founder, do some of that? Do you just ask folks like, "Hey, who are some of the best product leaders you know? I just want to chat with them. I'm not hiring, just want to kind of meet people who are awesome." Is that the behavior you suggest or is there something else you can do?

Lauren Ipsen (00:23:27):
That's a great way to go about it. And by simply saying, "No agenda, I'm not trying to hire you tomorrow, I just want to know great people." And to be totally honest, people feel flattered by that, typically. Most of the time if you've been referred to someone and heard nothing but great things about them and you really don't have an agenda other than wanting to pick their brain, people are like, "Huh, well, this is different from the day to day. This is fulfilling," and people want to pour their knowledge, especially into companies that they believe in.

Lauren Ipsen (00:23:58):
So, I think more often than not you'll find that, not just products leaders, but executives across the board are actually really inclined to do so and want to help out because it's a little bit different from the day to day monotony of their work life.

Lenny (00:24:12):
So, the advice is keep track of companies who are killing it, who you might be able to kind of poach from in the future, and keep a list and keep warm contact with folks that are awesome.

Lauren Ipsen (00:24:22):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:24:23):
It reminds me of a founder that ... or basically all founders who are really good at hiring and how far ahead they plant seeds and how they just play the long game with the best people they meet, and they just kind of keep the conversation going until they finally convince them to join a year or two later. Do you find that the same thing?

Lauren Ipsen (00:24:41):
Yeah, 1000000%. Yeah. When I was on the executive recruiting side of things at Daversa, the VP of engineering candidate that we ultimately landed, it was a seven month game of courtship, and let's bring him in to help out from an advising capacity, let's ask him how he would think about structuring this organization, let's talk to him about the best talent that he would recommend that we're spending time with. No question that's invasive, but more so just collaborative and exciting, and you'll find that the founder and that leader will build a different level of rapport and trust by not going through a formal interview process and having it feel transactional. And then with that, magic can happen and you can land incredible people.

Lenny (00:25:24):
This all sounds like a lot of work and a lot of time. Do you have guidance on how long it should take to find, like for a early stage startup, say series A or B, to find someone awesome, and/or how much time founders should spend a week, just best practice, on hiring for someone like this?

Lauren Ipsen (00:25:41):
I mean, I think if you're going to search, so if you're looking for this individual, it's really so case to case. There's searches that I've been in that I call three people. I know they're amazing for this. I tell the founder and CEO, "These are the three people you should chat with, hire one of them." And it's that easy.

Lauren Ipsen (00:25:59):
There's others where it's a lot of trying to figure out what the person's actually looking for. If there's some ... they hit it off from an emotional standpoint. There's so many different things that come with it. I would say from a timing perspective, it's not a hard number. It's more of just put yourself in the room with great people. If you have a tremendous amount of respect for someone, continue to harvest that relationship and ask what good looks like. Find excuses to continue to touch base with people that are important in your network. If you remembered that they'd mentioned that they were going to some event and you think that you might want to hire them down the road, in a non-creepy way, show up to that event. These are things that I'm constantly doing, and I think that founders can do a better job of, but just make yourself known and relevant. And then when you reach out and timing is right, it won't feel so obscure or so transactional.

Lenny (00:26:55):
That reminds me of a time at Airbnb where we had these meetups for engineers every month or so where it was a tech talk, and then all the engineers get a target engineer that is coming to the event. Like they get their profile and their picture, and their job is to make sure they have a great time and try to convince them to join someday.

Lauren Ipsen (00:27:14):
Oh my god. But it's so real. It's similar to college trips where you're trying to get recruited for a sport, and you have to ensure that you're, yeah, just continuing to give people the best experience possible and staying top of mind for people.

Lenny (00:27:28):
Yeah. But I can see it being creepy, They have no idea there's this person assigned to them, but it works. It worked great. It was a great tactic.

Lauren Ipsen (00:27:35):
That's awesome.

Lenny (00:27:36):
I want to come back to a question that I asked, but I feel like you'll have an actual more concrete answer to the specific piece of just, what's your guidance per week how much time you should be spending on hiring broadly, and specifically, heads of product, if that's any different. Do you have any just advice? Because I imagine it's always spend more time than you think. It's going to take a lot of time.

Lauren Ipsen (00:27:54):
Yeah, it's definitely spend more time than you think. If you are in an actual search, then you should devote all of your time to it. I know that sucks to hear, but you should be really carving out concrete time.

Lauren Ipsen (00:28:05):
The thing that's tough though is you could spend, I guess what I was trying to say is you could spend one hour on something or you could spend 10 hours on it, but it's more so around, are you doing things to be impactful during that period of time? Are you actually doing things that are going to move the needle? Are you just blindly reaching out to people on LinkedIn? Because that's not going to be the way in which you're going to find the best of the best. Some of the greatest talent, they're not even on LinkedIn.

Lauren Ipsen (00:28:32):
And so I think it's building a really strong network in advance, and then once you actually get to a place where you need to hire that person, calling all of those amazing people that you've built relationships with and saying, "Now tell me who your favorite person is and who the best person you've ever worked with is, and could you put me on a thread with them?" How are you going to differentiate yourself from the rest of the market? So it's less in my mind like a quantitative number of hours and more of, how are you doing things differently than the rest of the market?

Lenny (00:29:01):
I want to pull on this thread. Okay, so spending one hour versus 10 hours, and your point about how you could spend one hour and get as much done maybe in those 10 hours. What sorts of behaviors and actions should folks take to make use of, say, that one hour in hiring? How do you not waste your time?

Lauren Ipsen (00:29:18):
I mean, I would say I've got probably five of my all time favorite product leaders in the world that I tap whenever I'm kicking off a search. And they know that whenever life brings them to an opportunity where they are going to start looking or want to lean into board opportunities, that I'm going to set them up and shout their name from the rooftop, so oftentimes they're willing to point me in the right direction of great people, make those introductions, what have you, and I'm going to know simply because of how great they are that they would never put me in touch with someone that wasn't equally as qualified.

Lauren Ipsen (00:29:55):
So that I think because the quality is there, so I'm not just blindly guessing on quantity, spending a ton of time on LinkedIn, and then having to call unknown entities and ask for back channel references when they also might not even feel comfortable sharing the dirt. You know? So it comes back to rapport and people that you have around you that you know you can trust and tap into and ensuring that you're spending the time in the right areas.

Lenny (00:30:19):
Got it. Yeah, so tapping your network makes a lot of sense. If you don't have that yet, I guess is it worth spending time on LinkedIn just cold messaging people as a founder, and any tips there for just cold outreach that you think work for a founder doing it versus you who are a professional at it?

Lauren Ipsen (00:30:37):
I do think it is worth that time. If you see someone that looks amazing, hell yeah, reach out to them, spend time with them, why not? And oftentimes, again, people are excited to see, oh, this CEO and founder wants to pick my brain, doesn't look like they're coming at me to try and recruit me, but rather just to have an open-ended conversation. For sure, and they can sense. You can definitely sense that type of interaction and feel comfortable with it, whereas sometimes the walls immediately go up when someone senses that they're trying to get poached.

Lauren Ipsen (00:31:08):
And so it's I think something that's worth them doing for sure. It's just if you are going to look for a key executive and are on a time crunch, I don't necessarily think the best use of your time is blindly reaching out to executives when you don't necessarily have the expertise in knowing which companies were thriving during that period of time, which organizations were great, and which were a little bit weaker within companies. All of those things are just the inner workings of the recruiting atmosphere and technology, and I think tapping people, if you don't have the network, talk to a great recruiter or just spend some time kind of doing some research on who's great. You can ask investors or board members in your companies as to who you should be targeting. So there's always got to be one or two people that can at least point you to another three or four.

Lenny (00:31:56):
That reminds me of a tactic Gokul shared on this podcast about one of his best tricks, as you think of, if you're hiring salespeople, instead of looking for who are just the best salespeople, you look for the company that is known for being really good at sales and then you go find people there and try to poach their lieutenant types, not maybe necessarily their head of sales. Do you think that's a good move?

Lauren Ipsen (00:32:17):
Yes and no.

Lenny (00:32:18):
Ooh.

Lauren Ipsen (00:32:19):
Yes and no, because I think if the organization is incredibly good at sales then the majority of the folks are probably amazing, but you always have weak links, and just because someone has a brand on their resume at the right time, I think oftentimes CEOs and founders will do this thing where they kind over generalize, well, Amazon's Prime team at this time was amazing or something like that. It's like, they definitely could have been, but just as any other company, there's going to be people that are breakout, top 1% type individuals, and then other individuals that get to ride the wave and reap the benefits of being at the right place at the right time. And I think that's a good starting place, but then also spending time getting a little bit deeper on who the best people are within that organization. But yeah, we always start with market mapping, so determining who the best companies are within a specific area, and then I just encourage everyone to take that a layer deeper.

Lenny (00:33:16):
Got it. It just comes back to your previous piece of advice. Don't assume someone that has an awesome logo is going to be great, but sometimes they are. There's a question I should have asked you at the beginning that I'm going to ask now. How many folks have you placed? How many companies have you worked with? And then also, is there a story of just your favorite person that you've placed/company you've helped hire that comes to mind?

Lauren Ipsen (00:33:36):
Yeah. So both great questions. I've placed probably 85 executives over the course of my career, and then lots of entry level employees when I was in house, and also some great key leaders. Yeah, probably 85 searches that I've opened and closed, so that's been incredibly fulfilling work. It's also fun too on the exec side of things because you hire the VP of engineering at Postmates and you see firsthand the product change. You know, you watch those types of things happen before your eyes, which is, it's fulfilling stuff, it's really cool.

Lenny (00:34:09):
And delivery gets there faster too.

Lauren Ipsen (00:34:10):
Yeah, yeah, exactly. So, that's really fun. Favorite placement of all time has got to be the VP of engineering that I placed at IRL, which is, to be completely honest, a big reason that I joined that company. Alex Strand is his name, and he is just the most incredible, atypical, high emotional intelligent engineering leader. Still super technical, but has managed teams in the hundreds, built out Amazon Prime Day, then went on to build the core messaging platform at Snapchat, called him and he was like, "Why would I ever leave? There's a ton of financial incentive and a team that I've built that all loves me."

Lauren Ipsen (00:34:54):
And we got him to ultimately make a move in two weeks, which is just kind of unheard of, although it ended up being like a seven month push for a start date, but that was a big reason why I went and joined IRL was to work side by side him and help build out his team and learn to get more deep on the technical side of things. Because oftentimes, on the executive level, as mentioned before, can be sometimes more of that people management type role. And so he just felt like this unique hybrid of an individual, and yeah, you close searches and you cross your fingers and hope for the best and feel very good about it, but he was one where I had all the confidence in the world that I could not have done better. You know? I just felt so great about that. So, that was a good one.

Lenny (00:35:38):
I don't know how much more confidence you could instill in a candidate joining a company than the recruiter also then joining the company.

Lauren Ipsen (00:35:44):
Yeah, I did say that to him. I kept saying, "And if I were to go in house, I swear this is probably the company I would do it for." And then about four weeks after he signed, I'd texted him and I said, "Well, you'll never guess."

Lenny (00:35:58):
Wow.

Lauren Ipsen (00:35:58):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:36:00):
Amazing. What a stamp of confidence.

Lauren Ipsen (00:36:02):
Yeah. And a full circle life moment. I sent him a box of cookies, he sent it back and said, "Your turn."

Lenny (00:36:07):
And is he still there at IRL? Awesome.

Lauren Ipsen (00:36:09):
Yes, he is. He's great.

Lenny (00:36:12):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate growth. If your business stores any data in the cloud, then you've likely been asked or you're going to be asked about your SOC 2 compliance. SOC 2 is a way to prove your company's taking proper security measures to protect customer data and builds trust with customers and partners, especially those with serious security requirements.

Lenny (00:36:37):
Also, if you want to sell to the enterprise, proving security is essential. SOC 2 can either open the door for bigger and better deals or it can put your business on hold. If you don't have a SOC 2, there's a good chance you won't even get a seat at the table.

Lenny (00:36:51):
Beginning a SOC 2 report can be a huge burden, especially for startups. It's time consuming, tedious, and expensive. Enter Vanta. Over 3,000 fast growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2. Vanta can get you ready for security audits in weeks instead of months, less than a third of the time that it usually takes.

Lenny (00:37:14):
For a limited time, Lenny's Podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Just go to vanta.com/lenny, that's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discount. Get started today.

Lenny (00:37:29):
I want to shift a little bit to kind of flip to the product person's perspective and talk about, how do you be successful as a product leader in finding new opportunities and giving yourself opportunities in the space? And so maybe a first question is just generally, what should product leaders and PMs focus on to give themselves the most opportunity in their career?

Lauren Ipsen (00:37:51):
I think breadth is incredibly important. It's so critical, especially if someone has an end goal of wanting to step into a product leadership role to have been able to have touched lots of different components, as opposed to specializing in one specific thing. So I would say that's very important, to be able to make sure that you're maximizing opportunities for yourself down the road.

Lauren Ipsen (00:38:12):
And then as mentioned before, just always keeping a pulse on the market, regardless of how happy you are in your current company, regardless of what the project is that you're so incredibly excited about that isn't going to conclude until Q1 of next year. It's just so important that you always know the companies that are doing great things and keep those windows open for people, because you never know what the next 12 months hold, and you want to be in a position where you're never running out the door looking for what's next, but rather being able to be super selective about the things that you have in front of you. And that comes with time and network building and relationship building over years, honestly.

Lenny (00:38:54):
And when you say breadth, are you saying things like work on the platform team for a bit, work on the user facing team, maybe the internal tools team, like different types of product, or something else?

Lauren Ipsen (00:39:04):
Exactly that. Yeah. I think there's people that probably want to just be a specialist in growth, or want to get super deep on ads, and if that's the case, then by all means, do so. And I think there's something to be said about that as well because those types of skillsets will be needed. But if you're looking to diversify your skillset, continue to grow from a career trajectory perspective and think about potentially being in a head of product type role, I think it's really important that you touch all aspects of that.

Lenny (00:39:38):
I'm really happy to hear that because that's exactly the advice I give new PMs is that a variety of experience is one of the most powerful things you can do because you also just become a better PM because you can see how different types of products are built and how different types of teams operate and it just makes you better.

Lauren Ipsen (00:39:52):
Yes. Variety of experience, I think taking a bet on doing something more entrepreneurial, starting something, and then also joining things that are a little bit later and more established to get best practices. I think diversifying your skillset within an organization but also diversifying the work in which you're doing and the companies that you're spending time with is awesome.

Lenny (00:40:15):
Yeah. So on that, something I'm always weary of is folks jumping around between all the fancy companies to get a bunch of logos on the resume. "Oh, I worked at Snap and Facebook and Netflix," and I feel like you're just building a resume and then your life flies by, and you forget that you should enjoy the things you're doing and work on things that are fulfilling and optimized for not a great resume. And, curious your thoughts on just how often you think you should move from company to company, one to optimize for opportunities in the future, or just generally, do you recommend people try to move around or go deeper at their company? There's a bunch of questions there, but take it wherever you want to.

Lauren Ipsen (00:41:01):
Yeah, yeah. Okay. Sounds good. I think it's an interesting one because logo collecting is never something that you want to be known for, and the first thing you're taught, like entry level recruiting 101 is recognize patterns of candidates that jump from place to place and don't give opportunities a full chance. So, you're spot on. That is definitely not something you want to be known for if you're a prospect.

Lauren Ipsen (00:41:27):
There's also something to be said about staying somewhere too long though. And I will say that. I think sometimes you find people that are almost loyal to a fault, and companies have tanked and all executives have left and the writing's on the wall, and they're holding onto the fact that they were hired by a really good guy or gal and they want to make it work because they care about the human being, and I think sometimes in your career you do have to be a little bit more selfish and think about what's going to be best for you in the long haul. And so maybe that is still keeping your head down and working hard while also being thoughtful about other things that are out there and not saying hard nos to opportunities that knock on your door.

Lauren Ipsen (00:42:12):
So it's one where I would say it's an art and a science because you have to be thoughtful about taking on new things and knowing when it's worth taking a bet on yourself, but also you can't run as soon as things get hard because that is recognized, and if there's a riff or an internal dispute or a new leader brought in, and that is so quick as to make you run for the fences, that's not something that people look for because startup world is hard, tech is hard. Look at the crypto world right now. Things are incredibly volatile and difficult, and you want to be able to bring people in that are going to hang with you through the highs and lows.

Lauren Ipsen (00:42:55):
We're always looking to see where people moved the needle, especially on the product side, where their fingerprints were, what they can actually point to that they did and are proud of during their time there. And so if all that they can say that they did was onboarded and moved on, then doesn't matter where you were, but it's not going to be something that I can at least stand on to cheer you on.

Lenny (00:43:22):
I really like that. A lot of this comes down to, what impact have you made? And I was going to touch on that, and your point is, one, kind of heuristic for how long to stay at a place at the minimum is have some meaningful impact you can point to that you led. Does that sound right?

Lauren Ipsen (00:43:35):
Yeah, exactly. And have that meaningful impact be something that others can speak to. I think that's huge. If you built something within the organization that you're proud of but no one knows about it, then that's more difficult to have as your stamp of approval for what you are able to accomplish there. But if you did something that cross-functional leaders were speaking to, that your team all sings the praises of, then that is something that you can put a feather in the cap and say, "Okay, I left this place better than I found it, and that's the reason that I have decided to move forward."

Lenny (00:44:15):
And I imagine part of that is reference checks. People are going to check to see if you actually were successful.

Lauren Ipsen (00:44:20):
All the time. Yup. Whether you are exploratory, opportunistic, not looking at all, people are constantly calling each other, and the world of tech is so, so, so small, and no matter how fired up you were leaving a company or what went sideways, it is so critical that you try to leave the place better than you found it and do so as seamlessly as possible, because you want people to have nothing but positive to say. And oftentimes, that ... The thing that I always find too is if I call 10 people that were a part of the same organization as someone during a given period of time and they can't speak to anything they did, in that case, no news is not necessarily good news. You want to have an impact, you want to be able to say, "I did X, Y and Z. I'm super proud of this and the reason I moved on is because I did what I came in to accomplish."

Lenny (00:45:20):
It's a little bit innately tricky for product leaders. I imagine you run into this, that sometimes you have to upset people as a product leader to get stuff done that needs to get done and maybe they disagree and then later it's like, okay, I see what you did. Is that true? Do you deal with that or is it generally like, oh, yeah, they're the great people everyone knows, like a hundred percent of people will say they're awesome?

Lauren Ipsen (00:45:38):
It's a really good question. I think there's a way to navigate conflict without rubbing people the wrong way so that they'll say negative things. There's a way to be an impactful product leader and disagree and make change, and maybe your engineering leader and design leader and marketing leader completely disagree with the direction in which you're going, but because you have all of the data to support it and because you have gone about things in a way that feels very fact first and less emotional, it's really difficult for them to then point to why they disliked this person.

Lenny (00:46:19):
Yeah. This is interesting. So say you make those 10 calls, in your experience, the leaders you want to hire, are you finding 10 out of 10 are generally like, "Yes, this person's amazing, you should hire them"?

Lauren Ipsen (00:46:31):
There's ones that are slam dunks and no one has any negative to say. That's incredibly rare. More often you find some people like to just have something negative to say, just to have something negative to say. I also take all of my back channels with a grain of salt. Maybe the person I'm calling to back channel this person with I also haven't back channeled, right?

Lauren Ipsen (00:46:50):
So every single thing that you hear, you just take, make note of, and then move on and think more holistically about. But I think typically what I would say is the glaring nos are very obvious. People that are polarizing individuals or have done wrong within an organization or made bad calls across the board are, you can get that information typically pretty quick.

Lauren Ipsen (00:47:13):
It's the mixed ones where it's, "I think that person was decent," those are pretty tough, and you need to really find people that worked super closely with them because otherwise it's pretty difficult to say whether or not they were able to make an impact. Which again comes back to why right off the bat it's so nice to just have people that you can tap within every organization that's like an academy company or a great company and say, "Point me in the direction of the three best people." I don't want to have to go through the burden of having to try and back channel all of the maybe middle 50% or what have you.

Lenny (00:47:48):
Yeah, most people don't have that, which is a reason to hire, work with a recruiter. You come build in with all of that network.

Lauren Ipsen (00:47:55):
Totally. Totally there. Yeah.

Lenny (00:47:56):
There's a couple things I want to touch on that I wasn't planning to touch on, but reference calls. You do a lot of them, I imagine. And I'm curious, do you have any tips for how to ask questions on a reference call where you actually get useful advice where it's not just, "Yes, I like them, they're great. Hire them"?

Lauren Ipsen (00:48:11):
Especially on references, provided references, I've only had two candidates where provided references have come back negative, which that's tough. Outside of that, typically references are a standard. It is important to dig pretty deep and ask the hard questions.

Lenny (00:48:28):
What's the hard questions?

Lauren Ipsen (00:48:29):
Yeah, why would I not hire this person? What are their biggest weaknesses? And then if they give you the typical, "Oh, if they work too hard," it's like, no, tell me more. What are their actual weaknesses? What are things that we should be really cognizant of? Would you hire this person again? Would you report to this person? Would you endorse this person if you knew that your name was attached to it? Things like that I think get people thinking, and even if you just sense the slightest pause, that in itself will be enough to make you think twice. Right?

Lauren Ipsen (00:49:04):
So it's a lot of reading the room and probing harder than you think necessary, which is tough. But back channel references I think will always provide a greater source of truth than provided. It's similar to an Instagram Reel as opposed to the photos you're tagged in. That's the way I think of it. It's like this is what you want the world to see or think of you as, and then these are what your peers and your direct reports and the people around you actually say about the work that you did during this time.

Lenny (00:49:33):
Awesome. Coming back to a point you made about recruiter training 101, you learn how to find patterns and red flags in people's resume. What else is a red flag in your resume that you want to avoid/there's a rule of thumb of like, if you're at a place for less than a year, it's bad. Is that true? How do you feel about that? How do hiring managers generally feel about that?

Lauren Ipsen (00:49:53):
It definitely depends, with regards to being at a place less than a year. If that's a recurring theme, of course that's a big red flag. Even if it's happened two or three times, three definitely. If it's happened twice, it's like, "Huh, that feels off." You got to let people tell their story though and their side of things, and again, it comes back to reaching out to different people and understanding if what they're saying is true was actually the truth. And so when you have a really good pulse on what's happening in tech and whether there was a riff and the reason that person was let go was actually because they weren't prioritizing a certain part of the product or whatever, like those things, it happens. That's life, especially right now, right? If we were to X every single person that has a short stint that joined a new company over the course of the past year, that wouldn't do anyone any good.

Lauren Ipsen (00:50:44):
Another thing I've found that's pretty interesting is that people will often, because they're so afraid of that narrative, they'll often not include on their resume companies that they didn't stay for a year. And in my personal opinion, that's actually almost more of a red flag because that did happen, and you don't want to just pretend like that wasn't a decision you made in your life, and usually is handled with grace. You can speak to the reason that you decided to make a bet, the reason that you went there, and the reason that you moved on, in a way that people can typically resonate with. But I've seen executives just put that they've simply been advising for two years or something like that, when in reality they had two companies that failed.

Lauren Ipsen (00:51:33):
And the fact of the matter is, I have some CFO candidates I'm talking to right now and their past three years have been short stints because they were brought in to take a company through an IPO and then that changed, or they were brought in to enter into a SPAC and then that became less of the buzz. Right?

Lauren Ipsen (00:51:51):
So these things happen and roles change, and I think it's just allowing people to tell their story is the most important thing. So I would say red flag is, for me, just always be honest about when you started, when you left a company. If I see that someone still has present on their LinkedIn but they've been gone for two years and they kind of are acting like they're still there, that doesn't feel good. Just want people to give you the truth, the straight facts, so that you can support them and tell their story and represent them in a way that makes you feel like you have all the details.

Lenny (00:52:23):
Got it. So basically, don't lie. That makes sense. That reminds me a little bit of people kind of upgrade their titles a little bit because maybe they don't have an official title or they just want to sound a little important. How do you feel about when people do that on their resumes?

Lauren Ipsen (00:52:35):
Yeah, I don't love that. I also don't love on the resume when people, and some people do this and it's okay, but when people say silly, vague names like they'll say something along the lines of, "Whatever at Reddit," as their title or, "Master of blank at this," and it's like, okay, what were you actually doing?

Lenny (00:52:58):
But I think they do that to avoid recruiters reaching out to them.

Lauren Ipsen (00:53:00):
Exactly. As their direct target, I'm pissed. So I feel directly attacked in that regard. So that's something that throws me off, but that could definitely be a personal thing. And I think overall, for the most part, people don't have any other things that really just throw me for a loop. And the fact of the matter is, resumes we look at less and less, especially at the executive level, and it's a lot more of allowing people to tell their story, meeting in person, talking with their different people that support them, and getting kind of more of the big picture around who they are.

Lenny (00:53:33):
I want to talk about what recruiters often do wrong and what you've learned there. But before we get there, one last question: do you have any tips for a product manager in the interviewing process, how to be more successful interviewing?

Lauren Ipsen (00:53:45):
I've had this come up a few times when I've interviewed product folks that they'll speak down on their counterparts or say that the reason they weren't able to meet deadlines or push product in the right way was because of the engineering team or because of other components of the business and it wasn't them. And so I think that's never a good way to go about it. So it seems obvious, but you would be surprised how not obvious it is.

Lauren Ipsen (00:54:10):
So thinking about things more holistically, speaking honestly about your strengths and things that you want to continue to grow and improve upon, and then being able to tell your story, like practice telling your story. So often people don't do that, especially when they're not looking for jobs, and then it's not until their 10th interview that they know how to tell their story and what they did and what they impacted and why they were someone to be missed when they moved on. Those are things that you want to know how to speak to, and unless it's something you've been doing or practicing, it's less natural. That's some advice I think just off the top of the head.

Lenny (00:54:45):
Awesome. That's really good advice. One thing that makes me think about, I know I want to get to this last section, but do you think the best product leaders have their kind of story figured out in the future and work backwards from that and have a sense of where they want to end up, or just kind of take it as it goes? Because I'm the latter. I had no plan, I just went to see ... follow the path that was presented. Do you think that is generally true for folks that end up being successful, or do you recommend people think about, "Here's where I want to be in five years, here's what I need to do to get there"? Do you have any guidance there?

Lauren Ipsen (00:55:18):
I mean, for what it's worth, I'm definitely more with you. I don't know where I want to be in five years, so it's tough for me to say. But I do think that typically someone that has the end goal of being a CEO will put the pieces into place to try and get there, and so it's not a bad idea if you do have an end goal of wanting to run your own thing to inch towards that. So maybe you go from being a product specific leader to then operating in some type of GM of a business unit capacity and owning a P&L, and then although it's more of a product oriented role, you're still getting closer and closer to that end goal of COO or CEO.

Lauren Ipsen (00:55:53):
So if it's something like that, then I think that naturally makes sense. Do think people can be enticed by shiny objects, so excited because it's a step up from a title perspective and things like that, and I think that's just so not important in the grand scheme of things. You could be the VP of product or a CPO of what, you know? That's so vague. If someone just says, "I want to be a chief product officer, that's the end goal," I always say, "Of what?" You could be the chief product officer of your household. Is it of a multi-billion dollar consumer brand or ...

Lauren Ipsen (00:56:32):
So I guess what I'm trying to say is work backwards from a goal for sure, but don't allow titles or valuation bubbles or other things to derail something that feels good. If you're in a role and you feel like you're making an impact and you're learning and you're growing and are excited about the work you're doing, do not allow a title of some other company to make you feel like what you're doing isn't worthwhile.

Lenny (00:57:01):
I love that advice. So many people just chase some fancy new role, new title, new logo, and end up getting there like, "Man, this sucks."

Lauren Ipsen (00:57:08):
Exactly. Yeah.

Lenny (00:57:09):
This reminds me, I did a meditation retreat once and one of the teachings there was you don't want to be fixated with achieving a specific thing, but you want to push your cart in that direction, just like head that direction and have a general sense, but not, "I need to be that thing and that's what'll make me happy."

Lauren Ipsen (00:57:26):
Exactly. I think that's exactly right.

Lenny (00:57:27):
Awesome. Okay. Final topic is from the recruiter perspective, what do you find recruiters do wrong most often or miss when they're trying to attract great product talent to a company?

Lauren Ipsen (00:57:38):
Yeah, so this is one I feel especially passionate about because I do think recruiters have a bit of a reputation, and I think that it's for some good reason. There's naturally people that forget that these are human beings that we're dealing with every single day that have lives, have families, have careers, or ambitions outside of their career.

Lauren Ipsen (00:58:01):
So I think it's essential that you remember that this is another human being on the other end of things and that you should treat them with the same level of respect that you would expect to be treated.

Lauren Ipsen (00:58:15):
This has become even more apparent now that I have gone through some of my own recruiting cycles where I was looking for different jobs, and a transactional recruiting call just will rub you so the wrong way and will make you want to put things on your resume like I just alluded to that say things like, "Whatever at Reddit," or what have you because you just don't want to deal with it.

Lauren Ipsen (00:58:36):
And so I think you have to be a human, you have to start with a relationship, find common ground, build rapport, listen to people, like actually listen, and remember what they say. So if someone says, "I never want to do a crypto company," and I just am only shoving crypto companies down their throat, that's just insanely tone deaf. Or if they say, "I have this vest that I really want to be around for in May of next year," and I just keep hitting them up prior to that, that's just so not receptive to what they just said.

Lauren Ipsen (00:59:12):
Things like that, make notes if easier, because we speak to so many people all day long so it's definitely not easy to do. But I'll have a note on my calendar that John Kim's vest just happened in March, and then I'll be like, "Oh, okay, might be a good time for me to catch up." I won't say, "Congrats on the recent vest." I'll say, "You want to grab a coffee, or do you want to catch up about this?" Or, "Hey, I saw that you were speaking at this conference, love what you spoke about with regards to this." You got to find ways to connect with people outside of just shoving them into a job.

Lauren Ipsen (00:59:46):
And so I would say something that I've learned and become very good at is starting with a foundation of relationship building, gaining trust from people, because once you have that, then people will hear you out on jobs and people will listen to you and actually trust your advice from a career direction and perspective, but that takes time to build that, and it's definitely not going to be built by just chucking things at the wall and seeing what sticks with people and seeing where you can shove them temporarily. In fact, that will make them lose trust. And once you lose trust in a candidate, it's impossible to get it back.

Lenny (01:00:22):
It's interesting how one of the recurring themes of our chat so far is just play the long game in every way, which takes more time.

Lauren Ipsen (01:00:28):
Yes.

Lenny (01:00:28):
Kind of sucks that you have to put in all this time ahead of time before you really need to get something done, but what you keep coming back to is just that's how you end up being successful as a recruiter, as a product leader, as a hiring manager, as a founder.

Lauren Ipsen (01:00:39):
A million percent. Yeah. Yeah. And it's really easy when you've got a quota to hit and you've got people to provide for and a mortgage to just think about the numbers, but you have to play the long game because people aren't just a commodity. It's so much more.

Lenny (01:00:56):
And one of the perks of working with a recruiter is they have done that already for you, and so I was going to ask, when does it make sense for a founder to engage with a recruiter like yourself and when should they not?

Lauren Ipsen (01:01:08):
Engaging with recruiters sooner rather than later in a proactive way is always a positive thing. It's just sometimes companies aren't at the stage where they can necessarily hire a full-time recruiter because of resources and how expensive it is to bring in an exec recruiter.

Lauren Ipsen (01:01:26):
So having someone that you can bounce things off of in a more informal capacity, bringing in someone like a talent advisor that can help in a consultative way, those types of things, a million percent. Leaning into the venture firms that have backed you, which is a lot of what I'm doing right now, that is definitely areas in which early CEO founders should be leaning into that and trying to get as knowledgeable as possible. And then I would say typically series B feels ... series A, dependent on the check size, and then series B feels like a good time to bring in a couple key big players, if the company's well positioned to do so.

Lenny (01:02:06):
And bring in meaning full-time in-house recruiters or a firm?

Lauren Ipsen (01:02:09):
Probably bring in a firm. Yeah. That would be my recommendation. I think you can bring in one or two recruiters in the early days like seed, if it makes sense for the company and they're growing quickly, but it's all kind of case to case.

Lenny (01:02:22):
The fact that you're kind of off the table for most founders now that you're at GC, which is a part ... And is that true? Like you basically at this point work for General Catalyst founders, is that correct?

Lauren Ipsen (01:02:32):
I am supporting all of our GC founders in the consumer and crypto portfolio. That being said, I spend all day every single day networking and chatting with amazing entrepreneurs, people that could be founding a company down the road and need some advice, great people that want to help in an advising capacity. So it is, I would say, 50% networking, 50% actual parachuting into portfolio.

Lenny (01:03:00):
Got it. Okay.

Lauren Ipsen (01:03:01):
Supporting them.

Lenny (01:03:01):
That's cool. I didn't know that part.

Lauren Ipsen (01:03:03):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:03:03):
So outside of that, what do you suggest founders look for when they're looking for a recruiter, and the second to last question, what are signs that this is a good firm, a good recruiter? Just what should you be looking for when you're looking to hire a recruiter, either in house or a firm?

Lauren Ipsen (01:03:15):
I think it's important to provide them with some direction and then see if they can recite it back to you. Tell them the types of things you're looking for and then say, "Did that resonate? Because I'd love to hear from you what you took away from that and what you think we should be looking for."

Lauren Ipsen (01:03:32):
And then kind of off the bat, ask them for a couple candidate ideas. Don't give them time to just go call other people. In real time, ask them for some candidate ideas. Where does their brain go? Who are people they would call tomorrow on this? The more that you can get that dynamic relationship formed before you even go to search, the more you can determine whether this is someone you want to calibrate with.

Lauren Ipsen (01:03:54):
So yeah, I think just putting them on the spot a little bit and asking them to show their work rather than just sending over a deck of searches that could have been done by other partners or could have just been done by other people on their team. You want to actually understand who this person is. So that first question is testing their listening skills and their ability to actually hear what you're saying and what you're looking for, and then the second is, okay, now how quickly can we get calibrated on what this profile should look like.

Lenny (01:04:21):
Awesome. That is great advice. Very tactical. Any final words or wisdom before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Lauren Ipsen (01:04:26):
This has been awesome, by the way. I think more generally, the advice is just treat people like human beings, build rapport, play the long game, and gain trust, and that takes time. And so those are the most important things from a recruiting standpoint, is being able to tap people and have them feel like you genuinely have their best interest at heart and that you care about their career and life outside their career. And so I think that's what makes for a really good recruiter.

Lenny (01:04:53):
Simple advice, but often forgotten and easy to overlook. Awesome. All right. We've reached our very exciting lightning round. I'm going to give you six questions, whatever comes to mind, we'll go through them real fast. Does that sound good?

Lauren Ipsen (01:05:08):
Okay. Yes. Let's do it.

Lenny (01:05:10):
Let's do it. What are two or three books that you recommend most to other people?

Lauren Ipsen (01:05:14):
The Power of Now and You Are Here.

Lenny (01:05:17):
Wow. Awesome. What are favorite other podcasts that you listen to other than this one?

Lauren Ipsen (01:05:22):
I mean, there's tech ones, but Your Own Backyard because I went to Cal Poly, so that one hits a little close to home.

Lenny (01:05:28):
Wow, I haven't heard of that. Cool. What's a recent movie or TV show that you've watched that you've enjoyed?

Lauren Ipsen (01:05:34):
Top Gun I've watched too many times and-

Lenny (01:05:39):
The new Top Gun.

Lauren Ipsen (01:05:39):
Yeah. And then TV show. Oh, it's all trash reality, so I just can't tell you.

Lenny (01:05:45):
I get that. I understand. My wife has that and she can't tell anyone. Yeah.

Lauren Ipsen (01:05:51):
That's my one secret.

Lenny (01:05:51):
All right. Okay, great. We'll move on, but that's great. What's a favorite ... Oh, this is interesting. What's a favorite interview question that you like to ask or maybe you've seen someone ask?

Lauren Ipsen (01:06:01):
I love the good strengths and weaknesses question. I think it's really good to see how people self-analyze themselves.

Lenny (01:06:06):
What do you look for in their answer that's the sign that it's well answered?

Lauren Ipsen (01:06:10):
Honesty, authenticity. Can read right through a, "Work too hard," answer or a perfectionist type answer. What are your weaknesses? Let's talk about it.

Lenny (01:06:19):
For real.

Lauren Ipsen (01:06:21):
So that one I think is always a really good test of character.

Lenny (01:06:24):
What are some favorite apps right now?

Lauren Ipsen (01:06:27):
I've been playing around on BeReal. I mean, I love Spotify, it's straightforward. And then I've been on Strava, I've been running, so that are the-

Lenny (01:06:34):
That's a good combination of apps. That's like a full life.

Lauren Ipsen (01:06:37):
Thank you. Thanks so much. Trying to be.

Lenny (01:06:41):
Final question. Who else in the industry would you say that you most respect as a leader and a thought leader influence type person?

Lauren Ipsen (01:06:49):
My first boss out of college, Joe Suliman, is awesome. He's always taught me to lead with that relationship-based approach and it's really so easy to say that you do that, but then to actually do it and live it out for the people that work for you, as well as the people that are in industry and speak of you, is something else. And so he's always taught me to do that, and I just learned a ton from him and he's just incredibly smart and in tune with what's happening in industry and makes great stances and opinions on how to navigate those types of things. So, he's someone that I have an immense amount of respect for.

Lenny (01:07:24):
Sounds like an amazing person. Lauren, this was excellent. I feel like this is going to be useful to so many people, product managers, founders, other recruiters, all kinds of other people. Thank you so much for doing this and making the time. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out or maybe collaborate with you and learn more? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Lauren Ipsen (01:07:44):
Yes, absolutely. And also, thank you. This has been so much fun. They can reach out to me on LinkedIn. I happen to be on that one quite a bit, so definitely can DM me there, can send me an email, and I can shoot you that over as well. And then the way they can be helpful is if there's people that they think the world of, shoot them my way. If they have questions around best ways to go through an interview process or how to navigate different things, please, by all means, a huge part of my job is trying to help people that are going through this for the first time. Happy to just be a sounding board or of help in any capacity.

Lenny (01:08:19):
So if you're an awesome product leader, you want to see what's out there, find Lauren on LinkedIn. Is that the best place to find you?

Lauren Ipsen (01:08:24):
That's perfect.

Lenny (01:08:25):
All right. Awesome.

Lauren Ipsen (01:08:25):
Yep.

Lenny (01:08:25):
Thanks, Lauren.

Lauren Ipsen (01:08:26):
Thanks so much. Appreciate it.

Lenny (01:08:29):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Matt MacInnis (00:00:00):
It is really important to me that we feel that we've deliberately understaffed every project at the company. If you overstaff, you get politics, you get people working on things that are further down the priority list than necessary. That is poison. It's wasteful. It slows you down. It creates cruft.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:15):
You've been a long time COO at Rippling. Recently, you moved into CPO, Chief Product Officer at Rippling. Something you talk a lot about is that extraordinary results require extraordinary efforts.

Matt MacInnis (00:00:26):
If you want to be in the 99th percentile in terms of outcomes, it's going to be really difficult. You got to sort of remind people that if they ever find themselves in the comfort zone at work, they are definitely making a mistake. It's supposed to be really fricking exhausting.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:40):
You're a big fan of escalating issues.

Matt MacInnis (00:00:41):
Fundamentally, the most selfish thing you can do is withhold feedback from someone. When you think a thought that would help someone improve and you avoid giving it to them because it would make you uncomfortable. Well, you're optimizing for your own comfort, and it's fundamentally selfish. So many people have teams that are not functioning incredibly well. Teams will always optimize for local comfort over company outcomes. The purest form of ambition and most intense source of energy in the business is the founder CEO. Every next concentric circle of management beyond the founder CEO has the potential to be an order of magnitude drop off in intensity. That is fucking dangerous.

(00:01:17):
As an executive, as a leader, your job is to preserve that intensity at its highest possible level. You've had a couple really interesting experiences with your own startup. We talk in Silicon Valley about never quit, but that is complete absolute venture capital.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:33):
Today, my guest is Matt MacInnis, Chief Product Officer and formerly longtime Chief Operating Officer at Rippling. If you don't know much about Rippling, it's a massively successful business last valued at over $16 billion. They have over 5,000 employees, and Matt has been instrumental to that success. He's also got a really rare combination of brutal honesty, a ton of experience building a very complex and very successful business, and being able to clearly articulate what he has learned really well. Matt shared a lot of insights and advice that I've not heard anyone else on this podcast share, and I left this conversation feeling that every leader needs to hear his advice.

(00:02:12):
A huge thank you to Albert Scrashim and Sunil Raman for suggesting topics and questions for this conversation. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It helps tremendously. And if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of 19 incredible products, an entire year of Lovable, Replit, Bolt, Gamma, Inata, Linear, Devin, PostHog, Superhuman, descript, Whisperful, Perplexity, warp, granola, Magic Patterns, Raycast, ChatPARD, Mobbin, and Stripe Atlas. Head on over to Lenny'snewsletter.com and click product pass. With that, I bring you Matt MacInnis after a short word from our sponsors.

Amar (00:02:48):
This podcast is sponsored by Google. Hey folks, I'm Amar, product and design lead at Google DeepMind. Have you ever wanted to build an app for yourself, your friends, or finally launch that side project you've been dreaming about? Now you can bring any idea to life, no coding background required with Gemini three in Google AI Studio. It's called vibe coding and we're making it dead simple. Just describe your app and Gemini will wire up the right models for you so you can focus on your creative vision. Head to ai.studio/build to create your first app.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:18):
This episode is brought to you by Datadog, now home to Eppo, the leading experimentation and feature flagging platform. Product managers at the world's best companies use Datadog, the same platform their engineers rely on every day to connect product insights to product issues like bugs, UX friction, and business impact. It starts with product analytics where PMs can watch replays, review funnels, dive into retention and explore their growth metrics. Where other tools stop, Datadog goes even further. It helps you actually diagnose the impact of funnel drop-offs and bugs and UX friction. Once you know where to focus, experiments prove what works.

(00:03:56):
I saw this firsthand when I was at Airbnb where our experimentation platform was critical for analyzing what worked and where things went wrong. And the same team that built experimentation at Airbnb built Eppo. Datadog then lets you go beyond the numbers with session replay. Watch exactly how users interact with heat maps and scroll maps to truly understand their behavior. And all of this is powered by feature flags that are tied to real-time data so that you can roll out safely, target precisely and learn continuously. Datadog is more than engineering metrics. It's where great product teams learn faster, fix smarter, and ship with confidence. Request a demo at datadoghq.com/lenny. That's datadoghq.com/lenny.

(00:04:43):
Matt, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast. Thank you for having me. I want to start with something that I know is really important to you, something you talk a lot about that I don't think people hear enough on podcasts like this, which is that extraordinary results require extraordinary efforts. Talk about why this is so important, what you think people need to hear.

Matt MacInnis (00:05:04):
This is a term, that phrasing I actually attribute to a friend of mine, Dan Gill, who's the chief product officer at Carvana, which as a company also doesn't get enough credit for how much of a tech company it actually is. Super interesting. And I think as a general framework for me, and a lot of what I say with you today is not really specific to product in any way. We should actually talk about that. It's like the product function is an instantiation of the general concept of management. Being a chief product officer is not that different from being a chief whatever officer. You have to apply the same frameworks and concepts to get people to achieve goals together. But one thing that is absolutely universal that I think we, honestly, I think we forget it in Silicon Valley or a lot of people don't sort of internalize it, is that if you want to accomplish something truly extraordinary, if you want to be in the 99th percentile in terms of outcomes, it's going to be really difficult.

(00:05:56):
It's going to be really uncomfortable. And you got to sort of remind people of that, that if they ever find themselves in the comfort zone at work, they are definitely making a mistake. They have definitely screwed up somehow. It's not that an extraordinary effort is sufficient to an extraordinary outcome, but it is 100% true that it is necessary. And so I do use that framework as a sort of guiding principle in my own leadership.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:23):
To make this even more real for people, what are examples of moments that were extraordinarily hard?

Matt MacInnis (00:06:29):
It is not about any sort of grand single story. I think the story is actually told through a thousand little things. And so for me, the story is told through a thousand Jira tickets, not through a thousand grand events. The extraordinary effort thing is a reminder that it's supposed to be really fricking exhausting. It's supposed to be. So on Friday night, when you get hit with an escalation on Friday night, when you get sort of hit with a bunch of new bugs from someone in the engineering team that you've got a triage, those are the moments where great players and great teams are separated from good players and good teams. And it's so easy to say this at a company like Rippling because we're winning. As a company, for all of our foibles, and we should spend time today talking about where things are not perfect and not great, but the growth rate of the company on the revenue foundation that we have is extraordinary, really, really compelling.

(00:07:33):
And it gives you, as a leader, the air cover to get up in front of your team and say, "Hey guys, I need the last ounce of oil that you've got left." And if your company's not growing very quickly, if things aren't that great, if your growth rate is 30% or 40%, it doesn't feel as good as a contributor in that business to lean in and give everything you've got on Friday or Saturday or Sunday because you don't know that it's going to yield much. And so extraordinary results, outcomes demand extraordinary efforts, but if there's no chance at an extraordinary outcome, it's very hard to get the extraordinary effort. And so I like to remind people at Rippling at least that it's so rare to have the opportunity to be able to be a part of a team where the extraordinary effort that you do put in on Friday or whatever, whenever it is actually contributing to an extraordinary result.

(00:08:27):
It's a very special and rare thing, and it gives me a superpower as a leader because I can lean on that when I'm ringing the oil out of somebody who's in the bored and tired zone.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:38):
I saw the same thing actually at Airbnb with Brian Chesky. It always felt like things were going great and maybe we could take a break after something we shipped was killing it. And it always felt like the opposite. It always felt like, how do we press the gas pedal further? How do we go faster? How do we go bigger? There's never a moment to take a break.

Matt MacInnis (00:08:57):
I spent seven years at Apple and learned under Steve Jobs when he was the CEO, learned what we called the death march, which is what we did to the engineers. It was like as soon as you shipped one version of the iPhone, you were just immediately thrown into the pit of building the next one and there was no break. It was just relentless and talk about an extraordinary outcome at the end of the day. There is no relief. In a competitive market, and if the market is valuable, it's competitive, no question. If you leave anything on the field, if you sort of leave a crack for your competitor, 100% chance they're going to go fill that crack. And so you have to be relentless. There can be no relaxation of the organization. It doesn't mean people can't come and go or people can't take vacations or live their lives, of course.

(00:09:48):
And it's not like people are human beings. You can't grind the individuals down, but the team as a collective group of people has to be sort of on the ball all the time. There can't be a break. And if you leave one, you're just begging for the slightly more hungry competitor to come in and eat your lunch. And that's the beauty of capitalism.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:12):
Also, very counterintuitively, and maybe the more optimistic perspective here is when you do give your team space to just twiddle their thumbs, bad things start to happen. Morale actually dips in my experience. People get distracted. They're like, "Oh, what are we even doing? It's not interesting." I find that keeping people busy and motivated and fired up, even though you may think they'll be happier taking a many week break and slowing things down, I find they get more, the more I actually goes down in those moments.

Matt MacInnis (00:10:44):
So here's a management framework that I use fairly often. As an executive, you don't know how to get any decision exactly right. It's not knowable. You don't know how much budget to allocate. You don't know how many people to put on a project. You don't know how to set a deadline for when you're going to ship something. But of course, you have to set some default so you make your best guess and then you manage to that best guess and you learn as you go because in software development and in business in general, everything's emergent. These are not things that are knowable top down or a priority. And so you take a best guess and knowing that you're not going to get the right answer, you need to decide whether over-steering or under-steering relative to your perceived midpoint is better. And so let's talk about staffing. When you staff a project, is it better to overstaff or is it better to under-staff knowing that you can't get it right? Well, it's better to under-staff. If you overstaff, you get everything that you just said. You get politics, you get people working, I think most importantly on things that are further down the priority list than necessary. You have like 20 things on a stack rank list and you know that you got to do the top five, but the next 15 data's kind of ambiguous, but you've overstaffed the project. So the next 10 things down are getting worked on. Before you even know if they're necessary, that is poison. It's wasteful, it slows you down, it creates crust. And so it's very clear that under-staffing is less evil than over-staffing. In this particular framework, the advice is under-staff deliberately, always. And then the wisdom, the wisdom element is to know not to under-under-staff and sort of knowing the difference between those two things.

(00:12:22):
And so that's the way we work at Rippling. Everyone is constantly asking for more resources and of course where we can afford to and where it's appropriate new resources arrive, but it is really important to me that we feel that we've deliberately understaffed every project at the company.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:39):
There's a previous guest, I forget who this was. They used this metaphor if they want their team to be dehydrated to always be wanting more water. And then eventually they're too dehydrated and okay, we needed someone to help. Interesting. Yeah. There's a line along the lines of extraordinary efforts I want to make sure I read because I think this is really good. This may be a way to summarize what you're saying, that good teams get tired and that's when great teams kick the good team's asses.

Matt MacInnis (00:13:04):
Yes. This was a quote actually from Sunil, and he found it from a women's basketball team coach. And it is, to my point earlier about you got to run the engine at the red line at all times because the minute you let your guard down, the minute you slow down, the minute you relax, the minute you leave a crack for your competition, the great teams are going to come in and kick the good team's. And it's like sports, I'm not a very sporty guy, but sports analogies are sort of irresistible because at the end of the day, business is a game and none of this matters. We're not going to carry it to the grave. It's like you're here to do this stuff because it somehow fulfills you while you're on the planet. And I love the sport of business and I find that sports, notwithstanding the fact that I watched very little of it, that military, those are very ripe sources of parallel concepts to apply in leadership.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:56):
I find also those most intense, stressful, long nights are the moments you remember most and remember most fondly back to when you're building something. The key though is that it has to go well. As you said, if you are succeeding and winning, all of this is romantic in the end and nostalgic. Remember that time we built this thing and worked late nights and shipped this thing? If it doesn't go anywhere, you don't feel that. So I think that's a really important component of this is you need to be winning and succeeding.

Matt MacInnis (00:14:23):
One thing that I've learned from Parker, Parker's our CEO at Rippling, he said, "You don't really learn from your mistakes, you learn from your successes." And it's like you do, of course, and he would admit you learn a bit from mistakes, but I do think that this is sort of feel good that it's like, "Well, you didn't succeed, but at least you learned something." I've had failures. When I look back at the nine years I spent working on inkling from day one in 2009 until we sold that business to a private equity firm in 2018, up the curve of Silicon Valley coolness, back down the other side into obscurity. Of course, I learned and grew a ton during that time, but in now what I think is six or seven years, I'm trying to do the math, seven years coming up on at Rippling, I've learned so much more because I've seen success.

(00:15:13):
I've seen rapid, wild, crazy off the charts success of the business and it's more informative. There's more to glean from seeing how it's done right than there is to glean from seeing how it's done wrong. If I tell you you're going to get on an airplane and one maintenance technician has seen it done right a hundred times and the other maintenance technician has seen it done wrong a hundred times, but he learned from his mistakes, but still hasn't had any success himself. I mean, give me a break. There's not even a comparison which plane you're going to feel more comfortable on. And so I do think that learning from your mistakes thing is a bit of a feel good trope that actually has very little substance in reality. And it's why as an early career product manager, or it's why frankly at any stage of your career when you want to learn, you should join a winning team.

(00:15:57):
It's cool to go and start a company at 22. Good luck to you. The odds are not in your favor, but the folks who, when I look at a resume and I see that someone's joined, they were at really good companies when those companies were super exciting and in crazy growth mode. I'm like, "I instantly want to interview that candidate because I want to hear what they learned from being part of a winning team." And that's sort of one of my go to heuristics when I'm looking at candidate profiles and I think it's an under-told trope. Sorry, not an under-told trope. It's a piece of advice that I don't think people embrace enough in the valley that success begets success and you should chase success.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:35):
Speaking of success and learning, you've been a long time COO at Rippling and the reason you're here recently you moved into CPO, chief product officer at Rippling, which is very exciting and very rare. I don't see a lot of COOs moving into product. Let me ask you why did you move into that role? I feel like you've been killing it at COO. Maybe that's the reason. Be careful what you're good at. And also just what are some surprises about this, about moving into product? Because a lot of people imagine what it's like and then you're actually doing it.

Matt MacInnis (00:17:08):
The story at Rippling is pretty interesting and I'll tell it because I think it explains why I'm making this transition, but this isn't really about me. I think it's sort of a pattern that your listeners would find useful. In general, your best executives are the ones that you can mostly toss into any challenge and they will bring order to chaos. They will fix the thing. And I do appreciate the terms that people have used at Rippling for me, talking about MacInnis's injured birds, where at any given moment some function is in disarray or in jeopardy and I go and focus very carefully on that function to get it back in order batting 800 maybe, like not always wild success, but I did that everywhere except R&D. I would think about helping out with components of the sales organization like our channel team, or I spent time building out the recruiting function a few times when it needed to be sort of rethought in response to our growth, but it never R&D.

(00:18:23):
And so I would have my feet up on the table looking out across the floor at this dumpster fire off in the distance, just sort of emitting smoke and wondering if someone was going to go in and deal with that. And the smoke takes various forms and when you're growing as quickly as rippling is growing, it's not always something that necessarily even impacts customers, but it's the sort of thing where you're like, that architecture's not right or they're not measuring adoption correctly." From the outside, I actually had quite a few criticisms that I could lob in. And what happened at Rippling was we made some hiring mistakes. I think the folks that we had in those roles would agree that they weren't the right people. We had a hiring mistake in engineering leadership where the product leader at the time had to sort of run engineering.

(00:19:07):
We subsequently had a mistake in product hiring and a lot of us had to sort of pitch in. And Parker and I sort of stared at each other through two years of this kind of disarray or this chaos or this agony of things and just never really having good executive leadership over both engineering and product at the same time. And I remember Parker sort of slumped down in his seat and said, "Oh, I have to run another search." And I said, "No, the gig's up. I'm going to go do it." And he really sprung up in his seat. He's like, "Really? You'll go do that?" I'm like, "Dude, this is what the business needs." And so that's what I did. And that really started about a year ago in sort of, I realized I was going to do it and expressed that to Parker in December. I really took it on in January of '25.

(00:19:51):
And so it's been 11 months of learning. Jumping into the product role when the product function itself, although staffed with really talented people, wildly under understaffed, and without a single spiritual leader on top of it to drive consistency and process excellence had become locally optimized but globally incoherent. And if you know Conway's law, you are destined to ship your org chart. And so with a locally optimized, globally incoherent team, you had a locally optimized, globally incoherent product experience that needed to be resolved. And so my efforts over the last 11 months have been to establish greater clarity in terms of how we do things around here, better process, better general leadership, hiring and firing. I mean, just doing the sort of cleanup on aisle three that needed to be done, even though, again, a lot of the people in the team were quite talented and doing an excellent job of managing their specific domains.

(00:20:52):
Jumping into the product role has been quite eye-opening. I feel a little bashful about the naivety of my view from the outside a year ago. Product teams have a hierarchy of needs, and we like to point at the failures to meet elements of that hierarchy higher up the triangle and sort of impugn the failure of that organization for not, as an example, measuring adoption metrics very carefully and not closely tracking those metrics as a means by which to drive execution. When I jumped in, I was like, "Man, we need to establish some basic standards for test coverage. We need to establish some basic standards for how we do what I call a factory inspection on a product once it's ready to roll off the assembly line." Do we have a checklist for what we call product quality and what does product quality mean? Those basic things weren't there. And so the idea that we should be spending time measuring adoption metrics is absolute insanity.

(00:22:08):
You're skipping a lot of steps between here and there. And so we have made great strides and I think it's translating to product quality improvements for our customers, but I feel, as I said, a little dumb for the way I was thinking about it before I jumped into the deep end. There is just no excuse as an executive for sitting outside of the mess and thinking you know the answers. It's a cardinal sin as an executive to do that. You need to go and see. You'd be in the boiler room, you need to study the system, bottom up and develop hypotheses for how to amend the system. And that's what I've been doing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:46):
I love hearing this because so many people have teams that are not functioning incredibly well and hearing from someone that is not a longtime product person come in and try to fix these problems, I think is really useful and interesting for people to hear. To dig into this a little bit more, was the big lesson and kind of eye-opening moment that there's a lot of foundational work that needs to happen to achieve this outcome that you're trying to achieve, which is measure engagement and adoption well? Is it like tracking and metrics and data science? Is that kind of the lesson there?

Matt MacInnis (00:23:18):
The lesson is that everything must be done in its time and order, and you can move really, really quickly. There's no sort of excuse not to move with urgency on all of these things, but you got to do them in order and you have to lead bottom up. You got to lead from the specific circumstances you observe. And I think for me, one of the best things that's happened over the last 11 months is that I've gained a greater trust in my own instincts, that sort of patterns I've matched across other functions do indeed apply in product, but I have both the advantage and disadvantage of not having led a product function before and therefore must think about every problem from first principles. I have no choice. I can read shit on the internet. I can listen to clear thinkers on topics and import their ideas, but I'm very reluctant to import an idea without breaking it down into its constituent parts and figuring out how it applies at Rippling.

(00:24:29):
And so I don't actually give a shit about adoption metrics as a matter of principle. I care about adoption metrics when I care about adoption metrics. I realize that that's a total logical statement, but it's like I'll get there. And so in certain parts of our product, I really do care about adoption metrics. I care a lot about adoption metrics in our applicant tracking system, our recruiting product, because it's in a really good place from a usability standpoint, it's very well instrumented, it's got very happy users, it's got an awesome growth profile, and so we should still ...

Matt MacInnis (00:25:00):
It's got an awesome growth profile. So we should be really focused on the adoption metrics because I think that's going to be an important ingredient to low churn over time, removing friction from the implementation process as an example.

(00:25:13):
There are other parts of our product where I would say I don't care at all about adoption and am much more focused on foundational things like I said earlier, test coverage or whatever, just to make sure that the thing is stable and good and delivering exactly what it's supposed to deliver once it's adopted.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:28):
Now that you're on the inside of the product team, what's something that you think people outside of product, say Matt two years ago or other, I don't know, go to market leads, other execs should hear, need to understand about product that they don't until they're on the inside?

Matt MacInnis (00:25:44):
I'll give you another framework that I like to use. In the financial world, there's this concept of alpha. Alpha is outperformance relative to the index. So that's why you have seekingalpha.com as a very popular website. What they mean by that is you're looking to buy something, some combination of assets that will outperform, let's say the S&P 500, if that's your benchmark. So alpha is the outperformance relative to the index.

(00:26:12):
And then you have the concept of beta. Beta is just volatility. Beta's not good. A high beta stock jerks around for no particular reason. It's discorrelated with the index. It's very high beta. Great if you're an options trader, but other than that, it's not really something you want in an asset.

(00:26:28):
So your ideal stock is a very high alpha, very low beta stock. They don't really come in that shape because alpha and beta tend to be correlated, but that's what you want when you buy a financial asset.

(00:26:40):
So what's the analogy? I think you have high alpha people who are very valuable. I think you also have low beta people who are also very valuable people. Dennis Rodman, basketball player, nut job, very high alpha. And there's room on every team for one Dennis Rodman is a favorite of mine. It's like you can have one difficult employee who's got a ton of upside.

(00:27:12):
So this alpha beta thing, I use it pretty often when contemplating what kind of person I want and also what kind of process I want. So when you're building a product from zero to one, you're probably pursuing alpha. You're looking for some angle on this market or this customer problem where the product is actually going to provide an outsized return relative to whatever the default solution is. When you have a more mature product or if you have somebody in the product operations group or whatever, you probably want a more low beta environment where it's like it cranks it out, it does it very reliably.

(00:27:44):
Our payroll product, we badly want the payroll product to be very low beta. We really don't want the payroll product to have any unpredictability or aberration, and so we're willing to accept more process.

(00:27:55):
And here's a fundamental principle of design in an organization, which is that processes, processes in a business exist for the sole purpose of lowering beta. Processes are for decreasing volatility in the output of the system. The downside of a process is that it suppresses alpha. And you have to be super, super careful and judicious in the application of process and the product team to know that you're lowering beta in the places where you want to do that without suppressing alpha in the places where you need it.

(00:28:35):
So as we've gone through the last year of reforming the way that we build product at Rippling, it's been a game of recognizing those places where I need to implement a touch of process, just a touch. Other places where I need to implement a very clear, rigid process where I don't want alpha, I just want low beta. So examples of this are let's say our product quality list, which we lovingly at Rippling call the PQL.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:00):
Why PQL?

Matt MacInnis (00:29:01):
Yeah, so it's actually a really important thing. I think if you want to bring about cultural change in a team ... Look, we have 1,300 people in our R&D organization. It's a big ship that we have to steer. If you want to create a moment that sticks in people's brains and sort of becomes a zeitgeist or something that they latch onto, you got to create an entity, a vessel for meaning, and then you got to fill that vessel with your meaning.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:23):
A meme, you might say.

Matt MacInnis (00:29:24):
Yeah, well, sure, a meme. A meme is actually a good example of this in common culture. In pop culture. I think it's why, when people come to the table with ideas from the outside, I welcome those outside ideas. But the first thing I ask the person to do is to tell me what they mean without using those words. So when someone comes in and says, "Hey, I want to do this thing on strategy." I'm like, "Cool. Tell me what you mean without using the word strategy." And it forces them to break it down into its constituent parts. And if they can articulate it clearly without using that word, I know that they know what they're talking about. And if they just fumble around with the word strategy again, I'm like, "Okay, you actually haven't thought this through."

(00:30:01):
So with the PQL, with the product quality list, it's like I could come up with some generic term for this, but I really want a new joiner at the company to understand that this is an idiosyncratic thing to Rippling. This is unique to us. You want to understand this thing. I also want it to become a component of common parlance in the day-to-day work of the product management and engineering teams. So PQL, as cheeky or silly as it sounds, was deliberately sort of angular or stood out as a vessel I could fill with a particular meaning, and so we have a product quality list.

(00:30:32):
And the product quality list is lightweight in the sense that it just articulates in the simplest ways the standards we want you to meet when you ship a product. It doesn't apply to every product, not every line applies to every product, but it's comprehensive and it provides me with a framework for iterating over time as we learn.

(00:30:50):
So just yesterday, we shipped the product to Parker. This is part of our process. When we ship a new product, it goes to Parker, who is the big admin for Rippling at Rippling. If you're not aware, Parker is the sole payroll administrator for Rippling for all 5,200 employees. He personally runs payroll always, there is no exception, for all 5,200 people. He does complain about it sometimes, but it's a remarkable achievement for the software and perhaps for him. So he also installs any new app that we're going to install for ourselves because we dog food the hell out of everything we build.

(00:31:22):
Yesterday, he goes to install this new application. We're about to ship a new app for feedback, allowing people to give one another feedback on their companies. And he installs it and he goes in and it dumps them onto an empty screen. And he's like, "What the fuck is this? What is this? What's going on? Hey, wow, talk about fail." So I chop another one of my fingers off, I'm down to nine. And I'm like, "Well, what did we miss?"

(00:31:48):
What we missed was there was a fucking feature flag, a fucking feature flag. And I'm not allowed to say feature flag without fucking in front of it because feature flags are the bane of my existence and the worst things in the world that constantly cause problems. Engineers put one in temporarily and forget about it. It's like shims if you're building a house and the general contractor puts little shims in places and then forgets that they put the shims there and then builds a wall over them and eventually the shim fails and all of a sudden your door doesn't fit. Feature flags are super dangerous and need to be managed carefully, so fucking feature flags.

(00:32:18):
Anyway, we had one. Parker installs it, they forgot to disable the feature flag. He gets a blank screen when he installs the application. What did I do? My reaction was, "Ugh." Go back to the team, give them direct feedback, tell them not to make that mistake again. But also ask the question, "How do we miss this in the factory inspection process?"

(00:32:37):
And the answer is we didn't have any line item in the PQL for feature flags. So I added a line to the fucking PQL that said, "You are allowed to have one feature flag that governs your entire product at ship." It's an extreme standard that might not be achievable, but it's the standard we aspire to.

(00:32:59):
This framework, the PQL, given these lightweight checklists, iterated on consistently in response to everything we learn as we go, constitutes a very nice lightweight way to lower the beta of the system with hopefully only a modicum of negative impact on the alpha for how we build product.

(00:33:22):
You asked me a very simple question, I gave you a very long-winded answer, but these frameworks help me design systems that scale across one going to 2,000 technical workers.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:34):
Wow. Okay. By the way, PQL, is that like an acronym or it's just like, I like this word we're going to call it PQL?

Matt MacInnis (00:33:40):
Product quality list.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:42):
Okay, I see. So it's the [inaudible 00:33:44]. Okay.

Matt MacInnis (00:33:46):
PQL, which how could you pronounce it other than pickle?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:49):
I'm imagining all your decks have little PQL emojis and the-

Matt MacInnis (00:33:53):
The pickle emoji thing, the dancing pickle in Slack, there's a lot of-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:56):
[inaudible 00:33:56].

Matt MacInnis (00:33:56):
Yeah. It lends itself to a bit of fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:58):
What I think about is pickle Rick. Do you get that reference?

Matt MacInnis (00:34:02):
This is a Rorschach test.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:04):
Okay. So this high alpha, low beta, I love this concept. So the idea is depending on the team, depending on the problem, we need a high alpha, low beta person or actually okay with a lot of variants for this specific project that's actually [inaudible 00:34:16]-

Matt MacInnis (00:34:16):
Yeah, we're willing to accept a bunch of volatility in this area in exchange for the upside we get from the creativity and risk taking of these people or the lack of process that sort of gives them the latitude to do what they want to do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:26):
So when you're hiring, you're looking for, again, is this person low beta or not? That's going to [inaudible 00:34:30]-

Matt MacInnis (00:34:30):
For sure. It's really quite a useful way. You know when you meet a candidate and you ... My modus operandi, and I think with talk about hiring for a second, I think I've spent a lot of time with teams at Rippling talking about how I hire. And it is born of batting practice. It'd be super interesting to actually be able to rewind the tape on my life and sort of contemplate how many candidates I've met in every context. Many thousands, maybe tens of thousands, I don't know. It's a lot of batting practice and a lot of model training in my brain.

(00:35:06):
So I rely a lot of my intuition, which of course HR people say you're not supposed to do. That's complete bullshit. If you have a good intuition, you should absolutely rely on your intuition.

(00:35:15):
And what you have to do after you have a reaction to a candidate when you're looking at hiring somebody is you need to decode your intuition so that it can be expressed to other people productively. So one of the frameworks that I use for this is SPOTAC. It's a very ugly acronym. There's a hat tip to somebody out there in the universe who originally thought of this. It's not me, but I adopted it. And it's that people are smart, passionate, optimistic, tenacious, adaptable, and kind. Those five things. Six, can't even count. I told you I lost a finger when I made a mistake, so I was down one.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:54):
Nine to go.

Matt MacInnis (00:35:54):
SPOTAC isn't by itself a good top down framework, but when you're thinking about, "Oh, why did this candidate just ... Why did it not click? Why did I not like them?" You go down the list, you're like, "Oh, yeah, no, this person, it's that they were not excited about the idea. They weren't passionate." It's that they talked shit about their previous manager and that they were a victim of the performance of their last two companies. That's what it was, they're not optimistic.

(00:36:24):
The framework is super useful to evaluating people. And I think the alpha beta framework is also super useful when you come away from a conversation and you're like, "I like that guy. I think he'd be really, really good. Why is it that I don't think he would do a good job on this product in particular?" And the answer is like, "This is a high alpha product area and he's a low beta person." Valuable, but definitely not the right fit for this. So I think it's really useful in that context as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:48):
I love all these frameworks. You're speaking to this audience, framework to frameworks, frameworks.

Matt MacInnis (00:36:52):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:53):
So high alpha, low beta, sometimes high beta is okay, SPOTAC. In hiring, is there anything else that you find really useful? Before we move on to a different topic.

Matt MacInnis (00:37:03):
When I first started working in the product organization, I was introduced to an interview framework or an interview tactic that I hadn't really used much at all, I think in my career, which is that every product person at every seniority level is given the same case study. And the case study is extraordinarily difficult. It requires you to think about many, many dimensions simultaneously, to think about data propagation issues. It gets quite technical.

(00:37:37):
And the rubric that we use to sort of evaluate performance of that case study is it gives you guidance on what for us, like an entry level PM looks like, what a junior, mid-career, senior executive PM might look like. And everybody comes away from that interview feeling like poop, like they had failed it. Whereas on our side of it, we're like, "Wow, that person got really far." They saw around three or four corners in a really impressive way. There was 10 they didn't see around, but they saw around four of the hardest ones. And they were not defensive when we gave them new information that called into question the validity of their solution. And they were willing to interrupt us to ask more questions," and and and, like a lot of the sort of basic human interaction models.

(00:38:25):
You never think that giving someone an impossible task and even including the L5 person versus the VP on the same thing would be productive. And let's just say our recruiting team still sort of kvetches a bit about this and feels like we eliminate people too aggressively at this stage of the interview process. But I've found the wisdom in it and think it's actually quite useful to give everyone the same simple, complicated prompt and just see. Hand them a drill bit, give them the concrete wall and see if they can get a millimeter or an inch into the concrete. They're never going to get all the way through the wall. It doesn't matter. You're going to learn a lot. And I've found that to be kind of an eye-opening new thing for me that has been fun.

(00:39:04):
Look, the joy of product and the joy of product management and the joy of being part of product, I think there's a bunch of joys actually, if I could give you a sort of running list, but one of the big joys is that you get to work with some of the smartest people in software. Engineers are very smart. They're not always the best sort of social entities. Salespeople are awesome social entities. They're not always the best systems thinkers. You go down the list.

(00:39:28):
But the magic of product management is that you kind of have to ... We talk about the mini CEO. I think it's kind of a stupid misnomer, but there's some wisdom there. And I think the wisdom is that you have to be a polymath. You've got to be really good at working with other people. You got to be good at communications and articulation. You got to be good at project management. You got to be good at the science and the math and the engineering. And it's really fucking cool. So I think one of the great joys of this job for me has been interacting with the tippity top of the smartest and most polymathic people in the industry.

(00:40:01):
I'll say one other thing about what I love about leading product, which is as a COO, my job was to accept the product as it was and optimize everything around that. My job was to make sure that the product operations, in our business, the interface to the insurance carriers, the interface to the payment entities, the government regulators, that stuff all just sort of worked. It was to make sure that our sales engine, our marketing engine, all the go to-market stuff optimized itself around what the product was. It was about recruiting and making sure we got people in to work on the product. You kind of go down any function that isn't in R&D, and I had some hand in trying to figure out how to make that function work to the best of its ability, given what the product was.

(00:40:48):
And now that I lead product, I'm like, "Oh, wow. This is the high order bit." Not that I didn't sort of understand that, but now I really get that product is the high order bit. If you get the product right, it fits in the market, everything else gets easier. Finance is easier, sales is easier, marketing is easier, recruiting is easier, everything gets fucking easier. So I think the other joy of leading the product function is that I get to set the highest order bit in the business's success to one.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:22):
This is really great to hear. A lot of times people outside product don't understand these sorts of things and look down on product a lot of times, especially sales folks, COOs a lot of times. I love that you're seeing this and realizing this and recognizing just how important and interesting and challenging this work is and just how awesome PMs are. As you know, a lot of people are a very anti-product manager. "Why do we need product managers? We don't need them. Slow everything down, all this process."

Matt MacInnis (00:41:51):
Yeah. I have a distinction there, which is that I'm anti-shitty product managers.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:53):
That's exactly how I put it. If you hate product managers, you just haven't worked with a great product manager.

Matt MacInnis (00:41:58):
Well, it's like, look, I love wine, wine's one of my things. And I've learned a lot about wine. And one of my favorite lines is like, "I don't like Chardonnay." And I'm like, "No, no, no, no, no. Chardonnay's are the most fucking amazing varieties of wine in the world. You just haven't had good Chardonnay. And there's a Chardonnay out there for you." Product management, it's like you don't like product management, you think product managers suck. It's like, well, you just haven't had a good Chardonnay yet.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:22):
That's exactly what I [inaudible 00:42:24]-

Matt MacInnis (00:42:24):
Once you have one, you can't unlearn it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:26):
You're like, "Let's find that PM ASAP."

Matt MacInnis (00:42:30):
No, let's find that Chardonnay ASAP.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:34):
[inaudible 00:42:34] with some Chardonnay. You touched on this product market fit point, and I want to double down on this thread. You've had a couple really interesting experiences of struggling to find product market fit with your own startup. You said you worked on it for nine years, you said?

Matt MacInnis (00:42:47):
Mm-hmm.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:47):
Okay. And then with Rippling, complete opposite, extreme product market fit, up and to the right. What's something you've learned about just that that you think people maybe don't understand about what it feels like, what it takes to get to product market fit, how things change?

Matt MacInnis (00:42:59):
There's a line that this venture capitalist, whose name I will not mention, said, which was that product market fit is a sort of thing where you absolutely know it when you see it, and therefore if you don't absolutely know it, you don't have it.

(00:43:17):
And this kind of gets back to my point about learning from mistakes versus successes. It's like, ah, man, over and over again, over the course of the many years that I spent at Inkling, we thought we had it. We thought we had product market fit, maybe, maybe. And in hindsight, with the benefit of now having experienced solid product market fit, it was so, so obvious that we didn't.

(00:43:45):
And I've invested in like 60 companies or 70 companies. I don't know, it's not something I actively do. But opportunities, by virtue, I think, of my role at Rippling, sort of show up. And I talk to lots of entrepreneurs and I love it and I find it super stimulating and I love the fresh ideas and it's just something I do as a real cherry on top of the sport that I play already. But when I get the investor updates for the guys who've been at it for like three, four years and I read the updates from them that I sent to my investors in 2011 and 2012, I'm kind of heartbroken.

(00:44:29):
We talk in Silicon Valley about never quit, but that is complete absolute venture capital bullshit. The incentive of venture capitalist is to put money into your company and milk you dry. They never get their money back. There is no way for them to take that investment back. So the only logical desire that they would have is for you to keep trying against all odds because there is the occasional example where someone pivoted from A to X and it was wildly different and it worked. Slack was originally some sort of a gaming company and became corporate chat. Airbnb maybe. It's like there's some examples of companies having made wild pivots and succeeded, but man, is that rare. Just so exceedingly rare.

(00:45:21):
And I think it's important to remember, I'm 45 years old, we're going to be on the planet, the average age of a man in the United States when he dies is something in the mid 70s. I got 20, 30, maybe if I'm lucky, 40 years left on the planet. Very conscious of the time that I have. And I don't regret what I did at Inkling, I learned a lot. It informed what I do now. I don't think the chapter I'm in right now could have come without the chapters before it. So it's a beautiful, wonderful thing that I did what I did. But when I read the investor update and I'm like, "You're where I was and you are not getting out of this."

(00:45:56):
The Silicon Valley try until you die mindset is not pro-entrepreneur, it's pro-venture capitalist. And I know why that is, but I think it's important to say out loud that you should fucking quit. You should reset the clock, you should reset the cap table because trust me, product market fit when it arrives is insane and it's exciting and you should pursue it. And never delude yourself into believing you have it when you don't. It is dangerous and regrettable. How's that for a speech?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:33):
Beautiful. The anti-VC speech. The-

Matt MacInnis (00:46:38):
I got more where that came from. By the way, it's not anti-VC. It's anti-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:43):
VC propaganda.

Matt MacInnis (00:46:45):
Everybody's acting in accordance with their incentives in Silicon Valley, the executives, the founders, the venture ... Everybody's, of course, behaving in accordance with their incentives. And the venture capitalists have very strong enduring incentives that have shaped the dynamic of how Silicon Valley works. There's nothing wrong with that. It's just really, really important to point them out and scream at them for the 25-year-old entrepreneur who has no fucking clue how this stuff works.

(00:47:12):
Trust me, the 45-year-old entrepreneur or the 50-year-old venture capitalist who've been in the game for a while, they get it. They've observed it. They know what it's like. The system is there to take advantage of the people who don't, or at least it is the easiest prey for the incentive structures, not for venture capitalists as individual people who are beautiful and all of them are just really wonderful people. It's just that the incentive structures lead to some real harm, I think, in certain cases.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:37):
And the thing I find is when you do quit, VCs ... I'm always just like, "Hey, let me know when you're starting your next thing. I'm excited to invest." They're rarely, unless they're not a great VC, rarely are they just pissed at you for how could you possibly not make this work [inaudible 00:47:52].

Matt MacInnis (00:47:52):
That's the thing, as a founder, when it's time to throw in the towel on your business and you're so obsessed with giving money back to the cap table, I always remind the entrepreneur like, "Hey, if you're in the seed investing game, your forecast is zero. Your assumption on every investment is that it's going to go to zero." Any seed investor who doesn't take that stance is off their rocker anyway. They're a very bad investor. Seek investors who play the long game, who want to be in your second and third company and are willing to take a bet on the first one and let it go to zero so that you can get on with stuff. This is like, I've had that conversation many times.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:28):
This episode is brought to you by GoFundMe Giving Funds, the zero-fee donor-advised fund. I want to tell you about a new DAF product that GoFundMe just launched that makes year-end giving easy. GoFundMe Giving Funds is the DAF or donor-advised fund supported by the world's number one giving platform and trusted by over 200 million people. It's basically your own mini foundation, without the lawyers or admin costs. You contribute money or appreciated assets like stocks, get the tax deduction right away, potentially reduce capital gains, and then decide later where you want to donate. There are zero admin or asset fees, and you can lock in your deductions now and decide where to give later, which is perfect for year-end giving. Join the GoFundMe community of over 200 million people and start saving money on your tax bill, all while helping the causes that you care about most. Start your giving fund today at gofundme.com/lenny. If you transfer your existing DAF over, they'll even cover the DAF pay fees. That's gofundme.com/lenny to get started. This begs the question of just when is it time to quit? If people hearing this might be like, "Oh man," what are some signs that, okay, it's time to wrap it up?

Matt MacInnis (00:49:38):
Here, look, history provides us with a clear guide. When you look at companies having hit it big, they hit big pretty quick. It's very, very dangerous to be late to the party, it's very, very dangerous to be early to the party, and the vast majority of the time, that's the problem. Rippling, had it been started in 2014, would not be what it is today. I think Rippling, had it been started today, would not be what-

Matt MacInnis (00:50:00):
...Not be what it is today. I think Rippling, had it been started today, would not be what it is five years from now today, and so I think timing is a lot and it's very hard to control for, but when you get the timing right and the market is real and the product works, product market fit, like I said earlier, it's super clear, and so if I were to pick a number out of a hat just from my lived experience, I think it's very important, one aside, don't ask people for advice, ask people for relevant experience. If you ask them for advice, they will always give it, but if you ask them for relevant experience, they rarely have any to offer, and if they don't have any to offer, then don't ask for their advice.

(00:50:41):
So ask people for relevant experience, and I try to do this with my own entrepreneurs when I work with them, it's like, let me offer you whatever relevant experience I have, and my relevant experience on this topic of when to quit is like, I think we could have called it after the second or third pivot, which was somewhere around year four. It is of course very important to believe in what you're building and to be persistent, but there is definitely no shame in saying, "Look, we've pivoted once or twice. It's not catching. I got to go do the next thing," and I think if you're year four, year five in your entrepreneurship journey, and it's not just obviously a screaming rip-roaring growth story, it's extraordinarily difficult. This is so extremely rare. So beyond even already the rare scores you're going to face from the outset that now is going to convert to something crazy. So that's hard to hear, I guess, but man, it can be really liberating when you're like, "Fuck it, I'm going to do this. I have the energy. I'm going to do it again. I'm just going to do it with a clean sheet."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:48):
That is really helpful. You have this really fun way of describing product market fit around receptors and drugs.

Matt MacInnis (00:51:54):
Oh yeah. Yeah. I think this is a really fundamentally misunderstood dynamic. When founders message me and they're like, "Hey, like my LinkedIn post and my tweet for this launch," I do it. I retweet it, I like it, whatever. Nobody follows my Twitter anyways, it doesn't matter, but I do that, but I think to myself, this is not what this is about. This is not how great companies are built. It can be a nucleating event, but it's not a major thing, because nobody cares about your company. Your launch doesn't matter. Big, fat, pull the slingshot back, launches amount to the teeniest thimble of water in the ocean of noise about startups and companies, and so you just got to build it brick by brick bottom up, and these launches don't really amount to much, and so how do you think about that? How do you think about the insignificance of your launch or you think about all the effort you're putting into building a product that you believe is going to have product market fit?

(00:52:56):
Well, if you recognize that the market is immutable, no amount of tweeting, LinkedIn posting, advertising is going to change whether the market wants your product. It might raise awareness about your product, but it's not going to change whether somebody wants it. Then you take a different mindset. You have to view your startup as running an experiment in the universe to see what you get in return for that, and this analogy of drug discovery and binding receptors is like nobody at Genentech thinks they can market their way to better performance inside your body. The binding receptors for that drug, they exist or they don't, and when they build their product, their goal is to find out whether the binding receptors exist, but fate already has decided the outcome. This is absolutely true of every software product you build. Fate has already decided the outcome. The market's either going to latch onto your product and run with it or it's not. Do not ship the product, find a lack of success, and then try to market your way through that, because the binding receptors likely don't exist, and for me, it was a very liberating mindset, because now I just have to find the right drug, and I can forget trying to convince the body to develop the binding receptors for whatever it is that I'm building.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:13):
What I love about your advice here is you were an early investor in Notion, which is one of the classic stories of it took them... I think it was four years to get to something. They moved to Japan, they worked on the whole thing, and so is [inaudible 00:54:24] from there? Is that a rare example where it actually worked? And that's not an example to be inspired by, because it's extremely, extremely rare. Let's talk about alpha beta again.

Matt MacInnis (00:54:32):
Okay. As an investor, you might build a checklist of things you want to make sure are true or false about a company and hope that that's going to yield the kind of investment success you're looking for. Does it have this kind of founder? Is it a C Corp in Delaware? Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, and these checklists are all about what? They're all about suppressing beta. They're about avoiding avoidable mistakes. They're about bringing stability. Jeff Lewis is an investor who has many angular views on things, and I think one of his most enduring phrases is narrative violations. This idea that the common wisdom must be violated in some way by every company that has an outsized success. It is absolutely true, and when I give these general observations on the patterns in Silicon Valley, the most successful businesses inevitably violate something on that list in some really important way.

(00:55:37):
So Notion, you can't replicate Notion's success as an entrepreneur. You can't replicate it because you're not Ivan. You can't replicate it because you're not Notion. You can't replicate it because it's not 2010 when they started the company. Do the math on that. Or 2011, actually. These guys stuck with it. They went through hell. They pivoted. They went to Japan and sat in kimonos and meditated on what they were going to build, and by hook/crook, they got to where they are today as a really wildly successful business in an extraordinarily difficult market where building businesses is virtually impossible in productivity. It is dominated by Google and Microsoft. Carving out your own niche in that market is just unthinkable, and so I look at Notion as having succeeded by virtue of the narrative violation of persistence, I don't think is a good idea for very many people that happen to work for them, and I look at it as being a function of the founding team and their specific idiosyncrasies, the absolute insistence on craftsmanship from Ivan. This is him. That's his thing.

(00:56:55):
The takeaway lesson is not give up or don't give up. The takeaway lesson is certainly not go do what Notion did. The takeaway lesson is that every company succeeds on the foundations of the idiosyncrasies of the founder. The idiosyncrasies of the founder. Rippling succeeds for almost the polar opposite reasons that Notion succeeds, but in both cases, the companies succeed on the idiosyncrasies of the founder, and so embracing that, recognizing those idiosyncrasies, that's what great investors do. They spot that element of spikiness and greatness in a candidate investment, and they convert that to a commitment, and then of course the investor or the good ones accept what they get in exchange from that for the universe, from the universe.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:44):
I love that we went in this direction. I wasn't planning to talk about your investing career. Just to give people a reason to listen to this and maybe rewind, and I want to ask another question around investing. What are some other companies you invested in early?

Matt MacInnis (00:57:55):
First of all, okay, so I sort of hate the question. What are some other companies you've invested in? It's a fair question, but the problem is I'm going to give you a bunch of companies I've invested in that won, that are really notable. So what I would like to do instead of answering that question ... Here, let me give you some bait. I was one of the first investors in Notion. I was perhaps the first, I don't know, ask Ivan. Clever, which had a great exit. I was one of the first investors in Zenefits, if you've heard of it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:26):
Heard of it.

Matt MacInnis (00:58:27):
I was, before I joined, one of the first investors in Rippling, and then more recently invested in ... Here's a funny one. I was one of the first investors in Deal, if you've heard of them.

(00:58:43):
I was able to exit that position, and then hopefully that company's going to zero with their criminal behavior, but whatever, but more recently, if you know Decagon, which is doing some really cool stuff on the AI front.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:58):
Killing it.

Matt MacInnis (00:59:00):
I'm in laying chain. Great. So those are some companies that you maybe have heard of, but how about I invested in Macro. Founder was Derek Lee. Macro's out of business. I invested in Debrief, Ned Rockson. It's out of business. I invested in Verb Data with David Hertz out of business. I'm reading from a list. I invested in... What's the number? 70 companies according to this list where I track things and most of them went to zero and all those founders were awesome, all those founders were kick, and all those founders put a ton of energy into building their businesses, and they went to zero and they're enduring relationships.

(00:59:37):
I can call on any of those people, I think, maybe with the exception of Deal, and call in a favor and have... and I've got a few subsequent... and actually a lot of them joined Rippling, believe it or not. So I don't know. Companies I've invested in is a long list, and I love to give you names of companies that don't exist anymore because it's self-serving and a horrible survivorship bias to just list the good ones.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:00):
I love that answer. I think you're being modest in the context of your hit rate is clearly very high. Even one or two incredibly successful companies out of 70 is a win in VC, and so you're doing very well, but I think that's a really important perspective. When you see people's logos on their websites of all the companies they've invested in, you have no idea how many hit bats they've had.

Matt MacInnis (01:00:22):
I think it's good practice to ask people to give you the full list. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:24):
What are your favorite failures that you've invested in?

Matt MacInnis (01:00:29):
Oh, no. I'm not actually... Okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:31):
Well, obviously, no, we don't need spend time on it, but I think it's actually a really good question, but yeah, what are some of your best failed investments? Show me the logos of the companies that didn't work out.

Matt MacInnis (01:00:39):
It's a juicy question. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:42):
There's a topic around this area that I wanted to spend time on, and I haven't heard anyone think of things this way, which is this idea you talk about of compounding plus power law plus entropy and how that's a really useful frame to think about business.

Matt MacInnis (01:00:58):
So you kicked this conversation off sort of invoking the extraordinary outcomes, demand, extraordinary efforts line, hat tip to Dan Gill, and these are part and parcel. Man, understanding the nature of the universe is a pretty good way to work within it, and so power law distributions happen everywhere. It explains why so few people control so much wealth. It explains why Steph Curry is just so vastly better than the next guy down on the list on the basketball team. It explains why populations are concentrated into a relatively small number of mega cities in the world. It's like, power law distribution just plays out everywhere, and once you see it, you can't unsee it. It sort of plays out in many dynamics.

(01:01:47):
People tend to think that the world plays on a more linear relationship where the X and Y axis are sort of Y equals X, but that is absolutely not the case, and the implications are profound. It's like if you build something to 80 or 90%, the Y axis is barely budged yet. You haven't hit the inflection point in terms of reward, and so the implication of the power law more broadly is that people who are in the top 10%, the top 5%, don't just get 10 or 20% more reward. They get 10X the reward or 100X the reward. It's really dramatic.

(01:02:20):
Entropy, the second law of thermodynamics is a very simple concept. It's the reason your sock drawer becomes messy. It's the reason that potholes form. It's the reason we have to put so much energy into maintaining the aircraft we fly to keep them safe because they really, really, really want to fall apart, and that's the nature of things. If you abandon a city for a few months, it starts to go fallow, and so entropy is just this concept that shit tends toward disorder.

(01:02:48):
The universe, I mean, life itself is a temporary victory against entropy. You and I should not exist. The sun gives energy to the planet. It organizes stuff that we can eat and we fight entropy until we lose the battle somewhere, as I said earlier at the age of 70 or 80, if we're lucky. What does this have to do with product? This is really about effort.

(01:03:17):
The only antidote to entropy, the only antidote to decay in a system is energy. You got to inject energy. So if you have a code base, every line of code that you add to that code base increases the entropy of that system and demands ever more energy from human beings to go and intend to it to make sure it doesn't break, and if you want to achieve greatness, if you want an extraordinary outcome, and in particular, if you want to be in the top 10%, top 5% on the X axis so that the Y axis is through the roof, then you have to relentlessly inject energy at every single step of the game. Teams will, sadly, but because we are all human, teams will always optimize for local comfort over company outcomes.

(01:04:11):
Not because they get together and think, "We should do that," although unions do do that unequivocally, deliberately, but even in a collection of product managers or engineers, what's going to happen over time is entropy is going to creep in and people are going to optimize for local comfort. Your job as an executive, as a leader, is to fight that entropy tooth and nail every single day. It means that every time you see a bug, every time you see a bug, not most of the time, every time you go and you drop it at the feet of the product manager or the engineering manager, every time, in public, preferably, it means that every time someone comes to you to hire someone and says that they have skipped the back channel, every time you're like, "You can't hire this person unless you do the back channel," it means that when you get into the board and tired zone on any process, that you as the executive have got to demand the 99th percentile of energy, because otherwise entropy creeps in and the system decays. You have to do this.

(01:05:19):
One of the messages that I delivered recently at our big executive big... Like our top 75 manager offsite that we do roughly every 18 months, was a reminder that if the purest form of ambition and the purest and most intense source of energy in the business is the founder CEO, that every next concentric circle of management beyond the founder CEO has the potential to be an order of magnitude drop off in intensity, and that is dangerous because if you go to two layers and it's two orders of magnitude drop off and signal and intensity, that is a very dysfunctional organization. So what I say to the team was, it's not that you need to buffer people from the intensity of the CEO, it's that you need to absolutely mirror that intensity.

(01:06:13):
There are plenty of constituents in the business around you who will advocate for relaxing. There is an infinite supply of people under you who will buffer other team members from the intensity of the demands. Your job is not to be one of those buffers. Your job is to preserve that intensity at its highest possible level and let the buffering happen somewhere else, and that's the point is that entropy creeps into the system insidiously and slowly over time off your radar and you have to maintain that intensity every minute of every day to try and fight it if you want to stay at the extreme right end of the power law that obviously governs the outcome of everything that we build.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:03):
What does that look like to pass along that intensity? What does that feel like? What does that look like? So say Parker comes to you, "This bug sucks. I got this broken screen." You cut off your finger. Maybe that's the example.

(01:07:18):
Okay. Still got them. I got all 10.

Matt MacInnis (01:07:21):
I'll give you concrete examples. Actually, the joke that I sort of played on this one when I presented to the team was that the next sort of slide in my presentation was with the sound effect, the Slack huddle thing, and Parker's icon in Slack is just, he uses the generic yellow...

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:42):
The egg?

Matt MacInnis (01:07:43):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:43):
Oh, wow.

Matt MacInnis (01:07:46):
It's funny, and so everybody knows the yellow egg is Parker, and so the next slide in the presentation was boop, boop, boop, boop, boop, boop, boop, which is the sound that Slack makes when someone calls you, and it was Parker Conrad is inviting you to a huddle, and then the next slide was Parker Conrad is modeling personal intensity, and the idea is that if you know, you know, if you've ever been dragged into an... "I want to talk about this fucking problem right now and whatever you're doing, unless it's an interview, I want you to come and have a conversation with me."

(01:08:13):
That intensity is one place where it plays out. Every product team at Rippling, and we have a lot of them now, have public feedback channels. I am in there upside down on everything I find when I use those products, and I just model for everybody that this is how at least I want to do it, which is, "I don't like this. I don't understand this. Tell me why this is this way." Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, and people jump in and respond. The factory inspection process that I mentioned, which is where at the end of the assembly line, I jump out with the pickle and we talk about all of the elements. You have to record a loom of every major flow through the product. I personally review every one of those flows, I got a backlog I got to catch up on today and provide feedback to people always in a public channel so that every other product manager and engineering manager can jump in and see how the process has worked for other teams.

(01:09:01):
It's about modeling the intensity publicly so that other people can say, "Okay, this is how we do things around here," and it gives the reaction from the team that received the message that you have to inject that energy every minute of every day and that there are no exceptions, was not like, "Ooh, that's exhausting." The reaction is, "Oh, that is so invigorating." It's so wonderful to hear that we're going to achieve these great outcomes, or at least we have a shot at doing so, and that you're empowering me to follow my instinct, which is to really push for the best result.

(01:09:39):
The reaction universally is like, "Ugh, what a relief that I get to go be intense," because nobody in a position of leadership wants to be chill, and what's worse than a chill boss? No, don't work for a chill boss. Don't be a chill boss. It's the most pejorative label I could give you. Chill boss or chill PM. Don't be chill. Chill doesn't accomplish shit. Be intense. Be good, be respectful, be intense. Don't be chill.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:09):
Again, this advice comes from where we started, which is this is what success looks like, because somebody that is less chill than you is going to find that crack and come after your market. Is that the gist?

Matt MacInnis (01:10:21):
For sure. I mean, again, if you're chill and you move the X axis down 10 or 20 points, the Y axis collapses. It doesn't just drop 10 or 20%. The Y axis collapses, and this is just kind of true in everything we do. So yeah, if you want to win, you should probably try.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:45):
This is what I always say to people trying to build lifestyle businesses. There's always this idea, "I'm going to build a side business, I'm going to make recurring income, it's going to be amazing," and in my experience, anytime there's a market or something shows up that's juicy and there's ways to make money, somebody's going to come at you and work harder, raise more money, and there's only so long you can maintain that.

Matt MacInnis (01:11:04):
Well, man, there's a whole other podcast episode on the concept of leverage. If you sell your time, you've only got 24 hours a day to give, but if you can create a product that scales, the marginal cost of a unit of that product is zero like software, it's going to be competitive, man. Sell your time, it's not going to be super competitive, but achieve that level of leverage and it's a pretty efficient market.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:33):
To close out this thread of intensity and adding energy to everything, something I've heard about you is you're big on escalating. You're a big fan of escalating issues, and also you always tell people to never not give you negative feedback, to always share feedback to not hide anything. Tell me about those two.

Matt MacInnis (01:11:49):
Fundamentally, the most selfish thing you can do is withhold feedback from someone. Who are you optimizing for when you do that? What are you optimizing for when you think a thought that would help someone improve and you avoid giving it to them because it would make you uncomfortable? Well, you're optimizing for your own comfort and it's fundamentally selfish. It's the most selfish thing you could possibly do, is withhold feedback that would otherwise be useful to someone because you don't want to be uncomfortable. Well, that's not how high performance teams operate. So I demand feedback, and I give it, and it doesn't mean that when I give feedback, it's not open to being questioned or discussed. I mean, of course it is, but when I observe something, I try to say it. That's the feedback topic.

(01:12:35):
The part of this that has been interesting to me is that people withhold, escalate, the customers withhold. Customers don't want to escalate to me as an executive. Even the founders in whose businesses I've invested who use Rippling are reluctant to hit me up when something goes wrong because they don't want to bother me, but it's literally my job, literally my job to find things, problems, and make them better, and by virtue of making those specific things better, to iterate on the processes so that the system that builds the system can get better.

(01:13:09):
There's no greater gift to me as a product executive than receiving an escalation from a customer. We have an escalations team at Rippling, which sounds weird, but it's people who are just particularly skilled at pistol whipping other people in the company to get to real root causes, real root causes. Not like throw away the word root cause, like, "Oh, we fixed the data error and shut the ticket down." No, you went and you found the software that created the data error, and then you found the system that created the software that created the data error, and you solved all of that back to the top.

(01:13:44):
Escalation seems extremely good at that at Rippling. So we have sort of a dedicated little team that does this for us. Escalations are a gift, and it's like, if you're a listener right now on this podcast and you are a Rippling customer and you have shit that you think we should know, the fact that I might already know it is not a reason for you to withhold the gift of your feedback. So it's an attitude that I take to this every day. I've got a little cue of some stuff that I've... Minor things that are from the last couple of days from people who had some knits and issues that I'm just like, I've got them queued up on my to do list today and I'm going to take them to the product teams directly and be like, "I'd like to understand what happened here." Not in a negative way. I just think we'll all get better if we study this one, and so yeah, escalations are a gift, feedback like that is a gift, and nobody is ever inconveniencing me when they do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:32):
For people that are listening to this and feeling like, "Man, this is so stressful and intense and just like, I don't know if I want to work this way," give them a sense of just how successful Rippling is. I think a lot of people may not even have heard of Rippling. A lot of people are like, "Yeah, it's doing great." What are some things you can share that are public or not public that give people a sense of just how massive this business has become?

Matt MacInnis (01:14:53):
People look at Rippling from the outside, I think they think of us as payroll and HR or whatever, which is cool. It's a bit like saying Microsoft is a desktop operating system company or it's like every company starts from somewhere.

Matt MacInnis (01:15:00):
... system company or ... It's like every company starts from somewhere and grows out from there. We see ourselves as building the most successful business software platform in history. In fact, that's the mission statement of our product organization under the umbrella of the mission statement of the company, which is to free smart people to work on hard problems. And when you translate that from where we are today to where we think we're taking things, it's like we really do believe that the core of every workflow and everything that a company has to do, be it AI or manual traditional GUI based software, is who's doing stuff, who owns it, who's accountable? And so the people record is a really important component of that. You can argue that the customer record's also very important. And of course some big businesses have been built on that primitive as well, but we think the people primitive is actually much more important.

(01:15:43):
And that the only thing that hasn't been done here is somebody hasn't been ambitious enough to build a good business on top of that primitive. Workday is terrible software. Everybody agrees on that. I think Workday agrees on that. Good luck to them. But they have failed actually, despite their success, to build a really broad general purpose software platform for business software on the foundation of the people primitive. So we're going to do that.

(01:16:03):
And we're successful because we deliver on that promise at the scale we're at today. The fact that you can do ... and this is not a sales pitch or sort of like an advertisement for Rippling. I just think it's important to sort of contemplate that when you bring together a bunch of disparate business processes into one system on a common business data graph, an object graph, a data lake with a consistent interface, you can do some pretty magical things.

(01:16:27):
So we do payroll, we do HCM, we do IT, we do spend. We are about to launch a new product in the category of business intelligence and data management. And there's a whole bunch of other stuff coming beyond that. And then you layer in AI on top of this, where we alone, where we alone have all of your business data organized into this nice, neat package with a beautiful semantic layer on top of it. The AI can work magic. And we have shipped nothing, nothing yet in this category that I would say gets anywhere near what we're going to show next year. And it is going to set the standard. It is going to be the most ... The back flips that the AI is doing reading and writing data for the user just on our internal use cases at Rippling is jaw dropping. So I'm super excited about the tailwind this is going to create for us.

(01:17:20):
You ask about what can I share about the success of the company? What I can say, there are tens of thousands of companies that now run on Rippling. We're less than 1% of the market. And the market cap at 16 billion, I think now undervalues where we are from a revenue perspective by a long shot. There is just so much upside to do what we're doing. And SaaS might be dead-ish in terms of point solutions, but long live SaaS in terms of what we're building.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:48):
Let me follow that thread in AI. There's been a lot of talk about AI is going to replace SaaS, as you maybe just said.

Matt MacInnis (01:17:55):
Yeah. People are going to vibe code their way to their payroll system, which I ... good luck to the employees of those companies.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:01):
And so what I'm hearing here is that you actually do believe a lot of SaaS companies that are selling individual solutions are in big trouble. The answer implied here is this kind of compound startup idea of you need to do a lot of things for people for them to continue to pay for your software. Is that the gist?

Matt MacInnis (01:18:18):
No. I think the gist is ... there's a really good quote. I forget who it's attributable to, but it's, "There's two ways to make money in software, bundling and unbundling." And you just got to get the timing right. So this is a period of bundling. So here's the problem; point solutions don't have enough data in the age of AI to be useful. You got to be able to provide the AI with a lot of context about a lot of data so it can do things. It can do joins. It can do correlations.

(01:18:49):
And so if you're a point solution, you're in hard water because you've got to now rely on data from other sources. You've got to integrate to third party systems. And when you integrate to a third party system, even the best ones are still sort of drinking their data through a straw, which is a real problem. I mean, the biggest HCM software company you can think of integrates to the other biggest payroll software company you can think of through flat files via SFTP. What are they going to do? What are they going to do? It's just never going to work. It's just no way. And so I literally have no idea what they're going to do. They're just not going to build AI software, I guess. Point SaaS is sort of in a rough spot, especially when you cleave two really important systems apart and say they have to integrate. It's very, very hard.

(01:19:39):
The other thing that I would say about the world of, even just like not SaaS, but AI software is that point solutions in the AI world are also in a rough spot for the same reason. It's like if you're selling the shovels like OpenAI and Google with Gemini, you can make money. And if you own the mine, like Rippling, with the data, you can make money. If you're somewhere in the middle, building AI software that then tries to use the shovels from the shovel provider, but then also needs to rent out the mine, or get the ore out of somebody else's mind and start refining it, you're in a very difficult place from an economic standpoint. Because you're not going to be permitted by either of those parties to build a big business on their backs.

(01:20:25):
That's just not how it's going to work. They're going to demand value capture that crushes your unit economics. So I look at the landscape of AI companies that I've seen and I think you have to have a really durable, interesting insight that gives you a shot at viable unit economics to be an interesting business. And that is going to kill off 80 or 90% of the stuff that I see right now as standalone AI businesses.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:53):
So what I'm hearing here ... I love that you correct me when I get these things wrong, and that's exactly what I want. What I'm hearing is it's less about how difficult it is to build the SaaS product. It's about, do you have first party data that allows you to build an incredible AI product on top of what you've got?

Matt MacInnis (01:21:09):
Yep. Because look, SaaS software is a bit flipping. All SaaS software applications are bit flippers. It's an interface changing-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:09):
Your database?

Matt MacInnis (01:21:18):
Yeah. Changing values in your database, that's what it does. It's a really hard problem. One of Rippling's superpowers is we're a coin sorter. You dump $20,000 for an employee in the top of the coin sorter, and it figures out what goes to the government, what goes to health insurance, what goes to your 401k, what goes to you. And it has to move all that money very, very reliably and seamlessly, very challenging software to build and manage. What's it doing? Even that is just flipping bits in a database. And so AI is a new way to flip bits. AI is just a new way to flip bits. Hopefully a way that abstracts us a little bit further from having to think because our future is Wally. It's going to be great.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:57):
Speaking of Wally, actually, I have this Matic Robot. You have one of these?

Matt MacInnis (01:22:04):
Uh-huh.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:05):
No. It's like a self-driving car robot, basically, a self-driving car. People built this robot that cleans your house. Maybe I didn't mention that. It's like a house cleaning robot that just goes around.

Matt MacInnis (01:22:15):
Oh, okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:15):
It's like a Roomba. You should have one. They're expensive, but incredibly cool. And actually in Wally, there's a scene where they actually have basically what these things look like. So it's not so far-fetched for that movie.

Matt MacInnis (01:22:26):
I definitely was actually quite prescient, perhaps with the exception of the gravity defying day beds.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:33):
Yeah. I don't know, but that's not good news. You've seen that movie. Oh, man. So on this AI stuff, which I'm hearing is we're going to see a lot more consolidation where these point solution companies realize they need this data. This is existential, and they're going to combine and merge and bundle, as you described?

Matt MacInnis (01:22:51):
It's possible.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:52):
Or for now.

Matt MacInnis (01:22:52):
I am not an investigator on this stuff. I think there's some really interesting investors out there who I think are thinking quite deeply about this. And in particular, the conviction, which is like Mike Fornell and Sarah Guo. I think those are two investors who are hyper focused on AI. And when they made the decision to take that approach, at the time I thought that's kind of narrow. Now I'm like, no, no, no, that was the right move. And it just means that they have a very deep, deep, deep set of hypotheses that they've formed over the course of seeing every AI deal in the valley. And there are better people to ask this question of than I am. And I think if you're an entrepreneur, I recommend them to you because I think they're really smart.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:35):
Awesome. I love those guys. Also, Sarah and Elad have a podcast called No Priors that I'd also recommend. We'll point it to you in the show notes. So on this AI note, I guess is there anything else that you think would be really helpful for founders that are working in this space building an AI startup to hear they think you were seeing of like, here's what you need to do to win in an AI company?

Matt MacInnis (01:23:58):
So much. I actually think that if I were to give you an answer to this question right now, it would be bullshit. Yeah. I don't have anything ... Back to my point earlier, I don't have enough relevant experience in the abstract to dole out on a podcast on that topic, but I wish them luck.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:17):
I love that. Circling back to your advice, don't ask for advice, ask for a relevant experience. And I love that that's where your mind immediately went. I'm going to take us to AI Quarter, which is a recurring segment on this podcast. And the question is just what's one way you've found AI to be useful in your work day-to-day? Is there something that you found it unlocked in how you work?

Matt MacInnis (01:24:37):
I mean, it's not a super exciting thing, but I'll say where I use ... So one of the most important functions that I perform as an executive is the synthesis of ideas, and the ability to communicate those ideas very clearly to people. So when I talk about the product quality list and the pickle, as something that we've come up with internally, I do turn to AI, ChatGPT and Gemini, where I take a really, let's say, angular view of some topic and I give ... really, I write the essay for the AI and I'm like, "Look, this is the crisp idea I want to communicate. Help me come up with pithy ways to articulate these things." And 80% of what it outputs is trash. It's just sort of middle of the road, average, low alpha junk.

(01:25:24):
But it is a thought partner, a non-judgemental thought partner where in 20% of the stuff it comes out with, I'm like, yeah, it's pretty good. That's a new word I didn't think of. That does kind of hit the nail on the head for this concept. And so if I believe that my job is to sort of bring brains along on the journey for some sort of change that I'm trying to bring about, then the most important tool is language. And I do find that the ChatGPT and Gemini do a great job of helping me refine how to articulate the concepts that I want to articulate. They are not useful in coming up with the ideas themselves.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:59):
That's an awesome tip. I don't know if you've played with Claude much, but I actually find Claude is better at writing and words and language.

Matt MacInnis (01:26:05):
I have not spent a lot of time with Claude. I have used it, but by virtue of this conversation, I'll probably go give it a go.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:12):
Right. Yeah. They're all great, but there's something about Claude that is just at writing specifically is much better, but they're all getting better all the time. There's always something new.

(01:26:23):
Matt, we've covered so much ground. We've touched on everything I was hoping to touch on. Before we get to our very exciting lightning round, is there anything else that you were hoping to share or anything else you wanted to touch on or leave listeners with?

Matt MacInnis (01:26:34):
Yeah. We've spent a lot of time talking about intensity and the grind, and the need to just always be operating at the 99th percentile. And I think if you listen to that in a vacuum, it's very easy to believe that that intensity is soul crushing, that it's a negative, that it's maybe not something that you want. And I think there's a backstop for me that I didn't talk about today that I think is important to share, which is that life is amazing. That the fact that we all exist on this blue marble drifting through space and time, that we are some weird instantiation of consciousness, each of us, and that you're here for such a short period of time whittling your stick, doing something, that if you remember how insignificant we are and all of this is, it brings this levity to what we do and to the work we put into building this.

(01:27:47):
Because Silicon Valley in 2025 is Florence and the Renaissance. It's crazy. The amount of creativity and insane invention and progress that's happening for our species right now in this place is absolutely unparalleled in all human history. You've got to zoom out and appreciate that magic. And so then you turn around and you're like, fuck, I've got to work on Friday night, right? I've got to go give it my all. I've got to go compete in the arena of business.

(01:28:22):
You have to never forget that number one, none of this matters. And number two, it is an absolutely beautiful and amazing phenomenon that we get to be alive doing this right now. So play the sport, play it with everything you've got, but never forget that it's just a sport and that none of it matters. I think it's super important as a counterpoint to the intensity that we talked about.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:48):
That is beautiful.

Matt MacInnis (01:28:50):
I think about Pale Blue Dot, Carl Sagan's whole thing. Just a stunning photograph that literally changed the way I think about who I am as a person when I saw it. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:02):
Well, going in a completely different direction, with that, Matt, we reached our very exciting lighting round.

Matt MacInnis (01:29:07):
Okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:07):
All right, five questions for you. Are you ready?

Matt MacInnis (01:29:09):
Okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:11):
Here we go. What are two or three books that you find yourself recommending most to other people?

Matt MacInnis (01:29:16):
Okay. Two or three books. You give me a heads-up on this. So one book is Conscious Business. I don't have Conscious Business in front of me because it's actually at the office because we have Conscious Business Reading Club at Rippling. And every member of my current, my product leadership team is going through this right now, Conscious Business, Fred Kofman. It's been used in many businesses, LinkedIn most notably, as a framework for thinking about ... effectively, it's a user manual for human beings. So if you are a leader, a manager, an executive, whatever, particularly younger people in their 20s and 30s who are just sort of getting the hang of being a CEO or a product leader for the first time, this book is absolute fucking gold. It was recommended to me by Bryan Schreier at Sequoia when he was on my board at my previous company. I took way too long to take him up on the advice, wished I had read it sooner. Highly recommend Conscious Business. Changes your life.

(01:30:01):
Number two, Thinking in Systems, Donna Meadows. I always mispronounce her name, Donella Meadows. She died partway through writing this manuscript. Her fellow professors picked it up and finished it for her. It is the best generic framework for thinking about how systems work. You will extrapolate from this book to every aspect of your life after you read it.

(01:30:23):
And then the third is classic 1960s, The Effective Executive. It's an anachronism. It uses weird pronouns for the secretary and the executive. I'll let you guess which ones. But the book itself is so chock-full of simple enduring advice on how to be effective at leading teams. And the good shit is the stuff that's been in print for 70 years, and that's one of them.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:48):
Beautiful. I love the first one is you don't have it because you're using it with your team constantly. You mentioned at one point before we started recording, you have eight copies of that book that you just give out to everyone.

Matt MacInnis (01:30:57):
Yeah, and we handed out like candy.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:59):
Okay. Is there a favorite recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Matt MacInnis (01:31:03):
Yeah. So I'm a little embarrassed by this answer, but I'm going to be honest.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:07):
Please.

Matt MacInnis (01:31:08):
There's a new series called Heated Rivalry and it's about ... I'm Canadian and I'm gay. So it's about two hockey players. In Canada, rivals between the Bruins and the Maple Leafs, although they don't use those names, who are just heated rivals on the ice. And it's a huge thing that the world is watching, but actually they're secretly in love with each other and they start hooking up. And it's been labeled by the media as smutty but delightful. And I would say that's accurate. So it might not be for everybody, but it is a smash hit right now. It's on HBO Max and Crave, and it's only six episodes. But like I said, a little embarrassing because it's a little chintzy, but it's a lot of fun. It's also really fun to see gay people represented in the media as though they're normal, and it's fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:57):
And soon to be on Netflix with the acquisition if that goes through.

Matt MacInnis (01:32:00):
Oh, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:00):
It's crazy. Amazing. Okay. Is there a favorite product you recently discovered that you really love?

Matt MacInnis (01:32:06):
My Fellow coffee maker. I love my Fellow coffee maker. It's got an interface that lets you set light, medium, dark roast. It changes the temperature. It blooms the coffee. It tells you how many grams of coffee to put into the basket, slick interface, high quality coffee. It's definitely awesome. And so I have Ashley have one in the office and one at home and one in the garage.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:30):
Wow. That is a favorite product. You have three of them in the same cool space.

Matt MacInnis (01:32:30):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:35):
Oh no, in the office. Okay.

Matt MacInnis (01:32:35):
Fellow is also a Rippling customer and that's a nice side effect when we get to ...

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:39):
Have they ever escalated anything to you?

Matt MacInnis (01:32:42):
No. If you're listening and you're from Fellow, I want to hear all your gripes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:46):
Perfect. Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you find yourself coming back to often in work or in life?

Matt MacInnis (01:32:51):
It's a dark one, and I'll share this one sort of partially for the humor of it, but it's actually sometimes useful immediately. At least it's sort of a moment of smiling when it happens. The motto comes from my dad who said, "Matt, nothing's ever so bad in life that it couldn't get worse." And it's like we were going through some shit yesterday at work and we were like, "Fuck, now that happened." And I looked at the CTO and I'm like, "Dude, nothing's ever so bad that it couldn't get worse." And we had a good laugh and continued to brace for whatever might come next. So not exactly uplifting, but fun to use.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:26):
No, it is uplifting. I'm an optimist and I find myself thinking that often with my wife just like, "It could be worse. It could be worse than this. " Definitely. It's actually [inaudible 01:33:36].

Matt MacInnis (01:33:36):
And it might get there.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:38):
So let's enjoy this less worse version. Final question. Something you shared with me is that you were a DJ when you were a younger person. Can you just give us a little DJ voice to give people a sense of your skills?

Matt MacInnis (01:33:52):
Well, so first of all, it's not DJ, Lenny. It's radio personality. And yeah, I used to do the greatest hits of all time with hits from the '60s, the '70s, the '80s, and a little bit of the '90s, 101.5 The Hawk. Yeah. You can turn it on. It's very inauthentic, but it sounds good on the radio. It's cool. I did it when I was in high school. I ended up doing the midday segment right before I went to college. And what a gift. What a huge gift in my most formative years to have developed an ability to be in front of a microphone comfortably, because here we are.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:28):
I love for people that weren't watching this YouTube, you lean really close to the mic to get that radio personality voice.

Matt MacInnis (01:34:34):
Yeah, you got to be able to hear the saliva in the mouth.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:38):
Incredible, and it's like the same person talking. If you're not watching this, you're like, "Where did that guy come from?" That was great. You nailed it. Matt, this was incredible. I really appreciate being here. I really appreciate you sharing all this advice that I have not heard other people share. Two final questions. Is there something you want to plug, point people to, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Matt MacInnis (01:34:55):
Look, my life is rippling. I point people there, and this is my life's work. It's going to be a banger, so stay tuned. And the way that you can help me is that if you're a customer, you got to tell me when you have problems, because that's how we get better.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:10):
What's the way to get to you? Is there any place you want to point people to?

Matt MacInnis (01:35:13):
DM me on Twitter, is easy @stanine. You can email me my last name at rippling.com, and I'll go that far without giving out my phone number. How's that? Perfect.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:25):
A perfect boundary.

Matt MacInnis (01:35:26):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:27):
Matt, thank you so much for being here.

Matt MacInnis (01:35:29):
It's my pleasure. Thank you for having me, Lenny, and congrats on all the success with this podcast. It's been great.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:34):
Same to you. It's always a good sign at the end of a conversation when you're like, oh, I got to get me some of that stock and I got to get into that Rippling.

Matt MacInnis (01:35:41):
It's a good buy.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:41):
A great job.

Matt MacInnis (01:35:42):
Recommended by-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:43):
15 billion.

Matt MacInnis (01:35:44):
Yeah, but you're [inaudible 01:35:46]

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:45):
You're hard to get [inaudible 01:35:46] All right, man. Thank you so much.

Matt MacInnis (01:35:50):
Thanks.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:52):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Matt Mochary (00:00:00):
The biggest marker that I've seen between a botched layoff and a successful layoff is at the moment someone hears that they no longer have a job, did they hear it from their manager in a one-on-one? If that's when they heard it, it'll be okay. But if they heard it in an email, in a group chat, in any kind of thing where they were sitting next to or they're hearing it along with other people, it wasn't personalized, it wasn't one-on-one, that is terrible. That's when people get really angry and that's when they start going on to Twitter and going to newspapers and et cetera, because it feels dehumanizing. It feels like you didn't give a shit about me. You don't even have the courtesy to tell me to my face. And of course, there's no way to allow that person to express their emotions because they're in a group. So, that's the most important thing.

Lenny (00:01:08):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast. I'm Lenny and my aim here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. Today, my guest is Matt Mochary. Matt is a full-time executive coach, but not just any coach. He's worked with folks like Naval, the CEOs of OpenAI, Coinbase, Reddit, Rippling, Fair, Front, Notion, the list goes on. He's also coached partners at VCs like Sequoia, YC, Benchmark, many others.

Lenny (00:01:34):
We are so fortunate that Matt agreed to join me on this podcast and in our conversation we cover a lot of ground. We talk about why learning to fire people is one of the most important skills as a leader and how to do it well, why anger and fear often point you in the exact opposite direction you should be going, how to innovate within a larger company, how his coaching has evolved over the years, where the most successful founders still struggle, and so much more. This may be my new favorite episode and I bet it will be years, too. So much real talk with tactics, templates, all kind of goodness. Enjoy this conversation with Matt Mochary.

Lenny (00:02:12):
This episode is brought to you by AssemblyAI. If you're looking to build powerful AI-powered features in your audio or video products, then you need to know about AssemblyAI. AssemblyAI is the API platform for state-of-the-art AI models the thousands of product-led growth companies like Spotify, Loom and CallRail are using to infuse AI into their products. With simple APIs, developers and PMs can get access to powerful AI models for transcription, summarization, and dozens of other tasks that are fast, secure, and production ready. All of their models are researched and trained in-house and continuously updated by their team of AI experts, which for a PM make it easy to build and ship new AI-powered features. Product teams with startups and enterprises are using AssemblyAI to automatically transcribe and summarize phone calls and virtual meetings, detect topics and podcasts, pinpoint when sensitive content is spoken, redact PII from audio videos, and way more. Visit AssemblyAI.com to try AssemblyAI's API for free and start testing their models in their no-code playground. That's AssemblyAI.com.

Lenny (00:03:26):
This episode is brought to you by Lemon.io. You've achieved product market fit, you're able to activate, engage, and retain your customers, but you don't have the engineers that you need to move as fast as you want to because it's hard to find great engineers quickly, especially if you're trying to protect your burn rate. Meet Lemon.io. Lemon.io will quickly match you with skilled senior developers who are all vetted, results-oriented, and ready to help you grow. And all that at competitive rates. Startups choose Lemon.io because they offer only handpicked developers with three or more years of experience and strong proven portfolios. Only 1% of candidates who apply get in, so you can be sure that they offer you only high quality talent. And if something ever goes wrong, Lemon.io offers you a swift replacement so that you're kind of hiring with a warranty.

Lenny (00:04:15):
To learn more, just go to lemon.io/lenny and find your perfect developer or tech team in 48 hours or less. And if you start the process now, you can claim a special discount exclusively for Lenny's Podcast listeners, 15% off your first four weeks of working with your new software developer. Grow faster with an extra pair of hands, visit lemon.io/lenny.

Lenny (00:04:43):
Matt, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Matt Mochary (00:04:47):
Thanks for having me. I'm looking forward to it.

Lenny (00:04:49):
I am looking forward to it even more. The way I learned about you is back in the day I read this book called The Great CEO Within, which I have right here, and I was like, holy moly, this is the most tactical, practical, useful book I've seen for leaders. I need to tell everyone about it, and I did. Then a few weeks ago, someone shared a link in my newsletter Slack community to this document that is called the Mochary Method Curriculum Document. I was like, oh my god, this is the most practical, tactical, useful document I've seen in a long time. I got to share this with everyone, and I did. Then I realized it's the same person that wrote these two things, and so I reached out to you and you kindly agreed to join me on this podcast. And so again, really appreciate you being here.

Matt Mochary (00:05:30):
Thank you for having me.

Lenny (00:05:32):
Give folks a little bit of background on you who aren't so familiar with you, and just to help understand a little bit of a how you got so wise. Can you give folks just kind of a brief overview of some of the wonderful things you've done in your career, maybe some of the folks you've worked with and how you got to what you do now?

Matt Mochary (00:05:47):
Right on. I've had a very varied career. I started a company back in internet 1.0 called Totality, which was a good financial outcome. Then I went and just had fun for a long time and then I went and did social good and helped ex-convicts get and keep a job by becoming truck drivers. All that was super fun, but I realized I missed my peers and I wanted to get back into the tech world, but I didn't want to start a company because a company is a lot of work and the end result is you make a lot of money, but I didn't need money.

Matt Mochary (00:06:15):
And so I thought, how could I get in the tech world and not actually have to do the hard work? Oh, I could be a coach. I could coach people and then I just get to do the fun stuff and advise them and then they have to do the hard work. And so I looked around and thought, well how could I do that because I'm not a coach and so why would anyone listen to me? Then someone told me that there were students at Stanford that had started companies but no one would coach them. They couldn't get into YC because YC doesn't accept students. So, I went and started coaching them and it was super fun and very successful and then they started recommending me up the food chain and eventually, I met folks like Naval Ravikant and Sam Altman and Brian Armstrong and they recommended me around to the rest of the tech community, and ended up coaching some of the CEOs and the leaders of the biggest tech companies and biggest tech investment firms.

Matt Mochary (00:07:07):
It's been a ton of fun and for me, I do things for joy and each and every one of these interactions has been massively joyful for me and the people I coach become my really close friends, so it's all very selfish on my part.

Lenny (00:07:21):
I feel you on a lot of that. I also tried to explore starting a company again and similarly decided this is way too much stress and work, what else can I do instead? And that's what led to the work I do now, which I love.

Matt Mochary (00:07:33):
Right on.

Lenny (00:07:34):
How long have you been doing this coaching?

Matt Mochary (00:07:36):
That whole process started about 10 years ago, so about 10 years.

Lenny (00:07:40):
Awesome. You have a lot of fans on Twitter and the internet and ahead of this chat I polled folks on Twitter and asked them what they would ask you if they were chatting with you, so I thought I'd start off with asking you a few those questions and then we'll dig into a few very specific topics that I'm excited to talk about. The first question comes from Leo Polovets who's a GP at Susa Ventures, and he asked, "Matt has coached some incredible founders, what are some of the most common areas where even the most successful founders still struggle?"

Matt Mochary (00:08:11):
Great question. To me, the bar is fear and how strongly do people feel fear? There are few people that I coach that just don't feel fear at all. And frankly with them, we have very tactical conversations, but they're the minority. The most feel fear to some degree, some feel it a lot, some feel it less, but when they feel it grips their mind and it prevents them from seeing... It prevents them from doing the thing that is difficult but necessary, so that's a lot of what our coaching is, me pointing out to them, hey, I think you're in fear.

Matt Mochary (00:08:55):
What happens is very early on in coaching they'll go, yeah, okay, I'm in fear. So what? I go, great. I believe that fear is actually giving you bad advice and I think you're predicting that if you do this A will happen. Well, I'm predicting that if you do that, the exact opposite will happen. So, I'll tell you what, why don't we make a bet? This is very high stakes, why don't we pick something that's lower stakes? You make a prediction, we'll see if I make the opposite and then let's bet on it. So we pick something and then we make a bet on it, and whoever wins the bet in the future gets to determine what the actions are.

Matt Mochary (00:09:31):
I've made this bet hundreds of times and so far, I've never lost. It's not because I'm magician or a genius, it's because when someone's in fear, they're gripped. They can't see reality, their brain is making very exaggerated predictions. Whereas when someone is not in fear, and I'm not because it's not my situation, I am not gripped and therefore, my brain isn't making exaggerated predictions. And so, we make this bet once I win, then all of a sudden the CEO realizes, oh my God, there's something to this, fear gives bad advice. Then after that, all I need to do is remind the person that I perceive them to be in fear. That's all it takes, and they're like, oh, okay, and then they go ahead and do the thing that they feel fear about. Then of course, later they come back to me and say, Matt, that was magical. It works so well.

Matt Mochary (00:10:23):
I mean, I'll give you examples. The most extreme is when a CEO realizes that there's a problem in the business and they haven't told their board yet and their board doesn't know, and remember, their board is their investors, and they have another round coming up, they know they're going to have to raise money in another six to 12 months. They need their current investors to participate in the upcoming round, otherwise outside investors won't. Then they say, well, what the hell do I do? I've got this problem. Do I tell my investors? And most often, the knee jerk reaction is, no, I'm not going to tell them.

Matt Mochary (00:11:01):
Then I say, "Well, I think that's fear. I think if you actually tell them, tell your investors, the exact opposite of what we think is going to happen is going to happen. You think you're going to lose their trust. I think you're going to gain their trust." And so, if we've done this fear exercise before, they do it, they share transparently with their board all the problems and say, and I'm excited to tackle these problems. Every single time that's happened, the board members have said, "This is fantastic. I love this honesty. Thank you so much. This is one of the only companies that I'm on the board of that actually is transparent and honest," and they gain trust.

Lenny (00:11:42):
I'm glad that you brought this topic up. I wanted to spend time on it. Just to double click a little bit into it, just kind of to summarize your advice here, if you feel fear, which you may not recognize you feel, the advice is: do the opposite of what your brain is telling you to do, right?

Matt Mochary (00:11:57):
Generally, I mean, check with someone. Don't just randomly, I feel fear crossing the street crossing a crowded highway and then go, oh, that's fear talking. I should cross the highway anyway and then get hit by a cop. No, that's not what I mean. I don't mean physical danger, I mean things that we perceive to be danger to our egos, but that the easiest thing is just to check with somebody else who's not in fear because they will be able to see clearly when you can't.

Lenny (00:12:24):
I was working through your curriculum and you pointed out that you found a way to express to somebody that they are in fear. I think it was your wife that kind of iterated on how to give you feedback that you're in fear where you didn't get defensive, you got more fearful and angry and can you talk a bit about that?

Matt Mochary (00:12:40):
Yeah, so we iterated, I at times feel anger and I act on that anger and I don't even realize I'm in anger, so I wanted her to let me know, and so she would say, at first she said, "You're in anger," and that just made me feel accused and made me go into more anger. And then she said, "Are you in anger?" And that felt passive aggressive or indirect and that also made me go into more anger. Then finally she said, "I perceive you to be an anger." So it's an I statement and it's simply what she's perceiving. There's no judgment. That was able to punch through my anger and then I woke up and went, oh, and then I stopped and just didn't act until I was able to shift out of anger.

Lenny (00:13:25):
Awesome. And anger and fear, I think there's different pieces of advice for if you feel angry versus fear. Is that right?

Matt Mochary (00:13:32):
Yes. I mean, anger, you're just destroying and what you're doing is you're destroying relationships and so you just got to stop because you're breaking glass. Of course, you're breaking it with the people who are closest to you. They're the people who are nearest to you, which are the people you love and care about the most. They're not only people you work with, but they're the people you live with and you don't want to do that. You don't want to hurt them.

Lenny (00:13:59):
Yeah. Maybe one last question along these lines, why do we do this? Is this just we're trying to protect our ego and ourselves and we just want to do the safe thing?

Matt Mochary (00:14:06):
That's it. I mean, I just learned very recently, and this isn't written anywhere because I just learned it, someone shared with me that anger is not a base emotion. Anger is actually a cover. It's a cover for when we feel pain, and so our brain doesn't want to feel the pain, so instead it externalizes it. But the problem is it shoves that pain onto everybody else around us. The real answer here is not to have people let us know that we're in anger and then stop. The real answer is just to allow ourselves to feel the pain and it sucks by the way, it actually hurts. But then we're not... Sorry, I'm getting emotional. We're not pushing that out onto other people and I only learned this very recently and I'm just starting to practice this and I'm still not good at it, but I'm now at least sometimes not going to anger.

Lenny (00:15:02):
It's interesting how personal this advice is that it sounds like something that you deal with. It's not just like you're this coach that's just like, hey guys, here's all these problems you have. Here's how you fix stuff that you help yourself with.

Matt Mochary (00:15:15):
I'm human. Yes, and that's why I try to figure it out with me and if I can figure something out with me, then I can share it with others.

Lenny (00:15:24):
Amazing. That was a fruitful question from Leo, and we might come back to this topic.

Matt Mochary (00:15:30):
By the way, this also applies to organizations. I mean, the way that I used to get all this information about how to run organizations is I started a company, Totality, and my co-founder and I, we did a terrible job running that company. What happened was I didn't have any learnings from that which I could share with people because it was just worst practices, not best practices. But then 10 years later, I thought to myself, well, how could I have done that better? How could we have done that better?

Matt Mochary (00:15:55):
So, I picked up a book, a business book, it was High Output Management by Andy Grove. I read it and I was like, "Oh my God, here are all the answers." And then I read another book, The Hard Thing About Hard Things by Ben Horowitz was like, "Oh my God, there are even more answers." I just kept reading more and more business books, and every one I read, they were just chock full of answers. But then I needed to test whether or not these really worked, so that's when I started coaching and I started testing them in companies, but I had to let the people know here, do this, but they weren't going to read a 350 page book. I had to summarize it in two pages and then share it with them, and then they did, and then they implemented it and it worked.

Matt Mochary (00:16:29):
Then I had all these summaries, and then I started to create my own summaries of little niche cases that weren't in any book that I'd read. That's where all these writings came from. Then one day, someone that I was coaching said, "Matt, you got to take all these writings. They're a book, you got to publish them." And I said, "No, I don't." My friend said, "Well, how about I do all the work? How about I take care of the editing and the publishing?" And I was like, "Okay, if you want to do that, great." That was Alex MacCaw. Others had offered before, but he was the one that actually followed through all the way to the end. That was it. That's how the book was born.

Matt Mochary (00:17:06):
But I realized also, recently, that many of my most radical ideas, I can't get anyone to test them because I'll say, "Hey, I think you should do blank." And the CEO will say, "That sounds crazy. Matt, can you point me to other examples of other people that have done this and it's worked?" And I say, "No, this is an original thought that came out of my head. No one's done it before that I know of." They're like, "Okay, well I'm not going to be the first."

Matt Mochary (00:17:33):
Then I realized I needed an organization to test my most radical ideas, and also all of my CEOs had been asking me to create software because I have a methodology and it's step one, step two, step three, and you do it in one-on-ones and then a methodology for a team meeting and then a methodology for feedback and then a methodology for every different motion in the company. It's all in Google Docs. And they said to me, "Matt, this is amazing. I love this one-on-one process. I love your team process, but I don't want to have to teach each of my reports the way you've taught me. I'd like it just being softer. I just hit a button and boom, it happens automatically." At first, I said, "No, that's not interesting to me. I'm not a developer. You, Brian Armstrong, you're a developer and you have a thousand engineers that work for you. Why don't you go create it?"

Matt Mochary (00:18:21):
But in the end, I said, "Okay, this could be fun." So, I hired a team of developers and we started to create the software, and one, the product is working. But two more importantly, I now have a team of humans that we work together that I can start testing my more radical ideas out with. I would say about half of them are wildly successful and the other half complete duds. It almost seems like one are the other. But now I have my own basically laboratory to test things. Of course, when I see radical things that other people are doing, I try them in our organization, and it's phenomenal.

Matt Mochary (00:18:59):
I'll tell you the most radical one. I was asking one CEO, I said, "Have you ever let someone go and regretted it?" He said, "No." And I said, "Well, then you don't know what the bar is because the bar of where you should be letting people go is here, and the bar that you've let people go is here. So until you get close to that line, you don't know what that line is." He said, "Wow, that's true." Then I thought about it and I thought to myself, uh-oh, I have never let anyone go that I regret it, so I don't know where the line is.

Matt Mochary (00:19:34):
Then I thought, oh no, I've got to go into my team and let someone go, and here's the problem. We've already done talent density, we've already done the Netflix thing. If someone is meeting expectation, we let them go. We've already let all those folks go. So on our team, it's only outperformers. So, I thought there was one guy, he's an outperformer, no question about it, and super positive, an amazing guy and can do anything and is happy to do everything. But there wasn't much left for him to do because everything else was being covered. I talked to my number two and said, "Can you do what you're doing and what he's doing?" And she said, "Give me two weeks," and she did. She came back and said, "Yeah, I can." So, we let him go.

Matt Mochary (00:20:19):
Now, when I let someone go, I try to do it with a massive amount of compassion because I know it's brutal. I mean, losing your spouse, your home, and your job, these are the three most traumatic things that can happen to you. When that happens, of course you go into massive fear and the brain shuts down, so I want to be there and help them through that process and actively help them find their dream job because there is a place that absolutely needs them. So, what I do is I become their agent and I say, "I want to help you discover what it is that your ideal role is, and I want to help you create it or land it." I did that with him. Turns out, what he wanted to do was go start a company and create a new product so he could just start that day one. But, the litmus for me is that everybody I've let go, I believe anyway, that I continue to be friends with. That shows me that the process by which I let people go is a humane one.

Matt Mochary (00:21:17):
Here's the crazy thing, after letting this guy go, after about 30 days, I was like, ugh, did I do the wrong thing? Was that too much? But then after about two to three months, I realized, no, that actually was the right thing because my number two was able to absorb the things that he was doing and here's the crazy part, with fewer people in the organization, things work better. That's the big realization that most people never discover. they hit product market fit, they get tons of money from investors, just higher, higher, higher, higher, but every additional human you have in your organization causes extra overhead and geometrically so, because now you have to keep all those people informed, give them all context, make them all feel heard, because unless they feel like they're contributing and you understand what they're saying, then they feel ignored and they feel passed over and they feel disrespected and grumpy.

Matt Mochary (00:22:11):
There's this morale problem that exists. There's this friction of information flow and a morale problem that grows and grows and grows. Really, the only answer is, I mean, that's why people bring me in because they're growing, growing, growing, and things are breaking. I have a system that keeps things together, but it doesn't make it perfect. It just makes it so that the company doesn't fall apart. But really the ideal is just to keep the team super small. That's what WhatsApp did, that's what Instagram did, that's what Linear is doing right now. That's what Notion has been doing for a while. Those, to me, are the real success stories.

Lenny (00:22:53):
This reminds me of a story I just listened to on Lex Fridman's podcast. They were interviewing the head of AI at Tesla, or former head of AI, and Lex was asking him, "Why did you get rid of LiDAR on your cars? Like aren't more sensors good so that you can be better at self-driving?" And he's like, "If you have LiDAR, you got to think about the supply chain and getting all those parts. You got to think about all the additional data that it brings and adds more chaos to your data, and you have to think about that. Think about if that one part is gone, everything slows down, and in theory it is better, but then all these other factors end up making it worse." Talking about how Elon's philosophy is the best part is no part. It feels like that's exactly what you're saying.

Matt Mochary (00:23:36):
That's right.

Lenny (00:23:37):
You're getting to all the stuff I want to talk about, which is awesome. So firing people, this is good. We were chatting earlier and you mentioned that this is a skill that most managers are really bad at and maybe is the most important skill to develop as a leader and as a manager. People are just bad at it. You shared a few pieces of advice there, but is there anything else that you could share about just how to get better at firing people and that skill?

Matt Mochary (00:24:03):
Yeah, the reason people are bad at this is because they think that they're hurting the person who they're letting go. I mean, how many times have I heard from someone, "Yeah, this person's not performing, but gosh, they really need this job and their mother has cancer," and whatever personal situation they're in. Wei Deng, who is the CEO of Clipboard Health, who's one of my favorite CEOs, who frankly I learn more from her than she learns from me, she shared with me her framework for making decisions, which is she separates the decision from the implementation, meaning she thinks about who is the stakeholder here that I'm solving for? And almost always in a company, you're solving for the customer. So, what would the customer want to see happen? That's the decision. Of course, the customer would want to see only the best employees and anyone who isn't a great employee, don't be there.

Matt Mochary (00:24:52):
Now the implementation is, if I do this, if I let this person go, who gets hurt? Well, the employee gets hurt. Maybe I get hurt because it's a painful conversation. Maybe the rest of the team gets hurt because they're sad that their friend is leaving. Then you look at, well, what can we do? Each person who gets hurt, what is it that they really want? Let's see if we can help them get what they really want. Well, the person let go, what do they want? They want a great job where they're actually needed and they feel fulfilled, so they enjoy what they're doing and they're actually critical to the company or organization that they're with. Right now they're not, by the way, they're not critical, clearly. So you're actually holding them back from what it is that they really want.

Matt Mochary (00:25:36):
What you do is you help them find that place that really needs the skill or the passion that they have. Yourself, what do you really want? You want to not have a difficult conversation? Well, cognitive behavior therapy, the best way to get over that is to actually have one and realize it's not that bad. Then the rest of the team, they feel sad because their teammate left. Well, here's how you solve what they really want is they want to know that... They want to release their emotions. Okay, great. Listen to them, let them share their emotions, let them share the sadness that they feel, and then it's released out of their body.

Matt Mochary (00:26:12):
Decision is one thing, implementation is completely and utterly separate. That's the same thing here in letting someone go. But if you let them go kindly and humanely, the key is, in my opinion, you become their agent, like Michael Ovitz, the CAA agent. You help them find their next job actively. Michael Ovitz is the one who reaches out to employers for his clients and says, "Hey, do you have work for my client?" That's what I mean by being agent, not by, if you need a reference from me, I'll be happy to give you reference. That's bullshit, that's passive.

Matt Mochary (00:26:50):
I'm talking about active, and it doesn't take long. Maybe one to two hours of my time reaching out to people I know saying, "Hey, I've got this great person." Oh my God, of course they're going to pay attention. Of course, they're going to react. Now you might say, well, wait a second, what if the person isn't great? What if they're a bad performer and my posit is that they're good at something. You have to find out what it is they're good at. And really what they're good at is what they're passionate about, so find out what they're passionate about and that you can recommend them for. That's what I do.

Matt Mochary (00:27:25):
I think for almost all managers that aren't good at letting go, it's because A, they've never done it, or B, they've done it badly. They didn't help the person, and that person then went off and had a very painful time and now hates that manager. But if you actively help that person, they will appreciate it. Now, there are situations when a person says, "Screw you, I don't want your help." Okay, but they still recognize that you offered.

Lenny (00:27:56):
Who's the best person at firing that comes to mind when you think of this person's really good at this?

Matt Mochary (00:28:01):
Wei Deng from Clipboard Health. She's the most compassionate.

Lenny (00:28:07):
Awesome. The framework you shared reminds me of something my manager once taught me similarly. They missed the final piece of actually being their agent and finding their next gig, but just the idea of separate the emotion and doing the thing from, if there were no feelings involved, what would you do? And then you should do that, and that might be hard.

Matt Mochary (00:28:26):
That's exactly right. By the way, this whole thing about no feelings, I do have probably two CEOs that don't feel emotions. They don't feel fear, they don't feel anger. One, in particular, feels zero emotions. I have to say, he's a machine, he's an operating machine and there's zero time between ah, this is the right thing to do and doing it. It's amazing. It's an incredibly well run company and an incredibly valuable company. So yeah, emotions typically, again, typically fear and anger are the ones that derail our brains.

Lenny (00:29:08):
It makes me think of Alex Honnold, I think is his name, the free climber, the solo dude. His amygdala doesn't quite function so he doesn't-

Matt Mochary (00:29:19):
That's right.

Lenny (00:29:21):
That's interesting. He could be a free solo climber, he could be a CEO.

Matt Mochary (00:29:25):
That's right. CEO's a little safer. The prediction for Alex is that he will at some point, unfortunately die.

Lenny (00:29:33):
Yeah. Did you see The Alpinist? Not to spoil anything.

Matt Mochary (00:29:36):
Yes.

Lenny (00:29:38):
Okay, moving on from that, I'm curious, in a remote world, does your advice change in terms of firing? It seems like everything you shared you could do easily in person or remote, but does something change when you're doing it over Zoom?

Matt Mochary (00:29:51):
No, it doesn't change at all. There is one point I didn't include, which I'll include now, is there's helping the person be their agent, but there's also allowing the person, whenever I have a difficult conversation, I start it off, "Hey, this is going to be a difficult conversation. I want you to take a few seconds and prepare yourself. You are not going to enjoy this." What I found is that the way the amygdala gets triggered is often because of surprise. So, if you give someone just a few seconds to mentally prepare, then the amygdala often doesn't get triggered nearly as hard because if they're aware that they're going to go into fear, they're going to go into anger, they're going to go into sadness, then they can see it coming and they go, oh, that's what it is. But if they don't see it coming, just a surprise and all of a sudden it grips their whole brain and now they're in it and they don't even know they're in it.

Matt Mochary (00:30:43):
That's the first thing I do. This is going to be a difficult conversation. Are you ready? Then I share the news. I'm letting you go, here's why. Then second, I deliver the message. The third thing is now they're feeling emotions, strong ones. Even though I warned them, they're still feeling them. Now you want them to be able to release those emotions, and so I say to them, "My guess is you're feeling a lot of anger right now, fear, sadness. Is that true? And if so, would you be willing to share with me what you're feeling and what you're thinking?" Sometimes they don't answer, but many times they do and they share with me and they let it out. That's important to allow them to let it out. Then I make them feel heard and I actively listen. That makes them realize that I'm not trying to run away from the pain that they're feeling. I'm not trying to leave them alone with it. I sit with them as they have it and then I try to help them get through it.

Lenny (00:31:47):
That's something else I wanted to chat about is the feeling heard lesson that you have for people. I'd love to just get your advice on just how to help people feel heard. It's like, oh yeah, I know that's important. I want people to feel heard. I will listen and it'll go great. But you have some very tactical advice on how to actually make people feel heard.

Matt Mochary (00:32:05):
Yeah, there's sort of a few different levels of it. One way to make people feel heard is, let's assume you're talking to them because there's another way, there's an even more surface way is verbal. Sometimes what I do is I ask, if I'm in a group of people, and there's a question or a problem that we're trying to solve, instead of going around the room and hearing people's verbal opinions, which takes forever, I ask everyone at the same time to take five minutes to write down their solution. Then we all drop it in a doc and then I just read it. When I read it I say, "Thank you, Lenny." And that makes you know that I at least read it, so that's a little bit of feeling heard.

Matt Mochary (00:32:40):
Second, if I want to make you feel more heard, I ask you to say it verbally and then I repeat it back to you. "Lenny, I think what I heard you say is... Is that right?" And you're like, "Yes." Or you're like, "No, not quite a little bit different." Then if it's a little bit different, I repeat it again until you say, "Yes, that's it." Now you know that I understood you.

Matt Mochary (00:33:00):
Then there's a third way which is even deeper, which is especially if you're giving me feedback, you likely don't want to hurt my feelings. So what you're doing is you're giving me the feedback, but you're couching it, you're polishing it, you're rounding the edges, you're making it softer. It's not really what you're thinking, but it's what you're willing to say. If I want to make you really feel heard, I reflect back what I imagine are the thoughts in your head. If I think you're feeling anger, I sort of think to myself, well, what would anger feel like? I cause myself to feel that anger, then what are the thoughts that appear to me? I say something to you like, "Lenny, I think what I'm hearing you say is you're off and you're thinking, screw you, Matt. How dare you walk into the office and not even say hello to me? Is that close?" And you're like, "No, Matt."

Matt Mochary (00:33:49):
People either say one of two things, they say, "Yeah, that is it." Or they say "No, that's stronger than what I was thinking, but directionally that's right." What that really means is, yeah, that's what I was thinking. Almost always their thoughts are bigger than their words, but they really feel heard when I share their thoughts. Now, that's not the end of the process. I mean you actually have to then do something. Once you made them feel heard, you have to say, okay, well either I accept or don't accept this feedback and if I accept, here's what I'm going to do about it. If I don't accept, I need to explain to you why. Here's what's going on. You shared with me what's going on in your world, now let me share with you what's going on in my world. Hopefully, you can see why this thing that's going on in my world doesn't allow me to accept what it is that you shared, and hopefully now that you see what's going on in my world, your feedback changes and that's it. That's the whole process.

Lenny (00:34:45):
I'm listening to this advice and I'm like, yes, I will do this next time I'm talking to someone. I imagine people don't and they forget, and it takes time to actually learn these things. Like the firing advice you just shared, how do you actually get good at this and practice these things is like I have to work with a coach who will continue to reinforce these things? Is it follow these steps next time? Have them written down? What advice do you have for folks that are like, I want to get better at this. I want to start doing this stuff.

Matt Mochary (00:35:09):
Well, these docs are all free to the public in the curriculum. You can post them here, you can post them on Twitter, you can post the whole curriculum on Twitter, frankly, other people have. It has a step-by-step. There's a doc in there that is a step-by-step script. All you do is you read it and you follow the script in letting someone go or in making someone feel heard. My posit is once you do it one time, you're like, oh my god, that worked so well. That's the only motivation you need. And you've got the script, so you can just keep doing it. I don't think you need a coach.

Matt Mochary (00:35:42):
In fact, I remember one time I asked an investor who their best up and coming CEO was. The investor gave me a name. I was like, "Great, can I please get introduced to him? I want coach him." I reached out, the guy responded immediately. He's like, "Matt, I've read your book. I love your book. I read it three years ago. I've been implementing all the elements in our company. It's fantastic." When someone says that they know my work, they've already implemented it and it's worked, 10 out of 10 times, that person wants me to coach them. Then I said, "Great, that's fantastic. I'd love to coach you." And the guy said to me, "No, thanks." I was shocked. I was like, "Why?" He said, "Well, because it's all working. I don't have any problems. I don't think I need to be coached by you." I couldn't have heard a better answer. That, to me, is the ultimate answer. And he is right. He doesn't need me, doesn't need anyone.

Lenny (00:36:39):
I was going to ask if that's the goal of all of this writing down and systemizing is just to make yourself unnecessary.

Matt Mochary (00:36:45):
Totally.

Lenny (00:36:48):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate growth. If your business stores any data in the cloud, then you've likely been asked or you're going to be asked about your SOC 2 compliance. SOC 2 is a way to prove your company's taking proper security measures to protect customer data and builds trust with customers and partners, especially those with serious security requirements. Also, if you want to sell to the enterprise, proving security is essential. SOC 2 can either open the door for bigger and better deals or it can put your business on hold.

Lenny (00:37:22):
If you don't have a SOC 2, there's a good chance you won't even get a seat at the table. Beginning a SOC 2 report can be a huge burden, especially for startups. It's time consuming, tedious, and expensive. Enter Vanta. Over 3000 fast growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2. Vanta can get you ready for security audits in weeks instead of months, less than a third of the time that it usually takes.

Lenny (00:37:49):
For a limited time, Lenny's Podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Just go to vanta.com/lenny, that's vanta.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discount. Get started today.

Lenny (00:38:05):
That actually reminds me of another question a reader asked on Twitter who happened to be the one on only Ryan Hoover. He asked, "How has your approach changed in your coaching since you started?"

Matt Mochary (00:38:16):
Ryan obviously started Product Hunt and then he sold the company to AngelList, so he was part of AngelList when I went there because I was coaching Naval. What we realized coaching Naval is that Naval did not want to be CEO and he just didn't know how to get out. So, I said there's a way and I can show you, and so I did and made Naval's life 10 times better. Frankly, made AngelList 10 times better because Naval wasn't enjoying being CEO, therefore he wasn't good at it. We ended up putting someone in who did a fine job, then put someone else in who's doing an insanely good job. Now, of course, AngelList is massively valuable.

Matt Mochary (00:38:53):
Ryan was there at the time, Ryan Hoover, great guy, I love Ryan. So, what has changed since then? I think what's changed is I don't think back then I had any of this fear and anger give bad advice. I think back then it was all very tactical. It was all very high up management type stuff, which is you need to have goals and at the company level, at the department level, at the individual level, you then need to track those goals. You need to track all the agreements that people make, all the actions they say they'll do. You have to put it all in Asana. Everyone has to be able to see each other's Asana board so they can see what each other is doing. I still do that, but now I've added on this piece of oh, you're in the moment and you're feeling fear? Okay, you still got to go forward. That's sort of the big change.

Lenny (00:39:42):
I noticed that's at the top of the curriculum. Do you find that's where a lot of the biggest transformations happen, that curriculum component?

Matt Mochary (00:39:49):
Absolutely. I cause people when they first start coaching, they have to read that first. There's sort of three seminal documents: on time, top goal, and fear and anger give bad advice. On time just says, hey, we're going to start our meetings on time and you're going to show up and if you don't show up on time, you're going to let me know first. That's just because I don't want to... And by the way, I showed up two minutes late for us. That's because I was on the Google Hangout for 10 minutes. I didn't realize, I thought you were-

Lenny (00:40:21):
I'm trying to fix that bug. Every time we send an invite, there's a Google meet button there. I think I cracked it finally. Yeah, that would've been a funny podcast where I'm just sitting here starting on time and for two minutes. Hello, we're just waiting.

Matt Mochary (00:40:33):
Exactly. Second one is top goal, which is this concept from McKeown, who wrote Essentialism, which is everyone is making requests of you, but if all you do is spend all day is responding to other people's requests, you never actually march towards your own priorities. You need to A, create priorities and then set aside some amount of time each day, 30 minutes, an hour, two hours that you just work on your own priority. If you do that, you'll make massive gains. And that's true. I mean, in five minutes I can change someone's life just by having them follow that practice. Then the third one is, if you're in anger, give that advice and that's what I have people read and say, "Does this resonate with you?" If it does, we can work together and if it doesn't, we shouldn't work together. So yeah, that's kind of like the crux document of whether or not people philosophically are going to resonate with what I have to share.

Lenny (00:41:25):
The top goal piece, I'm reading a book called Make Time right now and that's a big part of it. I actually just added top goal to my calendar every day. It's not working yet. Every time I get to it, I'm like no, I'm going to just check Twitter right now. But I'm working on it.

Matt Mochary (00:41:38):
That is the hardest part. Now, what I've done is I'm similar. During my top goal time, I have somebody sit with me and they prevent me from doing anything but my top goal.

Lenny (00:41:51):
Wait, can you talk a bit more about that? Is this like a coworker? Are you just like, "I need you here for this hour every day?"

Matt Mochary (00:41:56):
Yeah, I mean it's like the same idea as a trainer in a gym. A trainer in a gym, maybe they're teaching you a little bit, but more often than not they're just forcing you to do the thing that you know need to do. But if they weren't there, you would kind of go eh and not do it. That's all this is. It's what I call an accountability partner.

Matt Mochary (00:42:15):
There's even an app now where you can go online and you can sign up and I think it costs like $5 a month and you can sign up to meet someone else and you become accountability partners to each other. It's insanely effective. I'm not the only one that has a problem focusing on tasks that I don't love that are necessary, but I don't love. Like a meeting, I could take a meeting, I could take 20 meetings, I could take 10 hours of meetings, no problem. Especially when I'm the presenter, when I'm the active one. But doing asynchronous tasks for me because so people-oriented that when there isn't another human with me, it's painful, so I just have another human with me.

Lenny (00:43:04):
I love that. And that person is doing other work, I imagine they're not just watching you full-time.

Matt Mochary (00:43:09):
No, they can do whatever they want.

Lenny (00:43:12):
Is this what you recommend to leaders and CEOs? Just have someone there for an hour. Wow.

Matt Mochary (00:43:18):
If your personality is like mine, yes, have someone there. It can be remote, it can be in person, it doesn't matter. In person's a little bit more effective.

Lenny (00:43:27):
Right, there's like a little zoom window.

Matt Mochary (00:43:28):
I have my kids do it. They love it.

Lenny (00:43:32):
I love that. There's an app I use called Centered, that app that I'm an investor in, but I use it all the time and they have this buddy feature actually where you can be paired with a buddy in real time.

Matt Mochary (00:43:40):
Yes, yes.

Lenny (00:43:42):
To close a loop on the firing piece, something I was thinking about while you were talking is there's a lot of layoffs happening right now. When you're letting go of like a thousand people, you can't really be their agent unless you've seen that happen. Do you have any advice for just like there's a large layoff how you could do this?

Matt Mochary (00:43:58):
Absolutely you can be their agent, not you personally, but they each have a manager and the manager usually has 12 reports and they're rarely letting go more than 50% at a time. That means six people that they've got to be the agent of maximum. Yes, each manager can be the agent for six people. My companies have done a lot of layoffs and here's why. Back in March of 2020, there was a chance that the world economy was imploding. Now of course, by April and May we realized that wasn't the case, that the tech world kept going, in fact, it was even flourishing.

Matt Mochary (00:44:38):
But in March of 2020, we didn't know that. And so you needed, if you were being fiscally responsible, you needed to prepare for that eventuality, so you needed pare costs. 80% of costs in any tech company is payroll, is humans. If you're going to pare costs, you actually have to let go of humans. Almost every one of my companies did. Some on the low side of 5%, some on the high side. One company that is a hotel company let go of 40% because it looked like their business was about to get obliterated and the results were crazy. Within 60 days of each layoff, the CEO reported back to me: It's insane. I don't know how this happened, but the company's now operating better. I'm not talking on a relative scale, I'm talking on an absolute scale. We're putting out more features, more code. Our NPS is up, whatever it is, whatever department is performing better. The only answer for it was we've got less people, so this coordination issue is reduced.

Matt Mochary (00:45:49):
Then now in May, June of this year, we had this huge reset of valuations where growth tech stocks dropped by 50 to 90% value and all of a sudden, which we're still in and we don't know how long this can last, it's all based on interest rates so it's likely that growth stocks will be at these valuations until interest rates come back down again, which could be two to three years. These companies now they can go raise money, but it's going to be at a big down round and down rounds are very painful. So now these companies have to make sure that they don't need to raise money in the next three years. They've got to conserve cash once again.

Matt Mochary (00:46:33):
Here we are, we're in the land of layoffs again, but this time it's different. This time these CEOs know that the company actually gets better. And the CEOs that have never done this before, I simply connect them with the CEOs who have done this before and then they get convinced like, oh man, my company will be better. And now this time, people have been even more aggressive. We've had companies that have laid off 50% of the company and the results have been frankly, phenomenal.

Matt Mochary (00:47:02):
But the key to doing it well is there has to be a humane delivery. The biggest marker that I've seen between a botched layoff and a successful layoff is at the moment someone hears that they no longer have a job, did they hear it from their manager in a one-on-one? If that's when they heard it, it'll be okay. But if they heard it in an email, in a group chat, in any kind of thing where they were sitting next to or they're hearing it along with other people, it wasn't personalized, it wasn't one-on-one, that is terrible. That's when people get really angry and that's when they start going on Twitter and going to newspapers and et cetera because it feels dehumanizing. It feels like you didn't give a shit about me. You didn't even have the courtesy to tell me to my face. Of course, there's no way to allow that person to express their emotions because they're in a group. That's the most important thing.

Matt Mochary (00:48:17):
The second thing is then later, so tactically, this is how it happens. You have an inner circle. I think that inner circle should include all managers in the company and you say, this is how much we need to let go. Here's how much each of you needs to let go. First of all, you don't say to each department head or team leader, manager, tell me who you can let go because they'll all say nobody. You actually have to give them numbers. You have to let this dollar amount go or this many people go, dollar amount is better because if you say people, then they'll just let go of the cheapest people, the most junior, and often the most junior are the ones that are actually doing the most work. You want it to be dollars because that's actually really what you're trying to save. You're trying to save dollars.

Matt Mochary (00:49:07):
So, you say you have to save this many dollars, come up with a number, they quickly come back with a number. You don't want to have department heads choose for managers because if you have a team lead and all of a sudden they're told to let go these three people, the team lead will go, that was crazy. Those are my three best people. So you want to let each manager choose and that doesn't need to take long. That could take 48 hours.

Matt Mochary (00:49:29):
Then you move to implementation. At implementation, you spend the morning and have each manager reach out to people and just Slack them say, "Hey, can I talk to you for 15 minutes?" And then they have these meetings back-to-back-to-back or as close as they can and they deliver the news, the difficult conversation that we talked about before. "It's going to be a difficult conversation. I'm letting you go. I imagine this feels crappy or feels like worse than that. This is horrible. If you're willing to share your feelings and I want to be your agent now. I don't have time to do it now, but I'd like to schedule with you another hour tomorrow, the next day whenever, so that we can go and dig in and I can help be your agent."

Matt Mochary (00:50:12):
Then, that takes the morning. By the afternoon, you've scheduled an all hands for the stay team. With the stay team, you'd tell them what had just occurred and you answer their questions. The questions are almost always around fear. Like, "Holy shit, is this going to happen to me? Did these people even get feedback that they weren't performing? Does this mean that we're dying as a company and that we're going to implode?" You have to address each one of these questions and hopefully the answer is: no, to the first one, is this going to happen to me? No, this isn't. We cut deep so that we only cut once. The people to your left and right and you, you are the state team. This is the team that we're going to building the company with going forward. It's important to be able to say that. You actually want to cut deep because cutting two times or three times creates PTSD in an organization. It's trauma one, trauma two, trauma three. Now they're like, ah, it's just going to keep happening.

Matt Mochary (00:51:10):
Then, the third piece is, and this not everybody does, if you don't do this, your company within 60 days will be performing better. If you do this, your company within two weeks will be performing better because people now, the stay team, they feel sadness, they feel anger, they feel fear. Yes, you addressed their questions in the all hands, but not fully because some people didn't even talk in the all hands.

Matt Mochary (00:51:34):
So, what you do is with each and every person on the stay team, you have a one-on-one with their manager for one hour and all the manager does is say, "I'd like to know your thoughts and feelings," and the person shares and then all the manager does is make them feel heard. I think what you're telling me is you feel sad because your three buddies are now no longer here and you feel anger because you think this is bullshit and you think why did we hire this many people if we're going to fire them? That was just irresponsible. You feel fear because you're not sure if the company's going to implode or if your job is safe. Is that right? And they're like, "Yes."

Matt Mochary (00:52:11):
It doesn't take away the emotion entirely, but it knocks it down by a good 25%, which is enough that the person won't do something rash, they won't quit, they won't stop working, they won't say bad shit to other people, and it allows them to accelerates their recovery. Within two weeks, they're now seeing how the company's operating better and morale then comes up and the company's now performing better than it was before. So, three elements.

Lenny (00:52:44):
That was thousands of dollars of advice I think, in just five to 10 minutes.

Matt Mochary (00:52:50):
That's after having probably gone through this with CEOs maybe 40 times and iterating AB testing, and what's the difference, and what works well, and what didn't work well. Yeah, I can't imagine there's somewhat out there who has advised more people through a layoff process, certainly in the tech world, than I have. I'm not saying I'm proud of that, but it just is.

Lenny (00:53:17):
What a fun place to be. As you were talking, I was thinking a little bit about Twitter and Elon and the experience that's going through right now. It feels like on the one hand, he's letting go of a lot of people, which matches kind of your advice. On the other hand, not being handled too well. I think it's emails and just a lot of random quick things. What's your perspective on this whole thing?

Matt Mochary (00:53:39):
I haven't been following it directly, so I don't know how he's implementing the layoffs or how much he's doing. Frankly, just haven't been following it at all. But here's the sad reality, even if it's handled incredibly poorly, the company ends up performing better. It just takes a little longer for people to recover, for the stay team to recover emotionally. But the worst case scenario, it's handled terribly, within two months, the company will be performing better.

Lenny (00:54:09):
Fascinating. That's actually a good segue to this last topic I wanted to touch on, which something that I think you have a lot of thoughts on is building new products within a larger company and innovating inside of a larger kind of scaled company, and especially the challenges around that. What are your thoughts on just how to do this well, how to innovate within a larger company?

Matt Mochary (00:54:30):
I can tell you the short version, but I'll tell you the long version. The long version is that this was a real problem for everyone I was coaching and I didn't know the answer. But it was obvious that YC startups were crushing and just iterating so much faster. And then I had the thought, well, why not just create your own YC startup and have it crush you but you own it? It, of course, has to really look like a YC startup. It has to have a founder mentality person as the head of the team, someone who's willing to just break glass and just won't stop until they run through the brick wall. It's actually pretty easy to find founder mentality folks. You just literally go to the YC alumni list and the ones whose startups failed, perfect, they're available and they are founder types and now they want to join a company that's actually succeeding because they realize how hard it is to create something on their own, but they still have the mentality.

Matt Mochary (00:55:24):
Then you want to keep the team really small because then they can, again, there's no buy-in required, like everyone's on the same page with the same information. We started testing that and it worked, and then I thought, well wait a second. The reason that a big company has a hard time innovating, it's because once a product is scaled, it's now got millions of users. So you have two things that you need to make sure stay true every day: the site is up and running and there's no security breach. Every time you add code, you've got to test it thoroughly to make sure it doesn't take down either one of those. The review process is insane.

Matt Mochary (00:56:06):
So now you're innovating, you're writing prototype code on new features. You can't get it approved it takes so long. That's what you're trying to decouple and you're trying to create an entity that isn't touching the core code, but you also don't want to have to go through the approval process of the product team or the head of product. That takes way too long, as well. That's why it has to be a small team that reports to outside of EPD. It can't report to the head of engineering, head of product, head of design, it can't. It's got to go outside, usually directly to the CEO. That's the only other place to report that's outside.

Matt Mochary (00:56:48):
Then I had this idea, well wait a second, there's also a brand question and so why don't you create an entirely new name for this product that isn't the core, the base business? Why don't you actually just create its own C corp? Why don't you make it so clear that this is its own entity? So I wrote this whole thing up and created its own C corp. I shared this with a few people and one CEO said to me, "Matt, this sounds radical and sounds like it could work, but is anyone actually doing this?" I thought to myself, oh shit, no, nobody's actually doing this. Nobody that I know has created new C Corps for the entities, the new products they're developing.

Matt Mochary (00:57:34):
Then 30 days later, I got in a call with Wei Deng. I told you before, I'm a huge fan, and we talked about product and I shared with her this write up. She's like, "Oh yeah, that's what I do." She said, "I created five C Corps in the last two months." I was like, "What? Someone's actually doing it." I was like, "Well, what are the results?" She's like, "They're fantastic." She goes, "The team doesn't worry about trying shit because they know that it doesn't hurt our core brand, and so they're iterating fast." And she said, "Not only do I do that, I actually have two teams, independent, working on each new product. One I have is more engineering focused, they build custom code. The other is more sort of customer relationship-focused and maybe they don't even have engineers and they build a manual solution or they use off the shelf products to build a solution, and just see which one makes more progress faster." Wow, insane. That's why, again, I have so much respect for Wei.

Lenny (00:58:36):
When I think about these ideas, I think of the NPE team at Facebook and I think it's called Area 21 at Google, which works on new ideas and I don't know if anything amazing has come out of those groups maybe, I don't know. But it feels like the missing piece, and you didn't mention this piece, is feeling like there's a huge upside if you get something. Like founders having equity of their company feels like such a motivator. I could become a billionaire if this works out, versus I'm helping my startup in some small incremental way. Is that an important piece or do you think it's not critical?

Matt Mochary (00:59:09):
I'm going to be radical here. I don't think it matters at all. I think that what really motivates people is building shit that gets used in the world. I think people will say, and they'll fight for equity and money, but in the end, that's not what actually motivates them. Because I've seen this work in companies where they don't have big equity, but they have autonomy, they have ownership, not equity ownership, ownership over decision making, ownership over creation. That's what I think people want. Amazon does this. They're not giving their people... Amazon's famous for being cheap bastards, but someone has a great idea, okay, here's 5 million bucks, go do. Amazon is definitely innovating successfully.

Lenny (01:00:02):
What about the flip side of that of not necessarily the huge upside, but the I'm staking everything on this startup, I need this to work, this is my thing, my name's on the line. I feel like that's a big motivator also for founders, like I'm not going to give up this feeling of grit. Is that important?

Matt Mochary (01:00:21):
Yeah, it's also fear. It's fear, which is like if this doesn't work, I'm screwed. Fear, frankly, is an excellent motivator. It gets people to move fast and move hard. The only problem with fear is it's also corrosive, so it eats out my insides as I go along. It makes it that I don't enjoy life, but it's highly motivated. Now, I think joy is actually even more motivating or they say it's as motivating, but it's noncorrosive, so I can last much longer if I'm doing something for joy. Fear is short term, extreme motivation. It's adrenaline. Joy is long term, consistent motivation that also allows me to look back on my life and go, wow, that was a great life. So yes, that is effective motivation, but I don't recommend putting oneself in that position to get motivated.

Lenny (01:01:14):
For companies that want to try this method that you're describing, is there a curriculum document for this approach out there?

Matt Mochary (01:01:21):
There is.

Lenny (01:01:22):
Okay, we'll link to that. Are there any other companies that are doing this well that come to mind? You mentioned Amazon, Clipboard Health.

Matt Mochary (01:01:29):
In my portfolio, I know Scale and Attentive Mobile are both doing this well. More and more companies that I coach are starting to do this because I have more and more examples of it working well, so more and more companies are then copying. I don't have other names offhand that I can share though.

Lenny (01:01:43):
What was that first company? Scale?

Matt Mochary (01:01:45):
Scale.

Lenny (01:01:46):
Cool. Is that Scale AI?

Matt Mochary (01:01:48):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:01:48):
Okay, cool. I love that. Love that founder. Maybe a last question, something that I noted just in case we had a little more time is around energy audit. This is something that you advise folks to understand what gives them energy, what zaps their energy, can you talk a bit about that?

Matt Mochary (01:02:06):
Sure. It turns out that what we're really good at is what we love and what we love is often space and time disappear when we do it. Therefore, we actually probably don't even value it because it comes so easily to us that we don't ascribe value. Whereas things that we don't love but we're good at, we often ascribe value there and other people want us to do those things because they're often creating value for the whole team or the family or the group.

Matt Mochary (01:02:39):
There are four zones I posit and I learned this from Diana Chapman at Conscious Leadership Group. I don't know where she learned it from, but almost everything that I have, I poached from somebody, but at least I tell you where I poached it from. The concept is you have four zones.

Matt Mochary (01:02:58):
Zone one is your incompetence, you're not good at it, someone's better at it than you. That's like fixing a car. You should let someone else do that.

Matt Mochary (01:03:07):
Second is your zone of competence, you're fine, you can do it fine. But so can somebody else do it fine. Like cleaning your house. Yes, you could do it, but it would take a lot of time and you're not creating that much value. You should let someone else do that.

Matt Mochary (01:03:22):
Third zone, your zone of excellence. This is something that you're uniquely good at, but you don't love it. This is the danger zone. This is likely what you're getting paid for and you're likely to getting paid a lot of money for it. Other people want you to do it. You are creating value, but it's also sucking the life force out of you and it doesn't allow you to become amazing and create massive value.

Matt Mochary (01:03:45):
Then there's your zone of genius. This is the thing you do that's uniquely good in the world and you don't even notice that you're doing it because you love it so much. The key is to go and look at your day. How do you move into the zone of genius? It's not that you figure out what it is and do more of that, it's that you figure out what it isn't and eliminate that and then naturally, you'll be drawn toward what it is that you love.

Matt Mochary (01:04:10):
What I do with the energy audit is you go through a calendar, two weeks of a calendar, a representative two weeks and you first look at all the meetings you have, but then you fill in there's time in between meetings. What were you actually doing? Take your best guess, write it in and then hour by hour, take a green marker and a red marker and each hour from Monday, 8:00 AM to 6:00 PM and the same thing each day for two weeks, each hour ask yourself at the end of that hour, did I have more energy or less energy?

Matt Mochary (01:04:41):
If it's more energy, you mark it green. If it's neutral or negative, you mark it red. Then, once you've done that for two weeks, you look at all the reds and say what's with the themes here? Oh, one on ones with people who are no longer by direct reports, team meetings where nothing was prepared in advance and everything was verbal. Recruiting meetings, interviews with people that we didn't end up hiring. Informational interviews from people that wanted to meet me and just know me but provide no value to me. These are all things that are energy draining.

Matt Mochary (01:05:14):
Great. Now what you do is you go through each one of them and say, one, do I need to do this at all? Does it need to be done? If the answer is no, just cancel it. Two, it needs to be done, but someone else can do it. Great, delegate it to them. Three, and this is the most common, it needs to be done and only I can do it. Great, then the question is, what would make it exquisite? Well, it's the exec team meeting. I'm the CEO, I have to be in it. Well, what would make it exquisite?

Matt Mochary (01:05:41):
You know what would be exquisite? It would be exquisite if everyone pre-prepared their update, which said how they're doing against their priorities, regular green, what they did last week, what they're going to do this week, and then they pre-route any problems they saw in the company and any proposed solution they had for those problems. If everyone did that, then we could spend the first 15 minutes of the meeting just reading, processing the decisions and we could take a three hour meeting down to a 45 minute meeting. Great, go write that up, share it with a group and say, hey gang, this is what would make this meaning exquisite for me. What do you guys think?

Matt Mochary (01:06:18):
Nine out of 10 times people look at it and go, yeah, that would be amazing because they're feeling the same way. Then you go with a new methodology and it turns out to be great. That's how you take what you do each day from a lot of energy draining things into open space or energy raising things which will then allow you to start doing more and more of the things that you love. You keep doing this energy audit repeatedly, 1, 2, 3 times until your calendar is 80% green. Once that happens, magic will occur. All of a sudden, your life will become phenomenal and you will start to create massive value. I did it. That's what happened to me.

Lenny (01:07:05):
I did that too actually, a simpler version where I just paid attention to what gave me energy and what didn't give me energy when I was on this journey post Airbnb and I thought I was wanted to start a company, I thought I wanted to do some advising and consulting and I realized none of that gives me energy, but writing interesting things that people like, that was fun. So I just kind of doubled down on that path and had no idea was going to make any money and it ended up making money and that's what I do now. So yeah, two thumbs up for this method and it's a more sophisticated version, which I like.

Matt Mochary (01:07:36):
Right on. That's also trusting that there will be, if you need to monetize, eventually you will be able to monetize, but you got to start with doing the thing you love first.

Lenny (01:07:51):
Right. Yeah, I feel like there's a lot of people on Twitter and newsletters that are just doing it because they think this is something they will enjoy and other people are doing it. But I find that with this content life, you get on this treadmill where you have to continue producing things and if you don't actually enjoy it and it's not interesting to you, you end up just building this job for yourself that is no fun at all. Extra important if you're kind of going down this path.

Lenny (01:08:19):
One quick question I had along these lines is you're talking about how you focus on yourself and your energy and what works for you or not. And I was like, do these collide with other people on your team because they maybe get energy from something you don't? But your point is that oftentimes, everyone's like, "Yes, this is good for me too. We should do this because it's going to help everybody feel better."

Matt Mochary (01:08:38):
That's exactly right. I remember one time we did this energy audit process, I did it with Henrique and Pedro from Brex and it was revolutionary for them. It caused them to change how the two of them operated together. They realized one really enjoyed the internal meetings and the other really enjoyed the external meetings, so well great, let's just do that. It changed the trajectory of the company so much so that they said, "Matt, would you please come in and do this energy audit with all of our managers?" And we did. We did a big group thing and what they found was that process also changes the trajectory of the company because for everything that you don't enjoy but needs to get done, there's someone out there that loves to do it. You just got to find out who it is, and that's what happened.

Lenny (01:09:28):
I was just talking to my mom who's a CPA and I'm like, "Do you even enjoy this job you're doing?" She's like, "I love it. I love doing taxes. It's so interesting." I'm like, I'm so happy somebody out there enjoys this. I would pay anything for someone to take this off my plate. You can charge me. Because my mom does my taxes.

Matt Mochary (01:09:44):
That's exactly right.

Lenny (01:09:45):
Matt, any final thoughts you want to share before we wrap up?

Matt Mochary (01:09:49):
This was fun. Thanks, Lenny. I appreciate this.

Lenny (01:09:52):
Super fun. I feel like a sign of a great conversation is it feels like we've been talking for maybe five minutes, but also a lifetime. Maybe we'll do this again. There's like a million other questions I'd love to get into, but until then, where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and learn more and how can listeners be useful to you?

Matt Mochary (01:10:07):
Where can people find me? I don't know. Don't find me. I won't be able to respond. I get too many inbounds and I can't respond to them. In terms of people helpful to me, just read the content and use it and don't pay me to coach you. Just do it on your own because you don't need to pay me to coach you.

Lenny (01:10:28):
I love that. It's the first time someone's like, "Do not reach out. I got it all for you online." We'll link to the show notes of the doc and everything. Matt, thank you. This was incredible.

Matt Mochary (01:10:39):
Thank you, Lenny. This was great. Take care.

Lenny (01:10:43):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
You've worked with many very high performing founder CEOs. Zuck, Cheryl Sandberg. Larry and Sergei at Google. Brett Taylor.

Molly Graham (00:00:07):
Google, when I was there, felt like two PhD students paradise. Facebook felt like 19-year-old hacker's dorm room. 80% of the culture of a company is literally defined by the personality of the founder. Our job as operators or as leaders is to help articulate the culture that they're creating.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:25):
When a lot of people think Molly Graham, a lot of people think of giving away your Legos.

Molly Graham (00:00:28):
You have to grow as fast as your company is growing if you really want to take advantage, both learning to give away what you've gotten good at and move on to the next shiny pile of Legos.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:39):
Sarah Caldwell. She told me that the framework that helped her most in her career is something that you call the J-curve versus stairs.

Molly Graham (00:00:46):
So Chamath, when he pitched me on this job, actually drew me a picture on a whiteboard. He said, the way a lot of people do careers is a set of stairs. Just walk up the stairs and you'll get promoted every two years. But that is boring. The much more fun careers are like jumping off cliffs and you do fall, but then you climb out way beyond where the stairs could ever get you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:08):
Today, my guest is Molly Graham. Molly was an early employee at Google, also at Facebook, where she worked closely with Zuck on building the Chan Zuckerberg initiative. She also worked with Brett Taylor on scaling Quip, which he sold to Salesforce. She's also worked with hundreds of companies and founders helping them grow into the leaders that they want to become. Today, she leads Glue Club, which is a community for leaders operating in changing, growing environments who want to develop themselves as quickly as their companies. Molly is maybe most known for her advice to give away your Legos, which we chat about. Along with basically all of her favorite frameworks and mindsets and pieces of advice that she's developed and collected over time. For leaders who are going through rapid scale and growth and are just struggling to keep up. I think of this episode as a high growth handbook for leaders who are experiencing rapid scale.

(00:01:58):
We cover the J curves versus stairs approach to career growth, the waterline model, and why you want to snorkel before you scuba. Her six rules for creating goals and building alignment, her rules of thumb for dealing with rapid scale and lots of change. The biggest lessons she's learned from Zuck and Sergei and Larry and Cheryl and Brett Taylor and so much more. Molly is incredible and you will be a better leader after listening to this episode. A huge thank you to Eric Antonow, Ashley Murphy and Sarah Caldwell for suggesting topics and questions for this conversation. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it on your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It helps tremendously. And if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get 19 incredible products for free for an entire year. Including, Lovable, Replit, Bold, gamma, Innate and Linear, Devon, Posttalk, Superhuman descript, Whisper Flow, Perplexity. Warp, Granola, Magic Patterns, Raycast, ChapiRD, Mobbit, and Stripe Atlas. Head on over to lennysnewsletter.com and click product pass. With that, I bring you Molly Graham after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:03:01):
Today's episode is brought to you by DX, the developer intelligence platform designed by leading researchers. To thrive in the AI era, organizations need to adapt quickly. But many organization leaders struggle to answer pressing questions like, which tools are working? How are they being used? What's actually driving value? DX provides the data and insights that leaders need to navigate this shift. With DX, companies like Dropbox, booking.com, Addien, and Intercom get a deep understanding of how AI is providing value to their developers. And what impact AI is having on engineering productivity. To learn more, visit DX's website at getdx.com/lenny. That's getdx.com/lenny.

(00:03:44):
If you're a founder, the hardest part of starting a company isn't having the idea. It's scaling the business without getting buried in back office work. That's where Brex comes in. Brex is the intelligent finance platform for founders. With Brex, you get high limit corporate cards, easy banking, high yield treasury, plus a team of AI agents that handle manual finance tasks for you. They'll do all the stuff that you don't want to do, like file your expenses, scour transactions for waste, and run reports all according to your rules. With Brex's AI agents, you can move faster while staying in full control. One in three startups in the United States already runs on Brex. You can too at brex.com. Molly, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Molly Graham (00:04:36):
Thanks, Lenny. I'm excited to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:38):
I feel like this conversation was in an inevitability. I feel like you're the kind of guest where it's like, we will do this someday. I'm such a fan of your stuff. I've read all the stuff you've put out there over the years. We're going to be talking about the best frameworks and mindsets that you've developed over the years that have been really helpful to you, to founders, to companies that you've worked with to help them with growth and scale and change and all the stuff that comes with success. The way I think about this, I want to make this the greatest hits of Molly Graham.

Molly Graham (00:05:06):
Love it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:08):
And so I sourced what I think are the greatest hits from a lot of colleagues that you've worked with, a lot of people you've worked with. We've chatted about the stuff that you find other people find most helpful. So we're going to be going through all that stuff. But let's help people understand why they should listen to this advice. What's kind of the backstory on these frameworks? Where did they come from? Where did you develop them? Tell us that story.

Molly Graham (00:05:29):
So first of all, Ami Vora, who you have had on your podcast, once said to me that all advice is just someone telling you what they did. And I always think about that. Because I really think that basically what I tell people is I've made every single mistake in the book. And then I got to the end of the book and I started inventing new mistakes. So mostly what I feel is that I like sharing my stories because I want to help people. I want to help people not make the same mistakes I did. And I also want to help people make sense of what they're experiencing. But I started in tech in 2007. I actually started at Google the week the iPhone launched and a lot of my scaling battle scars come from a couple of experiences. They come from a year and a half at Google, which is not very long.

(00:06:17):
And Google was pretty big when I was there. It has thousands of employees. But my department, which was the communications department, was 25 people when I joined and it grew in nine months to 125 people. And that was really my first experience with just all the sort of things that I still talk about today. In terms of what it feels like to grow really, really fast and sort of all the tools that I started developing from there. After Google, I left and followed Cheryl Sandberg and Elliot Schrage to Facebook. And I spent five years at Facebook. And I joined Facebook in 2008, and it's important context because it was 80 million users at the time. We were smaller than MySpace. It was 270 million in revenue, 500 employees. It did not feel inevitable. Most people thought we were going to sell it to Microsoft. When I told people I was going there, they were like, isn't that place just like a site for college kids? And so I was there for five years and it was a crazy five years.

(00:07:22):
When I left, it was 5,500 employees, five billion in revenue, over a billion users. So a huge amount of what I experienced, what I write about, what I talk about in Glue Club, which is the community that I run, comes from that rapid scale at Google and Facebook. But I also, I left Facebook right after we went public, about six months after we went public. And I only like doing jobs that I'm highly unqualified for. I like being on learning curves so steep that I'm scared I'm going to fall off. And so I left and I wanted to learn what it took to build something from nothing. And so I joined this little startup founded by Brett Taylor, a startup called Quip. I joined a couple of months before we launched and ran everything that wasn't product and engineering there for him. And that was such a valuable experience to me because the experience of building something from nothing is actually quite different than the experience of holding on for dear life while things are scaling so fast around you.

(00:08:27):
And it really taught me about all the tools and skills you need to go from zero to one and then from one to two and how lonely it can be to build something. And we eventually sold that company to Salesforce. And then again, only take jobs I'm highly unqualified for. But the last really chaotic scaling experience I had was actually helping Mark Zuckerberg and Priscilla Chan start their philanthropy, the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative. And I basically helped them for the first two years of its existence or its sort of like first full existence. And philanthropy sounds calm. You know what I mean? We're like, oh, giving money away. Must be so peaceful over there. And CZI grew from, I think the week I joined, it was 30 people and we bought two companies that week and it grew to 250 people that year. And it was like using every single tool in my toolkit that I had taken from every other job that I'd had.

(00:09:22):
So my advice and frameworks, like I said, come from having made a lot of mistakes. But I've also sort of made a personal study over the last 18 years, believe it or not. Essentially what does it take to thrive inside growing and changing companies, not just to hang on for dear life. What does it take to lead in the face of constant change? And really the other piece that I find truly fascinating is what genuinely makes the difference between a business that grows but then plateaus versus these generational businesses. The ones that go on forever. Sort of the difference between a Twitter or MySpace and a Facebook. Billions in revenue versus hundreds of billions in revenue. So what I like to do is take my experience and use it to help other leaders. I want to give people tools that work. And I also want to be honest about how hard all of this stuff really is.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:24):
Amazing. I say this a lot in this podcast. I just love the ROI that listeners of the podcast get. You spent 20 years toiling, struggling, working so hard, learning so much. And you're just here, here's all the answers that I've learned. And obviously not all the answers, but so many things that will help people avoid the pain and suffering that you've gone through.

Molly Graham (00:10:43):
That's the goal.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:45):
Also, a couple quick threads I want to follow here. One is Ami Vora, who you mentioned. She's now, I think, head of product at Anthropic.

Molly Graham (00:10:50):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:50):
Amazing. Former podcast guest, also speaker at Lenny and Friends Summit two years ago. This other point you just made about how you've always gone to places that have been way beyond your... I forget how you phrased it, but just beyond your current capabilities almost. And were very difficult. I just had Matt McGinnis on the podcast. He's CEO at Rippling, now CPO at Rippling, and just recorded an episode with him. And he had this really powerful quote that if you're ever comfortable at work and feel like, oh, I got this, you're making a huge mistake. Something's going terribly wrong. That's not where you want to be.

Molly Graham (00:11:23):
Yeah. I always say I get bored really easily, which is both a strength and probably my greatest weakness. So I like being scared.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:30):
Okay. So let's actually dive into some of your greatest hits of frameworks. And the greatest of all greats, when a lot of people think Molly Graham, a lot of people think of giving away your Legos. Some people haven't heard of this, many people have, so let's cover this. What is this advice of giving away your Legos?

Molly Graham (00:11:47):
So this definitely started in my experience at Google. And then Facebook was a masterclass in giving away the Legos. But the way I like to talk about it is basically when I watch leaders and employees go through rapid scale, I like to think of somebody putting down a giant pile of Legos in front of a bunch of kindergartners and then just being like, build something. And that's sort of what it feels like when you start. It's like, well, there's so many Legos and it's so fun. There's a lot of opportunity, but it's also kind of scary and overwhelming. And you're like, there's so many Legos. What do I do? Isn't there an instruction manual hidden under this pile somewhere? But then you start building and you're like, oh, okay. You build something and then you take it apart and then you put it back together.

(00:12:33):
And then eventually you start to get momentum and you're like, okay, it's like I'm building a house. I got this. It's a house. All right, great. And then you're like, I'm good at building houses. I was put on earth to build houses. And almost assuredly inside of scaling companies, as soon as you're like, I feel good at this and I should do this forever. Somebody's going to show up and be like, okay, it's not a house. It's a neighborhood. And you need to take this house that's kind of half built and you're going to pass it off to this other person that we just hired. And you are going to go build dog parks and streets and other things that are entirely unhouse-like. And what happens when someone does that to you is you're like, wait a minute. First of all, I'm not done with this house. And I'm worried that this person's going to screw it up.

(00:13:18):
I'm also worried that building houses is actually the most fun thing and that I'm going to give the Legos to that person and they're going to have all the fun work and I'm going to hate building dog parks. Or that dog parks are irrelevant eventually and it's going to turn out we're in the house building business. So there's this incredible set of emotions that come territorialistic, paired with excitement. Fear paired with joy. But eventually you pass the house off and then you go work on neighborhoods and you're sort of like, okay, dog parks, I'm good at dog parks. I got this. And then again, you get to the like, I'm great. I was put on earth to build neighborhoods. And immediately someone shows up and says, it's not a neighborhood. It's a country or a city or a world. And it just goes on and on and on.

(00:14:03):
And for me, learning this muscle of both learning to give away what you've gotten good at and move on to the next shiny pile of Legos. And learning that the emotions associated with that are inevitable. I've been doing this for 18, 20 years, I still get attacked by these emotions all the time, but that doesn't mean that you shouldn't give them away and move on to the next thing.

(00:14:33):
That is both the torment of scaling companies, which is that the ground is moving under your feet. And as soon as you're comfortable, someone will make sure that you are uncomfortable, but it's also the opportunity, which is that you can go from being someone that's good at building houses to someone that knows how to build entire worlds. And that is where the Legos metaphor came from.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:55):
That is such a good metaphor. And if you've gone through this, you so understand what this is like and what... And also just the Legos is metaphor is so good for the different things you build.

Molly Graham (00:15:06):
I have a very weird brain that for some odd reason just always thinks in metaphors.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:11):
[inaudible 00:15:11].

Molly Graham (00:15:11):
So it showed up when I was... At Facebook in particular, I would find that every so often I would have to have what I called a Legos talk with someone where I would just see them start to ask these questions like, why are we hiring that person? Or what's that team even do? And I was like, okay, we need to have the chat about the Legos. And then eventually it turned into an article and a whole thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:33):
A whole thing. And just to be clear, the advice is give away your Legos, this is actually the path to a successful career.

Molly Graham (00:15:40):
I have watched a lot of people over many years struggle with feeling like they should hang on to the thing that they've been good at. And it almost always... Because, you know, essentially the nature of a scaling company is that the Lego pile is just getting bigger and bigger and bigger however fast that graph is going up into the right. I always say that's the graph of how fast your business is growing. It's the graph of how fast your company is expanding. And it's the graph of how fast your job is getting bigger. That means that if you actually just stay and build houses, eventually you're literally buried under a pile of Legos. Do you know what I mean? You held onto something that's down here and the opportunity is actually to stay on top of that pile and to learn to just give away your job every so often.

(00:16:27):
At Facebook, I got to a place where I was literally giving away my job every three weeks. I was constantly rehiring myself essentially because you have to sort of grow as fast as your company is growing if you really want to take advantage of the opportunity that comes with companies that are growing and changing quickly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:45):
So people are hearing this, they're like, okay, my rational brain's like, I should give away my Legos. It'll help me. It'll be good for my career. In real life, it's very hard to actually do. To give away this empire that you've built, this team that you've built. This project that you're like, oh, this is going to be my thing. I know you have a really fun, useful tool to help people deal with that kind of irrational part of their brain. Talk about that.

Molly Graham (00:17:07):
So like I said, my brain works in weird metaphors. It's a weird brain. I was raised on The Muppets, and I like to think that this one came from, I guess, growing up watching weird animals. But basically, at some point I realized that this emotional rollercoaster that comes with scaling, with growing. With going through change, any kind of change. People feel that. Was never going to go away. And that no matter how good I got... Sometimes I think it gets worse the more senior you get, actually. Because you sort of feel like you're supposed to know what you're doing, and then you just get attacked by this monster that's like, who even gave you this job in the first place? So basically I externalized all these emotions that come with change into this little tiny monster. I named my monster, Bob. Your monster can be named whatever you want him to be named or her or them.

(00:17:56):
And Bob's job... I like to think his job is basically to make me the worst version of myself. He's the one that's like, oh, that person took all the fun Legos and you should go push them over and grab them back. Bob's job is... Bob's the one that wants to send the rage emails at 9:00PM and burn the house down. And the thing to learn about Bob is that, like I said, Bob never goes away. Bob is someone that you have to learn to deal with. But Bob's job is to make you the worst version of yourself. So your job is to let Bob do his thing, but not act on the emotions. Basically, all these emotions are normal and they are not useful. They are not the compass that should be telling you what to do.

(00:18:46):
But the other rule I have for managing Bob is a lot of people are like, oh, you're feeling off or tired or whatever. Go to bed and wake up tomorrow morning and you'll feel better. And the truth is that you're like, I want to send the rage email at 9:00PM. You still want to send it at 8:00AM. And a lot of these emotions just do not go away in 24 hours. So my rule of thumb from Facebook was give it two weeks. And the emotional, the sort of Bob... Bob is like these waves and they just roll through. So you made a new hire or somebody came in or you got layered or whatever. You'll have a set of reactions. And those reactions, again, they're normal, but they're not useful. They're not the ones that you should listen to. They are Bob.

(00:19:29):
And typically they go away in a couple of days, you get something new. Some new wave. But anything that lasts longer than two weeks is actually something you should pay attention to. It's something that if it's been around for two weeks, it's something you should go talk to someone about. Whether it's a manager or a friend or a coach or someone like that. That's the real stuff. Everything else is just Bob.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:50):
Is there a rule of thumb for when it actually, when you shouldn't give away your Legos? When it's like, okay, maybe you should fight back on this layering or whatever.

Molly Graham (00:20:00):
No rule of thumb. In general, I would actually say embracing change is far better than fighting it. And almost invariably, you cannot see what is around the corner, but it is almost always the thing to focus on. A lot of times I think inside of change, we get focused on the past, and one of the most valuable things you can do as a manager and a leader is help people focus on the future. I think... I'm sure there are times when people have done it and regretted it and it has led them somewhere.

(00:20:42):
I think being layered, for example, is one of the hardest things for people inside these experiences where someone brings in a manager above you. And I've also seen so many stories of that ending up being a great thing for someone. Even though they couldn't see it at the time. So in general, I would just say, step into the future and let the past go and see what you're going to learn. And sometimes you'll learn that it's time to leave or that this isn't the right pile of Legos for you. But it'll end up taking you somewhere that's worth exploring. Holding onto things almost always leads us to the worst version of ourselves.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:24):
It's a very Buddhist way of thinking too. Just don't cling.

Molly Graham (00:21:31):
There you go.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:31):
Yeah. And I think another part of this metaphor, I don't know if you think of it this way. Is the Legos aren't even your Legos, right? They're like the CEO's Legos, the shareholders' Legos. So you think they're your Legos, but no, you're not in charge.

Molly Graham (00:21:42):
Well, it is... I will say one of the hard-earned things is it can feel very emotional and it can feel very personal. It can feel like your work... I don't know, it can feel like your life is on the line sometimes. Just your work life. Oh, gosh, this matters so much. And one of the things that you learn as you get more senior and just have seen stuff is it's going to be okay. A friend of mine says, careers are long and nobody tells you that. But they're long. And this moment feels so dire and it feels so hard and it feels scary and it's going to be okay. So yeah, it is hard to know in the moment. And I think the story is going to be long and this is going to be one chapter or maybe even a part of a chapter, not a whole chapter. So embrace the length.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:37):
To build on that point, I've realized this is my fourth career doing what I do now. Whatever the hell this is. I was a engineer and then I was a founder. Then I was a product manager, and then what the hell I do now. Whatever this is, that's a whole different path.

Molly Graham (00:22:52):
You don't have a name for it yet, Lenny?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:55):
I don't. I hate all the terms people use for this world.

Molly Graham (00:22:58):
Somebody called me an influencer and I almost ripped their face off.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:00):
Yeah. [inaudible 00:23:02].

Molly Graham (00:23:02):
[inaudible 00:23:02].

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:03):
Yeah.

Molly Graham (00:23:04):
Yeah, man. The most interesting careers are winding and they have starts and stops and failures and successes and control. Anybody that's been through a lot of this stuff, control is usually not the name of the game. It's usually just like, "Let's see what happens. We're going to try this and we're going to see what happens next."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:26):
This is a great segue to another framework that I've heard from folks you've worked with that have been really impactful on them. So, Sarah Caldwell, who's a big deal at OpenAI, she told me that the framework that helped her most in her career is something that you call the J-Curve versus Stairs career growth framework. Talk about what that's about.

Molly Graham (00:23:46):
I actually gave a TED Talk about this one a couple of years ago because I am so passionate about it, but you can listen to the very packaged eight-minute version of this, but I will tell you the real story because it's very relevant to a lot of folks that listen to your podcast. I was at Facebook for five years. Like I said, the first two years I was in HR and I was doing employment branding and culture work and I was ready to stay there. I think I had in my head I was going to stay there until we went public, that was my plan just because I wanted to help the company through that moment, again, in my head.

(00:24:21):
This guy that many people know, Chamath Palihapitiya, came to me and Chamath ran growth and mobile at the time. And he came to me and we had lunch and he said in his very Chamath way, "You're useless. What are you doing in HR? This is stupid. You should come work for me." And anybody that knows Chamath is like, "Yes, that is actually what he said." He managed to insult you and compliment you in one sentence.

(00:24:47):
He gave me all these options on his team. And then the last one he said to me was like, "I'm going to go build a mobile phone. Do you want to come do that with me?" And I had four simultaneous reactions. The first was like, " That is incredibly stupid. Why are we doing that?" And then it was like, "Is that actually a thing that we're doing?" And then it was like, "Whoa, I think that sounds kind of fun." And so I left the conversation at Chamath and I went and asked my boss, Lori Goler, who's the head of people at Facebook for a very long time, like, "Is this actually something we're doing?" And she was like, "I can't believe he offered you that, whatever."

(00:25:21):
And I basically just could not get it out of my head, but it didn't make any sense, A, that Chamath had asked me because I was in HR. Like, "What am I doing? I don't absolutely jack shit about mobile." But I had worked on a project with him and I guess he thought I was smart. And I talked to Cheryl and she was like, "Well, that project will be dead in two months, but you can do it because you'll still have a job here." My dad was like, "Well, don't do that. " And anyway, a lot of very wise people being like, "Don't do that."

(00:25:51):
But I kind of couldn't get out of my head. And my friend said to me, "You've proven you're really good at this sort of company-wide project management and HR. Why don't you go show yourself how actually good you are? Is this transferable?" So, I took the job and I spent the next six months feeling like an absolute idiot. I basically felt like a total jackass all the time. I was sitting in rooms with these brilliant people asking the dumbest questions of my life and at the end of the six months, Chamath, I think, took a lot of pride in giving me the lowest performance rating I've ever gotten in my life, and it just felt like falling off a cliff. Then, slowly, I remember I had been doing all these trips to Taiwan because we were actually working on hardware and I, at some point, came back from Taiwan and I drew on a whiteboard for him the layout of a mobile phone and trying to explain to him why something he wanted to do was not possible. I so vividly remember walking out of that meeting being like, "Oh, I actually know things." And slowly then, over the following three years, I became an expert in mobile. And I basically... The phone itself was a giant failure, massive, costly failure for Facebook, but it was not a failure for me. It was a huge job that taught me that I was capable of things that I never could have dreamed of if I had stayed in HR. It set me up to be capable of taking on things that I didn't know about.

(00:27:28):
Chamath, when he pitched me on this job, actually drew me a picture on a whiteboard. He said, "Look, you can stay..." The way a lot of people do careers is a set of stairs. "You can be boring." To use Chamath, "And stay on these stairs. Just walk up the stairs and you'll get promoted every two years and your title will change from manager to senior manager to director to senior director, whatever." And he was like, "But that is boring." And he's like, "The much more fun careers are like jumping off cliffs." Basically, that you jump off this thing and you do fall for a period of time. I always like to say it's about six to nine months, but then this thing happens where you climb out.

(00:28:05):
And the picture he drew had this J-curve sort of basically leading you to places that are way beyond where the stairs could ever get you. And to be totally honest, that has been my experience. That taking risks, accepting the sort of terrible fall and that experience of falling has been more than worth it. Part of the reason why Sarah mentions it is that I do give this sort of talk to people that are inside of really fast-growing companies, because it's such an important place to let go of Legos and jump off cliffs because there's so much opportunity. And it is a place where if you prove to people that you're actually good, if they believe that you are the kind of person that they can use to do lots of things, you can get these opportunities that you are just so deeply unqualified for, but they can take you to places that you could never have imagined.

(00:29:01):
You can come out of those companies with skills that no one would ever have reasonably hired you to do. But I ended my time at Facebook in product and did business development and hardware and a whole bunch of the stuff along the way. And again, nobody would've hired me to do that at the beginning, but it's just because I kept saying yes to things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:22):
Molly, I got tingles listening to this story. Wow.

Molly Graham (00:29:25):
Does it sound familiar, Lenny?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:27):
It does. I want to ask, jumping off a cliff, sometimes you fall, really fall and you keep falling. Are there any kind of traits of like, "Okay, this is one that might be a J-Curve and worth the risk of falling, and this is when you should probably just not, let's not do this".

Molly Graham (00:29:46):
Yeah. I just think there are different kinds of fear. We talk a lot about this in Glue Club because one of the thing, there is a financial fear, right? Leaving a job and taking a job that has financial risk associated with it, or leaving a job and taking time off, which is something that I spend a lot of time talking to people about, you got to do the math and you got to... Sometimes there is a type of fear that is telling you like, "This is not the right time." Or, "I don't want to be financially anxious for months and months and months."

(00:30:21):
I use finances because it's the most concrete example of a type of fear that you should actually listen to. And sometimes you can do the math. I always counsel people through that. I'm like, "What is the number that you need to hit so that you're not constantly terrified financially?" And that number is wildly different for people based on their background and their life. "Can you do that? Can you consult, can you whatever in order to take this leap?" But a lot of times fear is just you saying, "I'm scared I can't do this. I'm scared I'm not capable of it. Yeah, I'm scared I'll fail."

(00:30:56):
And that's the kind of fear that I think of as a flashing green light because... And it sounds like Matt McGinnis said this too, where it's like, "That's the kind of fear that's saying, 'Why don't you go prove to yourself that you are actually capable of this?'" Or if you fail, like, "You'll have learned something, too." You know what I mean? You'll have learned, like, "I took this job in product at Facebook as my last chapter there, and let me tell you things that people should never fucking hire me to do." I was like, "I am not a good product manager." But I've got a great product mindset. I can sit in a bunch of chairs and hang with the product folks, but I'm not the person that cares about the button. Do you know what I mean?

(00:31:38):
And I would never have learned that. I wouldn't have known who I was if I hadn't taken that risk and failed or at least learned that it's not something I wanted to do again. So, there's many different lessons that come from facing down those fears and jumping off the cliff, but mostly what it is is knowing yourself better and knowing where you go next from there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:03):
That is such helpful advice. I also love how you frame this of, "Prove it to yourself that you can do this." It's not, "I'm going to show them that I can do this." Because the way you describe this, usually it's an opportunity given to you. "Hey, can you do this thing? We want you to lead this new thing." And the fear is like, "I don't think I can do that." And what you're saying here is, "Prove it to yourself that you can." Or, I guess, it's also, "Okay, maybe I can't and then I'll learn that and then I'll know more about myself."

Molly Graham (00:32:27):
Yeah, exactly. I mean, one of the greatest gifts in a career is knowing yourself. And that's a lifelong journey because who you are and what you want changes, but that knowledge and that gift, nothing accelerates your self-knowledge faster than trying to do something that you don't know how to do and that you're scared of.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:50):
Probably the quote I use most on this podcast comes up again in my mind as you talk about this, this line that, "The cave you fear contains the treasure you seek."

Molly Graham (00:32:59):
Hell yes, exactly. Well said.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:03):
There it is.

Molly Graham (00:33:03):
I haven't heard that one from you, so clearly I need to listen more.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:04):
Okay, that's great. I'm glad I don't overuse it. It just feels like it comes up again and again, and I think your point about the runway and the finances is such an important one because that's a very real practical question. One thing I did when I took time off, I took a year off after I left my job. What helped me was I just created a runway goal for myself. I'm just like, "Okay, here's what it's going to cost me for six months or a year to live without any income. Am I comfortable just burning through these tens of thousands of dollars to explore and see something new emerge?" And so you just have to feel good. "Okay, yes, I'm going to burn all that money and that's part of it."

Molly Graham (00:33:37):
Yeah, that's exactly the exercise. You're saying "runway" I say "burn rate", so we both were raised inside of companies, incentive tech, but I think it is do the math, right? What can you afford? And it's both what can you afford and still feel safe? Because sometimes, I mean, again, I think that is different for everyone, but it is such an important set of math to do because, A, a lot of times that number is smaller than you think it is, then your brain makes it out to be if you have this sort of existential financial anxiety versus, I always say, "Specific financial anxiety is much more useful than existential financial anxiety." And some friends are leaving jobs and I'll be like, "Hey, your number is 5K or 10K a month. You have to believe that you can get a consulting gig that will pay you that. Do you believe that?" And it's like, "Either yes or no." And then, "Okay, either we're doing it or we're not.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:29):
The other part of this J- Curve that I think is really important to touch on is this idea of for the first six or nine months, you're going to be at the bottom of the J curve falling, still falling. And some projects don't last that long and then you're like, "Okay, total failure. I never emerged from this fall." So, is there any advice there? Just, how do you create that enough space to give you a chance to start to un-fall?

Molly Graham (00:34:49):
I mean, the most valuable thing that happens as you fall is learning. And even on the other side of failure, you've learned a shit ton. I always say, "The most important thing to do in the falling phase and the risk taking land is to learn to embrace being a professional idiot." Basically, being the one that shows up at the meeting and is like, "What are we talking about? What does that word mean?"

(00:35:18):
For a bunch of reasons. Number one, you can learn so much. And again, even in the face of failure, no one can take away your learning. Do you know what I mean? But the other thing is that it turns out that a lot of the questions in the world that, you're sitting in the meeting and you're like, "This is a dumb question. Everyone's going to think I'm an idiot." But then you get brave and you ask it and it turns out it wasn't a dumb question. Do you know what I mean? Turns out that everyone had that question in their mind, but no one was brave enough to ask it.

(00:35:48):
So, from a skills' perspective, again, regardless of outcome, being the person that sort of takes their learning in their own hands, learning no matter what and learning to ask those dumb questions, it's a superpower. I always say that, "Actually, my superpower is being a professional moron." Because I'm the one that shows up in a room and is like, "Do we have goals? What are we doing? Why are we talking about this? Why are we having this meeting?" And most of the time it's actually what I was hired to do, which is bring clarity.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:19):
It's so funny. I just recorded a podcast episode with a PM named Zevi who joined Wix and he had this thought, he's like a very young PM, just getting started and he's like, "Okay, I need to be a 10X PM because that's what they expect of me, that's what everyone that is really good, that's how I think of a 10X PM." And then he went into his first meeting and he just failed and he just felt so bad. He's like, "I guess I'm not that 10X PM. They're all going to see that. They think I'm terrible." And then he did another presentation a little bit later and people were so impressed with how he learned and evolved and improved. And he realized that he needs to be not a 10X PM, but a 10X learner, and that's what people actually expect from someone, especially a junior person.

Molly Graham (00:37:05):
Yeah. Well, I was having a conversation last night with a friend of mine who has a senior in high school and I was like, "What is the plan? What are we telling this senior in high school to think about relative to their career given everything that's going on with AI?" And we talked about it a bunch, but what we both circled back to was this idea of soft skills and that actually the only thing you can really anchor on right now is that teaching kids grit, teaching them hard work, teaching them learning, right? Learning how to learn, loving learning, being able to fall, in a world that's changing this fast. And I say this inside of companies too, right? I always say, like, "What you know today is way less valuable than what you can learn by tomorrow." If you're inside of a company where the growth curve is like this, what you know today is irrelevant.

(00:37:52):
Somebody once told... I'm sure this is faster now, but they rewrote the entire code base at Google every eight years, which means that if you're not learning, if you're not evolving, then you become irrelevant and extinct. It's actually the whole underlying point of the Legos stuff is that evolution is the way you stay on top, and I think that's more true today than it's ever been.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:14):
And luckily, AI is really good at helping us learn.

Molly Graham (00:38:16):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:17):
So, that's good. Thank you, AI. And this actually comes up a bunch in the podcast. I ask a lot of AI-forward people what they're teaching their kids and curiosity is one of the main things people talk a lot about. Just like, "Help them develop curiosity about the world."

Molly Graham (00:38:31):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:31):
Yeah. Okay. I feel like I could be talking about this specific topic for a whole podcast episode, but I want to move on to a couple other frameworks that you've developed. One is something called a Waterline Model and another former colleague of here said, "This is the most impactful thing that they've learned from you on their career." So, talk about the Waterline Model.

Molly Graham (00:38:50):
Okay. Yeah. Well, first of all, the Waterline Model is not mine. It's from some business book somewhere, but I actually learned it. My first job out of college was leading wilderness trips. I led 75-day wilderness trips in Patagonia and Alaska for a school called NOLS, the National Outdoor Leadership School. NOLS basically teaches essentially leadership and communication skills to students.

(00:39:15):
I was mostly leading college age kids through wilderness expeditions. So, by having to lead a group of your peers that you don't know. Anyway, the Waterline Model is something that we taught on NOLS. It's a really, really helpful model for understanding how to diagnose when something is not working on a team, so I teach it inside of Glue Club and I'll just quickly explain it. Basically, the way to think about the Waterline Model is that a team is a boat and it's a boat on an ocean trying to get somewhere, getting somewhere is goals, right? "What are we trying to build or ship or do?" Essentially, that is going to be harder or easier based on whatever the shape of the ocean is, right? If it's really choppy, it's harder, if it's smooth and calm, it's going to be easy to get to your goals.

(00:40:02):
So, the Waterline basically asks the question like, "What is going on under the water? What is going on that's making it harder or easier to get to your goals?" And there's essentially four things underneath the water and they are in a descending order. The surface level is what's called structural things. Basically, structural things are like goal setting, vision, roles, expectations, kind of the structures you put in place to make a team and a company and a business make sense, that touch every single member of the team.

(00:40:37):
Right below that is something called dynamics, which is essentially how the team works together. It's culture, it's decision making, it's how we resolve conflict, all the sort of like interwoven pieces of how teams work together. And then below that is interpersonal, so basically relationships between two people and all the things that come with us being humans. And then the bottom is intrapersonal, meaning within one person, challenges and issues there.

(00:41:08):
The interesting thing about this model is that most people, when something's going wrong on a team, a lot of times we always go to the bottom. We go to the people. We're like, "The people aren't getting along, that person's having a rough moment." We go to the humans, but the rule with the Waterline Model, which is very memorable, is you snorkel before you scuba. So, 80% of problems on teams actually happen because of structural issues or dynamics issues. So, when there are problems on your team, where you start is at the top, you start structural issues.

(00:41:44):
And one of my biggest things that I say all the time over and over again inside of Glue Club is, "Your only goal as a manager, if you do nothing else, is clear roles and clear expectations. That's it." Because honestly, I've taken over a lot of teams in my life and almost always I show up and it turns out that no one knows what their job is and no one knows what success looks like. And if you can make those two things clear, which again is at the snorkel level, it will fix a huge percentage of other issues on a team. But the main thing is where you start and just always sort of starting at that structural level or the dynamics level and not sort of immediately going to the people and all that. Because yes, people cause all sorts of problems, but a lot of times the problems are happening because they're existing inside of a structure that's confusing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:32):
Another very vivid metaphor and just, I love how it builds on it with the snorkeling. Okay. So, just to be super clear about this, the takeaway here is, you have a problem with your team, with the company, many people think it's, they jump to the people are the problem. "They're not good enough, they're not working hard enough." Really, what you're saying is, most often, the issue is not the person, it's the situation, whether it's the structure of how they're set up to work or the dynamics amongst the people. And specifically what you're saying is that the role maybe isn't clear or what success means for that role is not clear.

Molly Graham (00:43:08):
Every company I've worked with or advise, I often start with like, "What are the goals?" And usually what you get the hack is, "Uh, not clear." And that in and of itself is a structural issue, right? How can someone show up and decide what they're going to do with their day all day if the goals aren't clear, if they don't actually know what the priorities are? And then it goes to, okay, role, right? "Do I know what my job is? Do I know what number I was hired to own and drive?" And then, "Do I know what success looks like? How does my role tie to that overall goal that the company has?" Just literally right there. You got probably 80% of problems inside of companies because this is the hard work of company building. It's the stuff that's not intuitive. "How do you organize a group of people to know which direction to row?"

(00:43:52):
And that equation, again, I would say 80% of problems that I see, performance issues. I always start with, "Does this person actually know what you expect of them?" If not, go back to step one. Do you know what I mean? Clarify expectations, so the Waterline Model is just helpful for reminding us, like, "Start at the top."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:11):
So what would you do there? Say you're a manager, you're having an issue with a team member, would you go and ask, "Hey, let's just make sure we're aligned on goals and roles." Is that how'd you approach it or is there a different approach?

Molly Graham (00:44:24):
So a lot of times what I do is two-sided, right? So it's like, "Hey, here's what I'm seeing and tell me what's going on for you. Do you know X, Y, Z?" When I take over a team, when I'm doing my listening tour, part of what I'm asking is, "What do you think your job is? What number were you hired to drive?" Because what you'll find is often their picture is different than your picture. You think you've been clear, you described an elephant and they spat out a tiger and that coming back to like, "Okay, no, we're building an elephant. You're in charge of the trunk." Will, in some percentage of cases, actually make a huge difference to the person's work and time and performance. In plenty of cases it doesn't, but that's always where I would start because it so often is just a more fundamental problem that then would lead you to look at other things across the team.

(00:45:20):
But yeah, I would say two-way dialogue, but re-clarifying roles and expectations, re-describing the elephant over and over and over again, is one of the hardest parts about being a leader because you feel like a broken record, right? You feel like an idiot. You're like, "I've said this 45 times." Turns out no one heard you the first 43 and you have to. You have to re-describe it in order for people to hear you and to re-understand their sort of role in what they're doing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:45):
I love how you reframed the way I approached it by starting with, "Here's what I'm seeing. What are you seeing? What do you think your role is? " The very non-violent communication oriented, which is a clear pattern on this podcast, just the power of that specific framework.

Molly Graham (00:45:58):
Yeah, totally. Well, like I said, work is about humans and it's...

Molly Graham (00:46:01):
Like I said, work is about humans and it's the art of organizing humans to get something done and build something that's greater than the sum of its parts and that is an art of the humanness in all of us, how do we get people to hear us, how do we get people aligned.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:17):
Work for a lifetime.

Molly Graham (00:46:19):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:20):
This episode is brought to you by GoFundMe Giving Funds, the zero fee donor advised fund. Did you make it New Year's resolution to give more? I want to tell you about a new product that GoFundMe has launched called Giving Funds which is a smarter and easier way to give. GoFundMe Giving Funds is a DAF or donor-advised fund from the world's number one giving platform trusted by over 200 million people, it's basically your own mini foundation without the lawyers or admin costs. You contribute money or stock, get the tax deduction right away and then decide later where you want to donate. There are zero admin or asset fees and, while the money sits there, you can invest and grow a tax-free so that you can give more later. GoFundMe is a FinTech unicorn working for good. Make a better world in 2026 and start your Giving Fund today at gofundme.com/lenny. They'll even cover your DAF pay fees if you transfer your existing DAF over. That's gofundme.com/lenny to start your giving fund.

(00:47:17):
Okay, so let me actually follow this thread of the importance of goals and just being clear around this stuff. You have these six rules for creating clear goals and alignment on teams, talk about these six roles.

Molly Graham (00:47:30):
Yeah, totally. I feel like there should be less than six but it's where we're at. I would say, at a high level, two things before I get to the six. One is that I definitely have a bone to pick with OKRs, I feel like it's obviously been a really helpful framework for Google and others and, a lot of times, when I show up inside a company or I'm talking to a leader and I'm like, "What are your goals?" what I get back is this spreadsheet that has 100 lines and feels like it's written in Greek and, when I look at it, I'm like, " This doesn't create clarity for anyone." And it brings me back to what is the point of goals, why do we have them and, at the end of the day, goals are a communication tool, that's what they are. They're a communication tool designed to create clarity, to help people know I'm going to show up at my desk, what should I work on, what's the most important thing and your 100-line spreadsheet doesn't help anybody.

(00:48:23):
And the second thing I would just say is you really have to ask the question what is right for me at this company and this stage, what is right for a seed stage company is not what is right for a company that's got an established business and a clear go-to-market machine. So, when I'm building in seed stage, I'm setting goals every two months in a very iterative way. When I have an established business, I can actually set annual goals but annual goals for early stage companies is just a waste of time. So, anyway, a lot of my goal setting stuff actually comes from Facebook which I think was very, very good at this.

(00:48:58):
So, the first role is that no company needs more than three company goals and the point of company goals is to help people know what the most important things are to success. So, Facebook basically had three goals for the entire time I was there, it was five years and we did six-month goal setting, I think we did annual goal setting that ended up getting reset every six months but whatever. So, the three goals were this, there was growth which was measured as monthly active users, that was the externally reported number eventually, MAUs. The second goal was engagement meaning how often do people come back and use the site and the third was revenue and we literally had three goals for the five years that I was there. If you can govern that business with three goals, you can govern literally any business with three goals. So, no company needs more than three goals.

(00:49:52):
The second thing is that one goal needs to win in a fight. So, if I'm sitting down and asking how do I prioritize my time on a given day I need to know what is the most important thing. At Facebook, we had growth and there's a lot of different ways you can add monthly active users to a social media site including you can go buy a whole bunch of bots in Indonesia and that would add to your MAU number but it would not add to your engagement number and it was very clear for the entire time that I was there that engagement was the most important thing. Acquiring users that were going to use the site all the time, that's what drives revenue, it's also what drove the heart of that site. So, if you had to prioritize something, you prioritized engagement, that goal won in the fight.

(00:50:35):
The third I'll say is, I call it the explain it to me like I'm five goal, but an intern that started on Monday should be able to look at your goals and understand them and, if they can't, then you are failing because they are not a communication tool that's effective. You have to be able to understand the goals, you have to explain the acronyms, you have to have numbers that make sense to average people, otherwise, again, it fails as a communication tool.

(00:51:03):
The fourth one is ... Actually, I stole a phrase from Claire Hughes Johnson who you've had on your podcast but wrote a book called Scaling People and in it she says this sentence that I love which is strategy should hurt. And my role used to be set non-goals, basically, make it as clear what you're not going to do as what you are going to do but strategy should hurt is a much better way to explain it to people which is, if you're not making trade-offs that are painful, you are not actually helping people prioritize their time. Because the nature of work is that people will show up every day and do something and either you are very clear with them about what the priorities are or they're going to prioritize for you because they're going to choose what they work on every day. And we see this so much with founders where they can't cut things off the list, they just have to have the 10 goals and I'm like, "Cool. Six of these goals are not going to get done so either you pick which four it is or other people are going to pick for you." So, strategy should hurt. If your goal setting process is not painful, then you're not prioritizing heavily enough.

(00:52:09):
Okay, ready? We're on number five. This is more of an organizational point but it's really important for the waterline model too which is that one goal has one owner. You have a number, that number has a name next to it. If you cannot do that work, you haven't done the most important work to actually make sure that these goals get accomplished. And it's organizational work and it's very painful because sometimes it feels like, oh, this person can own it or this, maybe they'll just own it together, two people owning a goal is no one owning a goal. One person owns the goal, who is it? It's not you as the CEO, it's someone that works for you so one goal, one owner. And then the last, which is the hardest, is that goals by themselves are not enough. I've spent a lot of time with founders that are like, "I did it. I set the goals. Why not working? I don't understand." And I'm like, "What did you do after you set the goals?" And they're like, "I don't know, I set the goals." Goals ...

(00:53:10):
James Clear who wrote Atomic Habits has this really lovely sentence which is winners and losers have the same goal. Goals by themself are not enough, you have to have a process by which you follow up on the goals and you hold people accountable to the goals and you learn from the goals because so much of goal setting, particularly if you're earlier in building your company, is about learning from trying to do something. You set a goal, can we do it, how hard is it to move this number, that is the ... You might be wrong all the time but you're learning what it takes to move the number. So, setting the goal by itself, not enough, you have to build a process in the system to actually learn from the goal.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:53):
Wow. This list is ... There's so much power in this list, it's such a succinct-

Molly Graham (00:53:57):
It's too long.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:58):
No, I don't think it is because each of these has so much depth and power to them that saves you so much headache and just wasted time and resources. Just the idea of one owner, one goal, something I've personally discovered to have such power because, and correct me if I'm missing something here but just, if you feel like someone else may be doing the thing or feels like it's not just fully your responsibility, there's so much less energy and just mental ... I don't know. You just don't care as much about hitting that goal. And if it's you-

Molly Graham (00:54:29):
Yeah, accountability.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:30):
Yeah. If it's like, "Lenny, this goal is your goal and, if you hit it, you've done it. If you don't, you've done a bad job," that'd be a such motivating, so motivating. If it's me and Molly, okay, well, we'll figure it out.

Molly Graham (00:54:41):
It creates a flood of clarity that seeps down from the person too. And to go back to the waterline model, I would say, so often you'll actually find companies that have set goals but no one owns the goals, everyone owns the goals, multiple people own the goal and you didn't actually get all the way to the answer. And I will say that the ownership thing is hard, it can feel painful but it's really important. There's only one owner and that means that that person, come hell or high water, owns that number.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:16):
Yeah. The way I described it [inaudible 00:55:18] was just someone's ass has to be on the line for this and that just works. That's such a powerful lever to drive things to have one person responsible.

Molly Graham (00:55:28):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:29):
The other's just this idea of strategy hurting, I love that. I love that phrase, I forgot Claire had that. So true.

Molly Graham (00:55:36):
So good.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:37):
Because the whole idea is you need to not do things, you need to decide what you're not ... The whole strategy, a big part of it is what we are not doing.

Molly Graham (00:55:44):
Yeah, absolutely. And if you're not making painful choices, then you're not actually doing it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:49):
And this idea of three goals, so is it just ... So, do you go into a company and just go through a checklist essentially of here's the six things I look at to tell me where there's opportunity to improve?

Molly Graham (00:55:58):
When I work with founders and I see their goals, I use it as a way to get to know the business and I'm just going to be literally like, "What is this? What are you trying to explain?" And I can usually, through asking a lot of really dumb questions which, like I said, one of my superpowers, get them to explain to me the one sentence and the one number that they're actually trying to get across but it takes work and that's part of ... It's almost easier to write the 100-line spreadsheet than it is to say, "Wait, what are the three drivers of this business genuinely? What are they and how do they relate to each other?" And there can be things underneath them but there's three at the top that matter. So, yeah, I'm not a scientific person about it but a lot of it is just by asking people to explain their businesses to me, you can basically find the drivers.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:51):
And the story about Facebook having these same three goals for five years, considering their success, you may think they're not as complicated as your business but I am confident they're just as, if not, more complicated. They're a marketplace, a social network, they're a ad business, just they're ... There's a lot going on and, if they can work with three goals, you can do that too. And to your point, if it's not hurting, then you're doing something wrong.

Molly Graham (00:57:17):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:18):
I love how ... This is very much what I wanted this chat to be. It feels like every little segment is its own, could be its own podcast where we could talk about this for hours so I'm really excited how this is going. Moving on to another topic, you have not necessarily rules but rules of thumb that you find really helpful for people to have in their head as they're dealing with change and scale and growth and all that kind of stuff so let's just walk through that.

Molly Graham (00:57:45):
Yeah. So, for leaders that are leading through change and growth, the list is probably long but I always say to people don't come to me for management 101, I'm not the person to ask on how to run the most effective one-on-one with your people. What I think is not talked about enough is what it takes to manage and lead through change and that is a very particular set of feelings. And the first thing I learned, when someone makes you a manager or when you take a job as a leader inside a company, you really do feel like, "Oh, who gave me this job?" and you feel like you're supposed to know the answer to things. People come to you and ask questions and you're like, "I'm supposed to know. I'm a leader, I am supposed to have answers."

(00:58:35):
And I think, particularly inside of rapid change and scale and growth, it's really important to understand that your job as manager and a leader is not to have all the answers. It is not to have all the answers, it is to get good at finding them, it is to get good at bringing people together to find the answers. And that is hard because it requires saying, "I don't know, let's go figure it out," a whole bunch and it's scary as a leader to say I don't know because you think, "Oh, gosh, people are going to see through me." But again, the more you travel in life, the more you realize that the most experienced leaders are the ones that say, "No, no, no," all the time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:13):
I think this is a good reminder of this Bob the monster concept because, hearing this, okay, I don't need to have all the answers as a leader. In real life, being in a meeting, people are like, "Hey, Molly, what do you think of this?" You're like, "Oh, I should have a good answer." And so, I think that's a good reminder of this idea of this Bob the monster is going to tell you, "Oh, you don't know anything, you're not ready for this. You suck at this, you're going to fail everyone that's [inaudible 00:59:34]."

Molly Graham (00:59:33):
They're regretting hiring you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:35):
Yeah, exactly.

Molly Graham (00:59:36):
Everyone's going to see through you. Imposter, imposter, imposter.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:39):
Yeah, yeah.

Molly Graham (00:59:39):
Yeah, 100%.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:39):
But just remembering, there's going to be this part of your head and that's okay, it's there but it doesn't mean it's true.

Molly Graham (00:59:44):
Absolutely. And these things are muscles. Dealing with Bob as a muscle, learning to not react to all those things that attack you but also learning, oh, in this moment when someone asks me a question and I'm like, "Oh," actually I should be like, "I don't actually know, let's go ... Who should we ask? How can we learn this? How can we explore this together? What do you think?" Those are all actually very powerful questions and they're terrifying to, particularly earlier in your career, as a leader and a manager.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:11):
Awesome. So, yeah, so the lesson there is no one expects you to have all the answers as a leader.

Molly Graham (01:00:15):
No.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:16):
Awesome.

Molly Graham (01:00:17):
And particularly in this world, the one that's changing as fast as it is, nobody knows. Nobody knows what the answers are in a lot of cases, the war will be won by the people that are good exploring and figuring it out.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:29):
I love that phrase.

Molly Graham (01:00:31):
So, the second one is, and everyone that has learned this has learned it the hard way, do not promise things that you can't control. It's so tempting particularly when you're hiring people to be like, "Oh, yeah, your onboarding will be smooth and calm and everything's clear and we've figured it ... Let us tell you our vision and how obvious and clear and smart and blah, blah, blah." And then they show up and it's like, "Oh, shit," you know what I mean? There's no manual, no one knows what they're doing, it's all ambiguity and chaos. It's so easy when someone says I want to know that I'm going to be your CMO forever to be like, "Sure, you can be my CMO," you don't know that. Do you know what I mean? So, being really careful with promises of things that are out of your control like stability or titles or never hiring over someone is a flashing red light because there is literally no faster way to demoralize high performers than going back on a promise. Everyone that has been through it knows that feeling of like, "They told me this when I joined," and then they don't do it and you're like, "Well, fuck this place." So, no faster way to demoralize people or to hire the wrong people than promising things that are actually out of your control. Being honest and upfront about who you are as a company, about what you're able to promise, all of that is actually ... It's very hard work but it's so important because so much is out of your control and you need to hire people that are cool with that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:01):
Love that. I learned this the hard way once, I had a ... One of my early projects, we were late and the head of product was just so pissed he's like, "Because I've been telling the CEO it's going to be on time because you've been telling me it's going to be on time and then it wasn't and why didn't you tell me that?" And I was just like, "Okay, it'll never happen again," and he's like, "You can't ... Don't tell me that because that's not true, that nay not ... You can't guarantee that." And so, that taught me that lesson of just, yeah, you're right, you want to say that, it feels so good. Okay, this will never happen again but you can't and they know you can't promise things like that.

Molly Graham (01:02:38):
Yeah. And sorry, I'm going to quote Claire Hughes Johnson again but she has this really fun phrase that she said in a talk at Glue Club that I've now latched onto and stolen from her which is, she was like, "Promises like that are like letter bombs that you mail yourself that are going to explode in your face in a year," and I was like, "That is the perfect metaphor." Because it's short-term pain, you want to make this person feel good right now so you promise them something but, in one year, you're going to make them feel terrible so don't do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:10):
Great advice. All right, keep going.

Molly Graham (01:03:11):
Yeah. So, again, could probably go on the topic of what it takes to manage and lead forever inside this stuff but I'll give you two more that I yell about a lot in Glue Club. The first is that we spend huge amounts of time talking about hiring. How do you get good at hiring? What's the right interview? How do I find the right people? Firing people is as important as hiring people. Getting good at identifying when someone does not belong or someone is not going to work out is actually a skill and being good at it as a company and as a leader is as important as identifying the right talent because, eventually, if you're not good at firing people, what you have is essentially barnacles on a ship. Really going forward with the ship metaphor, anyway.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:12):
It's true.

Molly Graham (01:04:00):
It's drag people that are sitting around not pushing the team forward. So, it's painful and it's horrible because it is humans but, when someone doesn't fit, you ... No one is right all the time when it comes to hiring, I actually say most people are wrong half the time. The best people in the world in hiring will tell you they have about a 50% average in terms of being right. That means half the hires don't work out. That means, half the time, you're going to need to fire the person. So, it's such an important skill to get good at particularly when you're going through a lot of change. And the last one is humans are messy and it's very emotional. And when you're a leader, particularly if you have any kind of anagram too or just if you like to make people happy and you want to be liked, it can be so hard to lead teams because you get tangled in the people. Firing people is a painful experience, reorganizing things, layering people, all these things are emotionally painful for the people and they're emotionally painful for you as a manager.

(01:05:05):
But my mantra that almost always leads in the best direction is serve the business, not the people meaning everyone is better off if this company is wildly successful. Everyone looks smart and makes lots of money or whatever if this company grows and does what we all dream it can. So, at the end of the day, the best decisions, the ones that are always going to be right are the ones that are like, "How do we do the right thing for this business?" And it also helps in political situations. Someone's acting weird or their Bob is raging all over the company, technically, everyone has the same goal. The goal is to build the biggest business possible, that's the answer. The answer is always what's the right thing for the business. And the people stuff can fall away when you actually focus on what's the right thing for the business.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:55):
A really useful tool to do that that I learned from my manager is to think about, when you're trying to decide whether to fire someone or change a project even though it's going to upset someone, is to say, "Okay, if there were no emotions involved, if this person had no negative reaction to this, what would I do?"

Molly Graham (01:06:15):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:16):
And then that's the thing you should do and then you just do it. And then the question is how do I communicate this to them where their pain is lowest essentially.

Molly Graham (01:06:16):
In the kindest way possible.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:27):
In the kindest way possible. And because, to your point, if you optimize for the other thing of making people feel good, everything just falls apart, they're going to suffer even more down the road.

Molly Graham (01:06:38):
Yeah, absolutely. Direct is kind. And it feels kind or, really, honestly, easy to avoid these things or to work around them or to not but, at the end of the day, it's basically just a drag, the barnacle thing. It drags on your company, on your time, on your energy, et cetera.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:58):
Yeah. But again, very hard to do in real life to do the thing that's hard and cause someone to be sad and upset and frustrated and maybe leave.

Molly Graham (01:07:08):
It is so hard and all these things are muscles, you get better at ... They don't become easy, it's not like anybody who's like, "Oh, it's so ... I enjoy firing people," no, but you recognize it faster and you are like, "Oh, I need to go do this." And that is actually ... It's a practice and something that you need to practice to become the kind of leader that leads these long-enduring companies.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:32):
Yeah. And this tool of thinking, asking what would I do if there were no emotions involved and this person wouldn't be upset, it helps you realize, okay, I see, this actually doesn't make sense to just do it the easy way right now because it doesn't make sense.

Molly Graham (01:07:46):
Yeah, it strips away. It strips away the emotions.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:50):
Something else I wanted to make sure we spent a little time on is you have another tidbit along these lines which is around putting most of your energy into high performers versus spending all your time people that need help, talk about that.

Molly Graham (01:08:02):
As a leader, as a manager, you're running these teams and someone's struggling and it's very easy to get dragged into that and to end up spending a huge amount of energy on it but high performers are actually the future of your company. And if you think about it and if you've spent time on it, those are the folks where, if you invest your time and energy in them, you're going to get the 10x return that people talk about all the time in Silicon Valley. But what I've witnessed is that most people have a high performer and they just leave them alone, they're like, "That person's doing well so I'm just going to let them do their thing." And what I do when I have a high performer that's my favorite thing in the world is invest time and energy in them and basically build a whole system of working with them that is designed to draw out potential. And I would say there's two things here, one is it's really important to realize that our tendency-

Molly Graham (01:09:00):
There's two things here. One is it's really important to realize that our tendency is to actually spend time on low performers and it is not a good use of your time. See the point about firing people. But the other thing is that actively investing in and developing high performers is something that's important to get good at as a leader because that is how you create these little rocket ships that end up... You'll manage someone who's just like a project manager and all of a sudden they're running a whole function inside the company eventually, but it's because you took time and energy to invest in them. And my basic way of doing that, not to... I could spend a long time on this, but I would just say is I run experiments. I basically develop a theory about someone, "I think this person is capable of this kind of thing." And then piece by piece, it doesn't have to be a whole job or whole project. It can just be an incremental experiment, "I'm going to see if they can do this with less guidance or support from me."

(01:09:52):
I'm going to give them a bigger project. I'm going to give them something with more visibility. I'm going to manage them less, oversee them less, whatever. All of those are experiments to basically test your theory and deepen your theory in terms of this person's potential and their ability to help the company. And you're basically, for me, what I'm doing is deeply getting to know that person and then trying to pair them with company needs. What do we need? This person is great at zebra farming. Where do we need zebra farming? So how do I get them working on bigger and bigger and more and more critical things?

(01:10:27):
And to be honest, this is what people have done for me. At Facebook in particular, I've benefited from people being like, "Ooh, come help me with this thing." They saw potential in me and they asked me to help with something and it unlocked a huge amount for me. And so, it is such a powerful tool for getting more out of people that might be a little bit stuck if you leave them in this box. But if you start to expand the box, you can really unlock people.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:55):
So speaking of high performers, you've worked with many very high performing founder-CEOs. He worked really closely with Zuck, with Cheryl Sandberg, with Larry and Sergei at Google, with Brett Taylor, who I just... Just like you trying to read his resume, it takes three lines of things he's done over the course of his career. And so I just want to spend a little time on what are some things you've learned, maybe a few things you've learned from them, that group that you find yourself sharing with other people most.

Molly Graham (01:11:26):
That list is very long, but I'll give you a couple. The first one that I think is kind of counterintuitive is... So I said I worked at Facebook. I worked on culture, which is one of those words that doesn't really mean anything. So I define it as the way we do things around here. And I thought my job was to shape the culture. I thought it was to push the culture. And the most humbling lesson I learned is 80% of the culture of a company is literally defined by the personality of the founder. Facebook is Mark. Google is Larry and Sergei. Google, when I was there, it felt like a university. It's where ideas are more important in a lot of ways than what's shipped. And there's a campus and they basically wanted people to live there when I was there. It was designed to basically be a two PhD students' paradise.

(01:12:29):
Facebook felt like a 19-year-old hacker's dorm room when I was there. And it was shipping above all and all else. And it seeped with Mark's DNA. And I spent ages trying to create various changes inside the company or trying to push a point. And Mark would say literally one thing in an all hands, and it was like somebody threw a boulder into the pond. So our job as operators or as leaders around founders is to help articulate the culture that they're creating and to help extend it. My version of founder mode, which I know you've spent some time on on this podcast is your job is to build a company that would make a decision the way the founder would when they're not in the room. That is the work of building a company around a founder, but your job is not to shape culture.

(01:13:24):
That is mostly defined by the literal personality strengths and weaknesses of the person at the top. And that's been true of Mark and it's been true of Brett. Everywhere I go, that's who it is. You don't need a consulting firm to tell you, just go do a personality diagnosis on your founder. And the weaknesses thing is real. I've seen and watched friends try to shape a set of values at a company and it just doesn't match who the founder is. You say, "Move fast and break things," or whatever your version of that is. And your founder loves ambiguity and is perfectly happy with not making decisions. All that leads to is cultural dissonance. It leads to people being like, "Wait, what? I thought we said we care about moving fast and making aggressive decisions and it turns out..." So being really careful about what you say, because what people actually feel when it comes to culture is what you do and how you act every day.

(01:14:18):
You can never write anything down and you will still have a culture. It will be created through the actions and the decisions that you make and that your founder makes. So that would be a huge one.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:28):
Let me spend a little more time on this because this is so good. So all this advice on culture and it feels so true based on everything I've seen. So tip one there is just you can't really change the culture. Maybe there's a little bit on the edges you could adjust. It will come down and trickle down from the founder, CEO probably mostly, but just the founders in general.

Molly Graham (01:14:49):
And founder-CEO is probably the single biggest.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:49):
Founder-CEO.

Molly Graham (01:14:52):
Co-founders, it depends a lot on the company.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:56):
Awesome.

Molly Graham (01:14:57):
I think Stripe is probably very much like Patrick and John, but it's not every co-founder that has that level of power [inaudible 01:15:03].

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:03):
Awesome. And then the way you describe culture, I think it's the way Seth Godin talks about it too, who's also been on the podcast. How cool is that?

Molly Graham (01:15:09):
So cool.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:10):
He said, "Culture is..." And what you said, "Culture is the way we do things around here. That's what culture is, is how we..." That's how people describe your culture is, "The way we do things around here."

Molly Graham (01:15:22):
I ran culture, whatever the hell that means, at Facebook for a hot second. I literally haven't done a values exercise since. And it sounds crazy, right? Because in theory, I know how to do this stuff. I don't really know how to do this stuff. But for me, the point is process and systems and how do we make decisions? That's where culture actually lives. It is what you do. It's how you hire. It's how you fire. It's who you don't hire. It's all of those decisions. That is culture. So whenever I'm working with a company or building a company, that's what I'm focused on, not on what's the shiny word that we're putting on the wall. You know what I mean?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:54):
Yeah. So the way you're describing is, as you said, it's what you do. It's not what you say?

Molly Graham (01:15:59):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:59):
Awesome. Keep going.

Molly Graham (01:16:04):
I'll give you two more that are helpful. This one is a Mark Zuckerberg classic, but he has this very strong feeling that people don't escalate enough. And he was very adamant about it at Facebook. And he brought it to CZI too where he was like, "Escalation is a tool." And he's like, "People get stuck. They get stuck with two people with equal power trying to solve a problem. You can spend so much time bashing heads, going back and forth. And actually what you just need to do is go up. You need to go." The problem is that we think of escalation as, "I'm A and B and I are disagreeing. And so, I'm going to go up to C and tell on B. I'm going to go tattle to the teacher." That is not what escalation is. What escalation is, "We disagree. Neither one of us has enough power to make this decision. Let's go to someone who does." My boss, my boss's boss, whoever it is.

(01:16:59):
As soon as you are stuck, escalate. Go together, go make your case to whoever it is, go together up. That is unlocking. It's saving you a whole bunch of time. And it's something that I've found as I've worked with companies and leaders in Glue Club. It's not a muscle that's very comfortable for people, but it's so smart. And Mark has a lot of these, but that one I really took away because again, I think so many people think of escalation as bad, a failure, like, "I failed, so I had to escalate." No, it's a tool. It's what management is for. They're there to unblock you. Let them unblock you. Stop arguing over something you can't decide.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:36):
And they'll be so happy knowing you did not waste a week debating this and then just arguing and just looking at data. It's like, "Okay, I can just tell you exactly what we should do. Let's go do that."

Molly Graham (01:17:44):
Exactly. You lack context or you lack power. And then the last one actually is from Cheryl Sandberg, who I learned an enormous amount from, huge, was like going to business school without going to business school working with her. But I say it a lot right now, so I'm going to say it on your podcast so maybe some people will hear me. Growing more than 100% every year is a bad idea. The happiest growth rate is 50%, 100% is manageable. Anything more than doubling and you are signing yourself up for a world of pain. And I have seen this over and over and over again. I had to scream way louder about it five years ago than I do now because we've been through collectively a lot of pain and a lot of layoffs. And obviously the combination of 2021 and then AI has led us to talk about unit economics and scaling with tools, not people.

(01:18:47):
But I still see companies and I'm still talking to founders that are like, "Yeah, we're 50 people and we're going to be 150 people next year." And I'm like, "Could you possibly do that with 100 people?" But here's what basically happens if you grow at more than 100%, which is you're growing too fast to de-dupe all the issues. So somebody posts this role, it actually turns out that that role is also being hired for on this other team. So you're hiring two people who more or less have the same job description and are assigned to the same number or the same problem, but nobody talked to each other. And those two people both show up and they're like, "I am doing this." And the person's like, "Wait, I thought I was doing that." Anyway, so then you've got all this... And think about all the time and all the energy and all the money that goes into de-duping that.

(01:19:32):
If you slow down, if you hire for quality and for real need versus the panic hiring, whatever your sales model spits out or whatever, you'll actually find leverage. You find, "Oh, I didn't need that person," or, "I didn't need this whole team," or, "I didn't need this whole function," or, "I can wait for that." So slow down. And again, these are all just guidelines in terms of the 50% is happy and 100% is manageable. But having seen enough of this, I can tell you these are good rules and you should pay attention to them. And sometimes you're like, "I have to double or I have to more than double or I have to triple," or whatever. I'm like, "Okay, just ask a whole lot of questions as you open roles. Ask a whole lot of questions as you hire because you will find duplication, you will find chaos coming in the front door."

(01:20:16):
More people does not actually make you faster. Do you know what I mean? We think it does. It does not. It makes it harder. It makes it harder to get work done. It makes it slower. So you should be scared of adding people, not like, "Oh, this is the answer to all my problems."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:27):
Amazing. And just to be clear, you're talking about the growth of the company. So doubling in a year, bad idea. It's possible, but you're saying it's going to be very hard and painful and probably a really bad idea.

Molly Graham (01:20:40):
Yeah. More than doubling head count growth.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:40):
More than doubling.

Molly Graham (01:20:40):
Great point.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:40):
Head count?

Molly Graham (01:20:42):
Yes, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:43):
Awesome. It's-

Molly Graham (01:20:44):
Please feel free to do whatever you want with your business.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:47):
Just advice. This is top of mind because I just had the interview with Matt McGinnis, but so much of what he talked about is this resonates with what you're talking about. He talked a lot about under-resourcing your team-

Molly Graham (01:20:59):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:59):
Leads to much better outcomes because people don't work on the low priority stuff. They focus on only high priority stuff. And the other is this idea of escalating. He talked a lot about that. Just like, "Escalation is good. Tell me when there's something I can help with, please. I'm here waiting constantly-

Molly Graham (01:21:14):
There you go.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:14):
"To help."

Molly Graham (01:21:14):
Yeah, 100%.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:16):
Amazing. So maybe for a final question, one of your former colleagues, Eric Antonow, who's just this epic dude that few people know about-

Molly Graham (01:21:16):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:24):
That I've chatted with over the last few months because he knows so many people that come on this podcast. He's a former Facebook person, now at OpenAI. I asked him what I should ask you about and he told me something really insightful about you. He said that you had this really massive growth spurt at Facebook, which you shared and talked about. And then after you leaving, you had this huge ambition to become COO, CEO, become this huge big deal boss person, just take over the world. And then he noticed your ambitions significantly pivot to working on community building and helping people with their careers. And you turned down really big C-level role opportunities. And the way he described it is you were a dog that once thought you were cat. And the other metaphor he used is you change from AC current to DC current, which I don't know exactly what that means. So does this resonate? And if so, just what happened there?

Molly Graham (01:22:22):
Eric is actually better at metaphors than I am, and I regularly rip his metaphors. But yes, Eric Antonow, the least well-known, but most brilliant person in my life. So I gave a talk at a company recently and somebody asked the question, "What's something you've changed your mind about?" And I was like, "Woof." But I actually talked about this because... So my brain is developing this model that is not done yet, but it's basically this idea that everybody has a proving phase to their career where you're proving to yourself and probably to your parents and some other people that you're good at stuff. You're like, "I'm going to prove." And it's an important phase because you need to learn. All the stuff we talked about. You need to learn what you're good at. You need to learn that you are good at things and that people should hire you for things and what are those things?

(01:23:22):
But part of that phase is also doing what you think matters, what you think you should do. Family programming or career books tell you this is what you should do, titles and all that stuff. And then, I think everybody has a moment and I think this moment varies wildly in terms of when it hits people, where you hit some sort of wall or I don't know what it is, speed bump, something, and the world forces you to say, "Okay, I've proven myself and I'm good at this thing. What do I want to do with it?" And for me, I spent 10 or 15 years proving to myself and to others that I was really good at this thing, basically working with brilliant founders to help bring their vision to life, "That's what you should hire me to do." That's what I was known for.

(01:24:20):
And it turned out that that wasn't what I love doing anymore. And it was really, really hard to walk away from because there was a lot of shoulds. It was like, "You should take this job with this fancy title. People are going to think you're so cool." And you get to... I call it a LinkedIn crush where you're really excited to post the job on LinkedIn, but you're deeply unexcited about doing the job. So you have all these LinkedIn crushes and you're like... And I vividly remember this one job that I turned down where I had to go for many walks. And what I was repeating over and over again to myself was, "What does this get you that you don't already have? What does this get you that you don't already have?" And I think, for me, it was this realization that these things that fed me early in my career just didn't feed me anymore, that I didn't get joy and excitement out of doing these jobs anymore, and I wasn't scared.

(01:25:20):
So it led me actually on a very long, windy journey, a founder journey, even though I have trouble with that title, just like the influencer title, to figure out what I wanted to build. And what I would've told you I wanted to build three years ago is actually not what I'm doing today, but through a lot of really fun experiments and a journey that never ends, what I've discovered is that what I love doing is building safe spaces for leaders to learn and grow, but also to find sanity and connection in a world that's kind of insane, whether it's working in a startup or some other kind of insanity, but that feeds me and there's nothing I love more than that, and I could not have told you that three years ago, but, to Eric's point, it really took a lot of work to switch currents or switch myself from a dog to a cat or whatever his metaphor is. And I think it's the work of it's ongoing work, but it's that thing of what do I want versus what do I think people expect of me?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:32):
There's so much depth there. This could be another entire podcast conversation talking through this journey, but I'm going to close with a note from your partner, Sarah. She told me that she has this sticker on her notebook with three pieces of advice that you gave her when she started at OpenAI. Get to know your customer, they have the answer; be patient because everything is going to change; and just keep trying. So just as a final question, is there anything along those lines that you think might be helpful for people to hear or is there anything else you want to share or leave listeners with?

Molly Graham (01:27:07):
Part of what I think is so important to realize inside of scaling and changing companies and the world is some things will always be true. And part of what I was saying to Sarah in the "get to know the customer, they have the answer" is, whatever bullshit is going on around you and whatever walls and ceiling are being rearranged this week, the customer is never going to change. That's a thing that will never change. And I think finding those immovable objects, those compasses in the face of a storm, which being inside of a scaling company in a startup feels like a tornado. And I think OpenAI is extra special on that front. You have to find these guiding lights that get you through that storm. And I think it's sort of the same thing as "Serve the business, not the people." What are the things that will always be true? We are here to do this. We are here to serve the customer.

(01:28:09):
And then the other piece of the three things that she wrote down is, I think that we, as humans, we seek stability. Our brains would like things to stop changing. We would like things to stay the same. And that is just not a reality inside of companies that are growing and changing as fast as OpenAI or a lot of the companies today that are being built. So actually, you need to start to expect instability. You need to start to just assume things are going to change. Assume you're going to have a new boss in six months. I talk about this a lot when I talk to folks at OpenAI, "You need to stop expecting that anything's going to be the same in six months or a year. You will have a different job. You will have a different boss."

(01:28:55):
How do you prepare for that? Do you know what I mean? How do you almost see the instability as stability because it's the only thing that is definitely going to be true. And part of that is to just keep going. You know what I mean? To just find these lights and these compasses or whatever metaphor sticks with you and focus on those because whatever is happening around you, you just got to keep moving forward and keep learning as much as you can because that's the real opportunity. Whatever happens to the company, however successful it is, all that you take away from it... I always say all that you take away from it is people that like working with you and want to work with you again and what you learned. That's it. You might hopefully take a bunch of money, but you might not. So people and what you learned, that's it. Focus on that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:41):
It's all about the friends you made along the way. That old line is true. Oh, man. Molly, I feel like we've gone for so long and we've just scratched the surface. I'd love to have you back to go deeper on a lot of this stuff. I'm going to skip the lightning round because we've gone long and I want to keep people from having to listen to more. So I'm just going to end with, what should people know about what you're working on? Where can people go find you online? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Molly Graham (01:30:07):
You can find me on LinkedIn and you can find me on Substack. I have a Substack called Lessons that I'm slowly trying to turn into a community where we can talk about things, the real stuff. And you can find me at Glue Club, which, if you're a leader inside of one of these crazy companies that's changing all the time, we can be a great home for you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:26):
What's the URL there just for folks to check out?

Molly Graham (01:30:27):
It's glueclub.com.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:28):
Glue, G-L-U-E?

Molly Graham (01:30:31):
G-L-U-E.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:32):
C-L-U-B.com. Great.

Molly Graham (01:30:34):
Yeah, exactly. And in terms of people, what people can do to be useful to me, I love helping leaders with problems. I really get a lot of energy out of unsticking people and helping people feel supported and seen and helping them grow. I do that through Glue Club. So if you're a leader that feels like you want some sanity and some support in the face of whatever tornado you're in, that's a great place to come. But the same is true of Substack. So if Glue Club isn't for you, come on over to Substack. I've opened up a bunch of channels to just talk about stuff, listen to people's problems, answer questions because I love helping people. And I think it's a complicated moment right now to be a leader and to figure out which way is up. So come on over.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:24):
Amazing. Molly, thank you so much for being here.

Molly Graham (01:31:27):
Thank you, Lenny. This was really fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:29):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Naomi Gleit (00:00:00):
I really believe in frameworks for things that helps drive extreme clarity. I work on a lot of different projects. A lot of times I'm ramping up a new project, I'm like, "Where can I learn what I need to learn about this project?" I ask five different people, get five different answers. That is unacceptable. Of course, I'm sure there's hundreds of docs associated with the project, but there needs to be one canonical doc. Everyone should know exactly where the canonical doc is. That's the one place I can go to get all the information I need about a project and it will link to all the other docs, things on the canonical doc are.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:33):
Today my guest is Naomi Gleit. Naomi is head of product at Meta. Other than Mark Zuckerberg, she's the longest-serving executive at Meta. She joined what was then called Facebook as employee number 29 and has been at Meta for almost 20 years. She's seen the company scale from 30 employees to the one and a half trillion dollar business that it is today. Naomi does very few podcasts and interviews and so I was really excited to chat with her and have her on this podcast. In our conversation, we dig into the many lessons that she learned from Facebook's early and legendary growth team, her superpower of taking really complex and gnarly problems and projects, simplifying them and delivering results. We also get into leadership lessons she's learned from Zuck, including his recent transformation into possibly the coolest CEO in tech. Also, why PMs are the conductor of product teams, some very tactical tips for running meetings, writing docs, working out, getting better sleep, and even how to get more protein in your diet.

(00:01:31):
This was such a fun conversation and such a wide-ranging conversation and whether you are in product or growth or any other tech function, you will get something useful out of this conversation. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Naomi Gleit.

(00:01:56):
Naomi, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Naomi Gleit (00:02:00):
Thanks so much for having me. As I told you earlier, I refer your podcast all the time and so I can't believe I have the opportunity to actually talk on it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:08):
Wow, I'm so flattered. I never get tired of hearing that. Appreciate you sharing that. I want to share a couple of tidbits about you because it's pretty crazy when you see this list. Okay, so you are Meta's longest serving executive other than Mark Zuckerberg. You're employee number 29 at Facebook. You've been there for over 19 years. Sorry, at Meta, formerly Facebook.

Naomi Gleit (00:02:35):
I do that all the time. That's what happens when you've been at Meta for 19 years is you can't get the name right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:42):
Okay, good. I won't feel bad about that Then and then the last thing is just you've been at the center of some of the most foundational products that Meta and Facebook have worked on, including working on the early growth team and thinking about the early growth strategy. Basically you've been there from employee number 30 to today, a one and a half trillion dollars company, one of the largest companies in the world today. Very few people have ever seen this sort of growth and scale from the inside.

(00:03:09):
First of all, I guess let me just ask this, do you ever reflect on this and just realize like, "Holy shit, what a journey I've been on. How wild."?

Naomi Gleit (00:03:16):
It is a great question. I would love to say that I reflect on it. The truth is I think I barely have time to reflect right now. I'm thinking about all the things that I need to do on my to-do list, so I'm pretty in it still. Even after 19 years, I am really focused on the work that I need to do. I do honestly have moments where I get to reflect. For example, on this podcast. Sometimes people do ask me and I think especially as I approach the twenty-year milestone, my twenty-year Faceversary, I'm sure that will give ample opportunity for me to look back.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:55):
Such a classic product manager answer. I have too much to do-

Naomi Gleit (00:03:55):
Too busy.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:59):
I have to think about this. Yeah, I got to hit some goals here.

(00:04:04):
This episode is brought to you by Pendo, the only all-in-one product experience platform for any type of application. Tired of bouncing around multiple tools to uncover what's really happening inside your product? With all the tools you need in one simple-to-use platform, Pendo makes it easy to answer critical questions about how users are engaging with your product and then turn those insights into action, all so you can get your users to do what you actually want them to do.

(00:04:31):
First, Pendo is built around product analytics, seeing what your users are actually doing in your apps so that you can optimize their experience. Next, Pendo lets you deploy in-app guides that lead users through the actions that matter most. Then, Pendo integrates user feedback so that you can capture and analyze what people actually want. And the new thing in Pendo, session replays, a very cool way to visualize user sessions. I'm not surprised at all that over 10,000 companies use it today. Visit Pendo.io/Lenny to create your free Pendo account today and start building better experiences across every corner of your product.

(00:05:08):
PS you want to take your product-led know-how a step further? Check out Pendo's lineup of free certification courses led by top product experts and designed to help you grow and advance in your career. Learn more and experience the power of the Pendo platform today at Pendo.io/Lenny.

(00:05:28):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta. When it comes to ensuring your company has top-notch security practices, things get complicated fast. Now you can assess risk, secure the trust of your customers and automate compliance for SOC 2, ISO 27,001, HIPAA, and more with a single platform, Vanta. Vanta's market-leading trust management platform helps you continuously monitor compliance, alongside reporting and tracking risk.

(00:05:57):
Plus, you can save hours by completing security questionnaires with Vanta AI. Join thousands of global companies that use Vanta to automate evidence collection, unify risk management, and streamline security reviews. Get $1,000 off Vanta when you go to Vanta.com/Lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A.com/Lenny.

(00:06:20):
Let me start. I want to start by just how you actually landed at Meta as employee number 29, which is a life-changing decision and a life-changing role and I want to learn if there's something folks can see about what you did that might be helpful to them when they're trying to find a place to work and your story, I was reading about the story and it's super interesting. You basically wrote your senior thesis at Stanford about why Facebook was going to win and why it was going to beat its competitors and the competitors cited I've never even heard of, so it's interesting that that was the competitor at the time. Could you just share the story of how you landed as employee number 29 at Facebook, now Meta?

Naomi Gleit (00:06:54):
Facebook as part of being an academic, researching Facebook, also being a Stanford student using Facebook. I was like, "I really want to work here." Facebook had just moved to Palo Alto. Mark had driven across country I guess, and arrived in Palo. Alto opened up an office at 443 Emerson Avenue or Emerson Street. It was right above the Jing Jing's Chinese restaurant in downtown Palo Alto and I just went to the office sort of cold called the equivalent of just walking into the office and seeing if there were any available jobs. There were not. I think I did that maybe five to 10 more times.

(00:07:31):
Eventually, there was an opening to interview for Sean Parker's personal assistant. He was at the time I think the president. I did interview and I did not get the job. A few months later I found out about a marketing role that was available. And one interesting thing I haven't really talked about was I got an offer from Facebook. I also got a competing offer from LinkedIn, and so at that time I made the choice to go to Facebook because I was interested in the social networking aspect of it. Why was I so bullish on this website at the time it was www.thefacebook.com. Why was I so excited about this thing?

(00:08:12):
I think it's because I definitely saw that there was product market fit. I saw that students at Stanford were obsessed with it, but it also had a long list of colleges that were really excited and on the waiting list to be accepted onto Facebook, and so there was this product market fit piece and also a huge demand from other audiences, other colleges, but our younger brothers and sisters were also sort of interested about Facebook and it seemed like it had this much broader appeal. So that's what happened. I got the marketing job. Cheryl also talks about when you are on getting a rocket ship, don't ask what seat. That was my foot in the door and here we are 19 years later.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:02):
I was just going to say that that's such a good example of what she recommends of if you can get a seat on a rocket ship, don't ask which seat. And I love the Sean Parker piece. I did not know that. That's hilarious. What a different life would've been if you got that job and went down that track.

(00:09:18):
So a couple of takeaways here for people that are trying to pick where to work, what I love about your story is one is you just had so much. You just had confidence that this business would work and you just knew that you wanted to get on this rocket ship. You saw attraction. So that told you I guess that added to this confidence that this was going to work out. And then you said that you walked into the office kind of cold, not even cold emailing or calling, but cold arriving. Five to 10 times you said?

Naomi Gleit (00:09:45):
Yeah, it was pure just refusing to quit. I think I just walked into the office, I talked to the person at the front desk, "Is there anything that I can do?" They weren't hiring non-technical people. I didn't have a computer science degree. I wasn't technical. I had this bachelor of arts degree and that's why the personal assistant in the marketing role eventually did open and was something that I thought I could be qualified for.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:12):
Cool. I think that's such an empowering lesson of if you look at someone like you and they're like, "Oh, she was so early at Facebook, how lucky," clearly wasn't luck. You knew you wanted to work at this company. You put a lot of effort into making it happen no matter the job. I think that's a really good takeaway and lesson. So if there's a company today that you are excited about that you're just like, "This is going to be a massive success," what I'm hearing is just do everything you can to try to land a job there and eventually you'll be in a role you actually want. It doesn't have to start there.

Naomi Gleit (00:10:41):
When I got to Facebook, I knew I wanted to build. As someone who wasn't really technical, I wasn't going to be an engineer or a coder. I wanted to work with the engineers and the coders to build products. I thought product management was the right function for me, and so my dream was always to be a PM and it wasn't luck as to how I ended up becoming a PM. I sort of took the same approach showing up at the office asking if there were any roles.

(00:11:08):
By then, we had moved to 156 University and all of the PMs and engineers worked on the second floor, and I was working in marketing, like I mentioned, and I worked on the third floor and all the business functions worked on the third floor, and my goal was to be a PM. I ended up going, sort of the analogy, I went to the second floor most days after work, asked if there were any projects that I could help out with.

(00:11:34):
It was very early days. There was always more to do than people to do it. And so eventually I picked up a few projects, helping with program management, giving my product feedback, and by the time that I actually applied formally to be a product manager, I had been doing the job voluntarily, almost informally for a few months.

(00:11:58):
And I remember this because I had a seat on the third floor. I picked up all the stuff on my desk, put it in a box, walked down to the second floor once I got the job to become a PM. And when I got to the second floor, I distinctly remember everyone on the second floor standing and clapping. And so it was a big standing ovation. I'll never forget, Boz was there, by the way. I know Boz has been on your podcast, but even Boz was there sort of standing and clapping. And so I guess to the lesson that you were trying to extract from my story, I do think I sort of tried to create the luck by not giving up and just repeatedly cold calling or cold showing up or cold volunteering until I sort of was able to make it happen.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:51):
Amazing. Again, very empowering. It's not just like, "Oh, there's these people that just get lucky they land this PM job." It's like you landed at the company. I want to be a product manager, which is interesting. Most people don't grow up in I want to be a product manager. That's like a rare thing people even want, especially that early on. So it's interesting that you already knew that, but you basically did the job. You did the job of PM before you had the job, and by the time you actually asked for it, you've been doing it for a long time and you could show, "Hey, look, I'm actually good at this. I can do this job." Awesome.

(00:13:22):
By the way, I love the Boz connection. I'm finding that Boz is connected to the most guests of this podcast in so many different ways.

Naomi Gleit (00:13:29):
Really?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:29):
Curious. Yeah, like Ami and-

Naomi Gleit (00:13:32):
Oh yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:33):
And a few other people. It's just interesting. There's a Boz spiderweb of connections throughout this podcast so far. Okay, so I'm going to fast-forward to today. So your role today is head of product at Meta?

Naomi Gleit (00:13:46):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:46):
What does that mean? What do you do at Meta today? How would you describe your role?

Naomi Gleit (00:13:52):
There are a few thousand PMs at Meta. They do not all report to me. I would say a few hundred of them report to me on the teams that I directly manage, but I feel responsible for the entire PM community at Meta. There are things that we do centrally, things like PM performance, PM culture PM onboarding and training, and that's the kind of thing that I look out for.

(00:14:16):
Obviously I wanted to be a PM. Head of product is my dream job. I am deeply supportive of the PM function, and so I really care and I think PMs are a huge point of leverage in a company for how we can actually get stuff done and help accomplish the company's goals. And so I sort of focus on PM as a really important exponential lever for doing that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:45):
I love that. Okay. I'm going to come back to what you've learned about what makes super successful PMs, what makes you really successful. I want to take a tangent to Zuck.

Naomi Gleit (00:14:54):
Please. Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:56):
So you've known Zuck for over 20 years at this point, and I just have to ask a few Zuck questions because people are always curious to learn from what has worked so well for him. The first question is just there's been a pretty profound transformation in Mark over the past few years, both in terms of how he leads and also just in his coolness and vibe factor. What are your thoughts on just this transformation and how he's been able to pull it off?

Naomi Gleit (00:15:22):
So I've always said that there is the biggest gap of anybody I know between what people think of Mark and who Mark really is. And so I think this is the Mark that I've known for the past 20 years and the world is finally getting to see what I've been lucky enough to see. And that gap that we've talked about is really starting to close.

(00:15:46):
How did we get here? I always say Mark is a learn it all, not a know-it-all. He is the fastest person at upskilling of anyone I've ever met. He used to do these annual challenges. One year I did them with him, it was learning Chinese, and within a year he was able to basically achieve an eighth grade fluency in Chinese. And that's just one example. Obviously, he's gotten incredibly great at guitar, MMA, a lot of his passions, but he's also gotten a lot better at some of the professional skills. And I think negotiation, public speaking is one of those. I think before in the early days, it just wasn't something that he was very comfortable with. He's talked himself about coming across as a little scripted. I think he was not confident and pretty careful about how he showed up and he's upskilled here. He's just gotten a lot more comfortable, and so people are able to see who he really is.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:44):
He was also like, I don't know, 20 something when he started Facebook and now he's running a 80,000 person org. I could see the emotion habits.

Naomi Gleit (00:16:52):
Yes. I think he might've been 19 or 20 when I came.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:56):
Oh God, that's insane. So yeah, I could see why someone would change. I was at the Acquired podcast Chase event with him being interviewed, and he's just such a cool dude now. He just has these big shirts with his own letters on it, his own phrases, his chain. What a cool dude.

Naomi Gleit (00:17:16):
His long hair.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:17):
His long hair.

Naomi Gleit (00:17:18):
His watch. Yeah, I was at that event too. I thought it was great. I think, yeah, that's the no gap between who Mark is and what the world sees.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:30):
I love that. Is there something about Zuck that you know that most people don't know? Something that would surprise us?

Naomi Gleit (00:17:37):
The one thing I would say about Mark is I think people know he's married. He has three daughters. He's a really great dad, he's a really great husband. I would say he's also a really good friend. Maybe that's something that I can sort of speak to from experience. He's just an incredibly thoughtful friend. There was a period in my life, I think it was 10 years ago when I was going through just sort of a really hard time. I had come out of a breakup, but Mark saw that I was having a hard time. He asked me if I wanted to volunteer to teach a class in East Palo Alto after their school day.

(00:18:15):
And in retrospect, it's pretty funny, but Mark and I taught a class about how to build a business. So you had the CEO of Meta teaching this class to a bunch of middle school students, and we got really close to them through that process. We made some really important mentorship connections. For years, we met with them. I think we still continue to, even though they've now at this point graduated from college and have real jobs.

(00:18:43):
But one of the lessons that we taught during that class that I remember Mark distinctly writing on the whiteboard, or not the whiteboard, there actually was chalk, it was with chalk on a chalkboard with the four life lessons. That was one, and I kept these for myself as well, love yourself. Two, only then can you truly serve others. Three, focus on what you can control. And four, for those things never give up.

(00:19:12):
And that was sort of his life lessons, four steps to how to approach life. And we actually made stickers for these four steps that the students could actually put on their composition notebooks as a reminder. And I think obviously that has really helped me over time, but I think that in that you can see some of what I think we all see in Mark, for example, for those things never give up. He has that aspect of him and it makes sense. For me number three is really the hardest, which is focus on what you can control. I think I probably think I can control more things than I actually can.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:53):
So do we all. I love that he was sharing that in a class on how to start a business, this life advice.

Naomi Gleit (00:20:00):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:02):
Oh man, that's amazing. I want to chat a bit about, so at this point is 86,000 employees, something like that. That's what I found online. So he has to run this massive org as this CEO, one person. I know that one way that he does this, he has something called a small group. Is that the term?

Naomi Gleit (00:20:24):
Yes, small group.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:25):
Okay, cool. So he's got the small group that he calls it and it's essentially is like core execs and this group meets regularly, and that's kind of how he's able to manage the entire org through this small group. For people that are struggling to run an increasingly larger org, are there any tidbits from how Mark and the small group operate that might be helpful to folks?

Naomi Gleit (00:20:47):
Sure. So I think the first thing is small group is sort of the leadership team. It's the leaders working on the most important projects at the company, sort of independent of reporting structure and stuff. It's like who are the leaders on the big most important projects or functions? They will be represented in small group.

(00:21:08):
What makes this group unique? A lot of them are people like me, people that have been there for a very long time. So I think the tenure of small group is really rare. Why I think that's important is you have a lot of people that are motivated by mission rather than climbing the corporate ladder at this point. And so there are a lot of what I call disagreeable givers.

(00:21:34):
So just to back up, I don't know if you've heard this framework, but I think I learned this from Adam Grant during an executive learning and development session, and he was saying that if you think of a two-by-two, there's people who are agreeable and disagreeable, and then there's people who are givers and takers.

(00:21:52):
And the most dangerous kind of person to have in an organization is an agreeable taker. And what that means is an agreeable person, super nice, everyone likes them, really easy to get along with, but they're a taker and maybe their motivation is more self-interested rather than what's best for the company, which is how I would define a giver. And the most precious person in an organization is the disagreeable giver. Those are the people who are really motivated to do what's best for the company, but they can be a little bit disagreeable in the sense that they may not say what you want to hear. They may push back on things, they may fight for things. And so I think small group is characterized by a lot of disagreeable givers and I think that's really important for an organization.

(00:22:41):
One thing I think Mark has done really well in general is just have a culture, including on his leadership team, of people who give him feedback. I think a lot of times as you get more successful or as you have more fame or if you have more wealth, you lose having an accurate feedback loop. And people may not want to be a hundred percent honest with you for various reasons. And Mark has tried to ensure that he himself has an accurate feedback loop, or we as a company have more of an accurate feedback loop by surrounding himself and our leadership team and creating a culture of giving direct and honest feedback. So that's some of the unique properties of small group.

(00:23:25):
From a process perspective, we have one weekly sort of strategic meeting. It's more open-ended, there is time for discussion. It's longer and it's sort of more unstructured. We also have one weekly operational meeting, which is highly structured where we go through all of the priority projects. The person who owns each of the projects will actually speak to the weekly updates for that project. And it's very operational and tactical.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:55):
Awesome. I just love this name, small group. It's just like a cozy name. It's not like executive staff or ESA after all these terms people always use. And that's just our small group.

Naomi Gleit (00:24:07):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:09):
And then this framework you described, it sounds a lot like radical candor of challenging directly, but caring deeply.

Naomi Gleit (00:24:16):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:16):
Where being disagreeable, but being constructive and additive. Is that the term? What was it? Disagreeable, but?

Naomi Gleit (00:24:23):
A giver.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:24):
Giver? Yeah.

Naomi Gleit (00:24:25):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:26):
Okay. That's great.

Naomi Gleit (00:24:26):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:28):
If there's nothing here, totally cool. But is there something that you changed Mark's mind about? You've talked about he's good at seeing new data and being like, "Oh, okay, I see, I see." Or is there anything that you were successful there that is an interesting story?

Naomi Gleit (00:24:42):
One of the things that we did in the early days on the growth team, because I'm not sure that necessarily when we talk about this sort of legacy or the history or the lore around the growth team, and this may not be a direct answer to the question, but it didn't really necessarily-

Naomi Gleit (00:25:00):
And this may not be a direct answer to the question, but it didn't really necessarily come from Mark. Mark wasn't like, "You guys should create a growth team. Here's how you should operate." And so I think in some ways we established and grew a growth team and Mark got on board or saw the value in it and was a huge proponent of it, but I'm not sure it necessarily originated with him. And indeed, I think sometimes the focus on being so data- driven might've been something that myself, Alex Schultz, Javier Olavon, these are some of the original people that were on the growth team and that my closest coworkers now may have really pushed on and highlighted the value of for Mark. I'm happy to talk about the growth team, which is something I get asked a lot of questions about, if you want.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:53):
Yeah, I'd love to. That's exactly where I was about to segue since you brought that up. So the Facebook growth team, it's a legendary team. I think it was probably the first real growth team in tech. The team developed some of the most core growth levers and techniques that companies use today, and so I'm really excited to chat a bit about this and what you learned from that time. One thing I wanted to start with is there's this legendary activation metric that you all had, the goal was to get, I think it was seven friends in 10 days or something like that. Is that a real thing? Is that what you guys actually did? Anything more there for folks that are like, "Oh, we got to come up with something like this"?

Naomi Gleit (00:26:30):
Sure. So yes, seven friends in 10 days was a thing. 10 friends in 14 days was also a thing. They're the same thing, they're just different points on a retention curve. I would say the key insight here is when we started the growth team, I think we were pretty focused on acquisition. We had a notion though of growth accounting, which looks at what's our net growth every day? And that would look at the number of new users that registered minus the number of users that actually went stale. So after a 30-day period, that's how we define it, they no longer logged in. And then plus the number of users that resurrected, which is after 30 days they came back. And what we found was the churn in resurrection lines were actually much larger than the new user line, which implied to us that retention and driving those two lines was actually our biggest lever to drive net growth.

(00:27:22):
And so while we were focused on acquisition, a lot of our focus shifted to be around engagement and retention. How do we drive engagement and retention? We look at the variables that correlate most with that outcome. What we found was friending. And so those two magic moments, having seven friends in 10 days or 10 friends in 14 days really just map to when we feel like your likelihood of being a retained user goes up because you've seen the value in Facebook. And it makes sense, Facebook is much more compelling if you have 14 friends. And the other thing around 10 or 14 days is we wanted it to happen quickly, we wanted to have you experience the magic moment soon after you had registered on the site to prevent you from churning and then us having to resurrect you again.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:17):
One of the most interesting lessons from this activation metric that people talk about, because right now everyone's like, "Yeah, of course retention is what you need to focus on. That's what product-market fit is." I think right now that's what everyone knows. I love that you guys basically figured that out, was one of the first times of, "Here's how we understand if our product will last and how to grow retention because it matters most." And retention cohort curves I think was one of the innovations y'all thought about early of just like, "Here's how we track retention, people joining at a certain time, how long do they stick around?"

Naomi Gleit (00:28:48):
Totally. And that was Danny Ferrante who really came up with the growth accounting framework, which I guess is quite obvious, but the plus new minus stale plus resurrected. The thing that I feel like may be valuable for PMs and is one of my Naomi-isms is I think what the growth team really pioneered was being data-driven and product-driven, especially in an area that was historically more of a business function. So I think at that time a lot of the growth in new users was expected to come from marketing or comms, whereas the insight that we had is actually the product is the biggest lever to drive growth, and that means we should have a product and engineering team working on optimizing things like the registration flow, the invite flow, the new user onboarding, getting you seven friends in 10 days.

(00:29:43):
One of my Naomi-isms is really understand, identify, and execute. That framework came from 2009 where the growth team at the time, it was fledgling and it just started, was focused on only instrumenting data. And Alex often wears a shirt that says, "I guess when you can know." We just didn't have the data that we needed to make informed decisions to know really what were the biggest levers to drive growth. And so in 2009 in January, we basically stopped doing anything on our roadmap except data instrumentation. And that's when we instrumented every step of the registration flow, instrumented every step of the news or onboarding experience. We knew where there was drop off. And so we understood, which allowed us to identify what were the key opportunities to drive growth and maybe, hey, it's increasing friending in the user experience or 20% drop off on registered users at the email confirmation step, how can we address that? These are the opportunities that we identified and then we would execute by building products.

(00:30:50):
So having this data-driven product-driven approach to what I think historically was more of a business responsibility at a company was sort of the special sauce of the growth team. We eventually extended that approach. I think that approach started with the growth team, but we extended to other areas. So for example, one of the projects that I took on after growth was social impact. And instead of what I think a normal company might do, which is start a corporate social responsibility wing, we decided, no, we're going to take a data-driven product-driven approach to driving social impact. Instead of having a foundation that's distributing money, we're going to build a product that actually raises money from our community. And many years later we've raised billions of dollars from the community for charity. So that's sort of the approach that I think is unique about the growth team that expanded to other areas and that I think that the company in many ways has taken to most of the problems that we face.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:55):
That's such a good point. And I almost took that for granted, but there was such a huge shift that y'all started from moving from marketing being the driver of growth to product and data and experiments and all that stuff. And so I think that's such a good reminder that, fun fact on the social good team, I'm really close friends with the designer that was on my team, his name's Mickey. He was on that team for a while and really enjoyed and yeah, really enjoyed working with you. Fun fact.

Naomi Gleit (00:32:22):
Oh, that's so great. I remember Mickey, what is his last name?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:26):
Settler.

Naomi Gleit (00:32:27):
Okay. Yes, I definitely remember this, yes. And social impact is just one thing that I think I'm really proud of. And again, remember social impact used to be a business thing. You would create this corporate social responsibility part of the company that was very separate from the product and engineering team.

(00:32:48):
Another thing that we did in the early days was there was a juncture where it was like, "How are we going to translate this site?" And I think we could have taken more of a non-technical traditional approach and had professional translators translate the entire site into the different languages, and instead sort of what the growth team suggested was why don't we build a version of Facebook that allows you to make translations in line? And so the community of people using Facebook at the time who actually knew the product the best could actually insert translations and there was a whole system that we built around how to up-rank the best translations and down-rank, sort of like Wikipedia. And to this day, we have over 100 languages supported. So we're always trying to find these product technology solutions to these sort of traditional problems.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:39):
I totally remember that, where it's like you ask your users to help translate the site.

Naomi Gleit (00:33:43):
Yes, yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:46):
I want to come back real quick to the activation metric because it's something that a lot of people somewhat misuse and think maybe incorrectly about. So to come up with an activation, as you described, you basically figure out what's the regression of if someone does X, retention increases, and so let's focus on getting them there. And a lot of people struggle with coming up with that metric. Do you have any thoughts on just how important it was to have that very specific activation milestone of seven exact friends in exactly 10 days versus the value of just having anything that is a rallying point for everyone to focus on and drive?

Naomi Gleit (00:34:19):
I think the majority of the value is in the latter, is just having extreme clarity around the goal and that allowed everybody to work towards optimizing the same goal. You're right, we did sort of just pick a point on the curve. I think it could have been any of those. And indeed, as part of preparing for this, I was like, "Was it seven friends in 10 days?" I had to go back and I asked a few people that I worked with back in the day and they were like, "Well, I thought it was 10 in 14." I mean, I think it doesn't matter, it's just that we picked one of them and what mattered there was we had the same goal, what mattered was that it was a retention goal or an activation metric.

(00:34:59):
And one of the most important things that actually came out of having that goal was building a new user experience. Believe it or not, when we first launched Facebook, I wasn't around then, but in the early days of when it was just a college site, we didn't need a news or onboarding. We didn't need to explain to people that they had to find their friends. They were sort of automagically connected to everyone on the college campus and sort of knew how to use this product, it felt very intuitive. Again, we were college students building a product for other college students. They were sitting next to each other in libraries or at desks and sort of through osmosis understanding how the product worked.

(00:35:38):
It was more when we launched the ability for teens to register and then work networks, and then in 2006 open registration where we started getting all kinds of people with any email address, before it was .edu or a microsoft.com email address that was required in order to sign up for Facebook and then anyone with any email just could register including people like my dad and my grandma that we realized, wow, in order to get people to this magic moment, how are we going to do that? What's the most effective way that insight resulted in building a new user experience? I remember it was just like step one, upload your profile picture. That was really important so people could find you and know who you were. Step two, find your friends. That's where a lot of the contact importing and people you may know and, "Here are other people at your school and here are mutual friends." That step in the news or experience ultimately became one of the most important drivers of that activation metric that we talked about.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:40):
I love that you shared that, such a recurring theme on this podcast, the power of onboarding, the value of investing in onboarding and the ripple effects of opportunities there. I love that you also were kind of like the first like, "Onboarding, that's a thing, we need onboarding."

Naomi Gleit (00:36:55):
I know. I mean, I remember the day where I was like, "Do we need to explain to people how to use this? Is it not obvious?" And it's like my dad's like, "I don't understand this whatsoever." My dad would go on to become Facebook's biggest power user because I always beta tested everything with him. But that was not obvious to us at the time in 2006 that we had to explain to people how to use Facebook.

(00:37:25):
And again, remember that it's fun talking about this because obviously the product has evolved so much, but the principles are relatively the same. It was thefacebook.com, eventually it became facebook.com, but eventually we built a mobile app and then it was mobile first product, and then it was about mobile photos, and then it was about mobile videos. So over time, the technology has really changed, but the core use case that we really need to educate people on, which is how to connect with their friends on Facebook and whatever iteration or product is the same. And so obviously we still have an onboarding today and it's relatively the same principles, like get a profile picture and find your friends.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:12):
Along those same lines, just maybe a last question around the growth stuff that you worked on for folks that are thinking of driving growth, working on onboarding maybe specifically just are there any lessons from things that worked super well when you were looking to accelerate growth of the Facebook early on that you think people are maybe sleeping on as lepers and tactics that worked back then that might still be really powerful today?

Naomi Gleit (00:38:36):
Well, definitely the understand, identify, execute. I would just ask yourselves, do you have the data that you need to know what you need to do on growth? And if not, definitely take the time to instrument that data.

(00:38:49):
The thing that, I think we were relatively lucky, I talked about why I was bullish on Facebook in 2005 even was because there was product-market fit. And so for us growth, as much credit as we give to the growth team, I'm actually not sure how much credit we deserve and how much incremental growth we drove above and beyond the fact that this was a product that had product-market fit and we benefited in a huge amount from having high demand for the product.

(00:39:23):
So at every step, and I talked about the growth team, the projects that we were working on were really at a high level around removing barriers. There were macro barriers, like the first project I worked on was high school students on Facebook, which is an interesting story in and of itself because at that time we almost created a separate website called Facebook High just to keep them separate from the college students. But at that time we were like, "No, this is one graph. This is one community. College students have friends and people they're connected to of all different ages. Why bifurcate the graph?" And obviously we've maintained that principle ever since.

(00:40:04):
But it was about removing barriers. So you had to be a college student, then you had to be a high school student, then you had to be in a work network, then you had to have any email address. One of the next projects I worked on was not everyone has access to a smartphone, how can we remove the barrier of having access to a smartphone and building more of a rich Facebook experience for someone that was using a feature phone or a lower-end device? Internet.org, what about removing the barrier of having access to the internet or being able to afford a data plan? And so those are the macro barriers that thematically the growth team has worked on.

(00:40:40):
What I would say is maybe applicable is really the micro barriers. All of the work that we did on growth around optimizing the flows were really about removing micro barriers. One of the things that I thought was just so elegant was after we did that 2009 instrumentation of all the flows, the product flows relevant to growth, what we found is 20% of people aren't actually confirming their email. We tried sending them an SMS, so maybe they would confirm the SMS instead. What we found was a lot of people are actually still clicking on notifications that they're getting, but because it wasn't the specific confirmation email, we weren't able to confirm the account.

(00:41:21):
And so what we did was allow people to get notifications even as an unconfirmed account, and then if they clicked on any of those notifications, that would count as an account confirmation as well because they proved ownership of the email. It's just removing a micro barrier of having to go find the confirmation email, click it before you can do anything on the site. So I do think we've been relatively lucky in having a lot of high demand That meant that we could focus on just removing micro barriers. And then on the growth team, a lot of the iterations and optimizations were about removing just sort of friction.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:56):
I love that framework of micro barriers and macro barriers, just thinking about ways to make this accessible to more people and also just helping them get through the flow faster. I also love your point about how a lot of growth teams get a lot of credit for growing a business when really in many ways it could have done really well even without that team potentially because product-market fit was so strong. I think about this with Airbnb honestly as just such after it gets to a certain point, such good product-market fit that who knows what would've happen if there was no one working on growth? It probably would've been okay for a long time.

Naomi Gleit (00:42:27):
Totally. And then maybe where we do sort of see the impact is maybe something like the translations thing that we talked about. With the macro barrier, removing the language barrier, and so maybe the approach we took meant that we supported 100 plus languages instead of whatever the professional translators, we have the long tail of languages so that last person who's still speaking a near extinct language can still use Facebook. But yeah, I think that's right. I sometimes think that maybe some of our efforts were really more on the margin of a bigger trend around product-market fit.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:06):
Final little thing I would just want to highlight again that you said that I think is so important, and I've always thought is true and I love that you confirmed it, is that the activation metric that you all rallied around the biggest value of it wasn't this is exactly the right regression connection to retention, it's more that we have something we are all going to focus on, and that is where most of the impact comes from is let's get more people to that point, whether it's perfectly right or not, it doesn't really matter.

Naomi Gleit (00:43:32):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:32):
Love that. And I think that's really freeing to a lot of people because they're like, "Oh, we don't know if we're going to be as perfect about this versus let's just drive some growth and get people who are good enough thinking on that." Okay, great.

(00:43:45):
You mentioned Naomi-isms, I want to segue to that. So let me first read a quote. So I asked Adam Mosseri, who is Head of Instagram, what to ask you. I know you guys work together on a bunch of stuff. Here's how he described you, "Naomi is called the conductor here at Meta. She has an incredible ability to handle the most complex projects and problems and bring the right people together to simplify and solve them. She is very firm yet kind. Her standards are extremely high, and she sets the bar." Also many other people that I messaged said very similar things about you, about how you're incredibly good at taking very complex problems and getting shit done, getting them done, simplifying them and getting them done.

(00:44:27):
So I want to spend some time understanding what you've learned about how to do this well. What are the skills you've collected that allow you to take really complex problems and get to a solution, stay kind but firm and take on these really hard challenges? So maybe just broadly, I'm curious, what are some of these skills that you have built that allow you to do this?

Naomi Gleit (00:44:51):
Yeah, well also that's very kind of Adam. I adore Adam obviously, he is one of the tenured people in small group and I've actually gotten the opportunity to work even more closely with him than usual. We recently launched something called Teen Accounts and Adam and I worked very closely on that.

(00:45:10):
In terms of how I do the things people say that I can do, I really rely on Naomi-isms. Like I said, and actually I refer your podcast out a lot because there isn't just a PM university that I can send people to, there isn't a formal training that people can get to become a product manager, and that's where Naomi-isms came from. It was stuff that I learned on the job from other people, including from Adam, that I found myself repeating over and over again. "A good PM looks for a way to make that more efficient," for me, that was writing them down, people started calling them Naomi-isms. I started sharing them internally. And then I think two years ago, I also started sharing them externally.

(00:45:52):
Adam referred to me as a conductor, that's one of the Naomi-isms, in my role as Head of Product, I want to educate the PM community about what is PM? It's the most common question I get from PMs and non-PMs, "What do PMs do? What makes a great PM?" And what I say is a PM is a conductor. It's as though the team that you are a PM on is an orchestra. There are many different functions in your team that includes legal policy, comms, data analytics, engineering, design, much like there are many different instruments in an orchestra. And as a PM, your job is to make sure everyone's playing their part correctly, every section in the orchestra is playing their part, but at the same time, they're playing together, they're unified in the music that they're producing and that they're playing at the right tempo.

(00:46:48):
And a lot of times I think people use music analogies or vocabulary to describe the work, and that includes things like people being in harmony, like a good team, a good PM, a good orchestra is in harmony, they're in sync, they're at the right tempo, they have the right cadence. That's sort of how I imagine what a PM does at work. Important characteristics are the PM is not the star of the show. Indeed, conductors don't even say anything during the performance. And also, I would at the same time give PMs little metronomes and conductor wands. This was something that I used to do when we were smaller., Just to sort of take the analogy way too far.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:29):
That's so funny. You actually gave him conductor wands and metronomes?

Naomi Gleit (00:47:32):
Oh yeah, just to wave around. Yeah, I love that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:35):
I would love a conductor wand.

(00:47:38):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing and feature management platform built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams. Companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth and for understanding the performance of new features. And Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I left most was our experimentation platform where could set up experiments easily, troubleshoot issues, and analyze performance all on my own. Eppo does all that and more with advanced statistical methods that can help you shave weeks off experiment time, and accessible UI for diving deeper into performance and out of the box reporting that helps you avoid annoying prolonged analytic cycles. Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insight with your team, sparking new ideas for the A/B testing flywheel. Eppo powers experimentation across every use case, including product, growth, machine learning, monetization, and email marketing. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com/lenny and 10x your experiment velocity. That's geteppo.com/lenny.

Naomi Gleit (00:48:57):
So PM as conductor is sort of how I describe the product management function, but one of the key Naomi-isms that I think is really critical to getting stuff done is what I call extreme clarity. I think our jobs are super hard. Extreme clarity means everyone's on the same page. It definitely doesn't mean that they all agree with each other, but they just have the same understanding of the facts. So we can disagree, but we all believe in the facts, which is that there's A, B, C, our options are X, Y, Z and here are the trade-offs 1, 2, 3. That kind of shared understanding is what extreme clarity is.

(00:49:36):
That came from a place of just being in many meetings, on many emails, in many situations where I felt like we actually agree on something, the nature of this conflict is a result of misunderstanding. And that seems like an incredible waste of time. And so we want to have extreme clarity so we can just focus our conversations on things when we actually agree, not when we are misunderstanding each other. There are a lot of tactics that I use to drive extreme clarity.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:03):
Yeah, I was going to ask how you do that, that sounds great.

Naomi Gleit (00:50:00):
... Tactics that I use to drive extreme clarity.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:03):
Yeah, I was going to ask how do you do that. That sounds great. How does one get to extreme clarity?

Naomi Gleit (00:50:07):
So another name I'm using is canonical everything, so that includes canonical nomenclature, I often talk about canonical nomenclature. One way to ensure extreme clarity is we have the shared vocabulary. I've been in a lot of situations where people are using the same or different words to describe the same or different things, which results in talking past each other. One of the most egregious examples of this is when I was working, I was in a conversation around how our reviewers and global operations were performing, and we were using consistency and accuracy interchangeably. Consistency refers to how often different reviewers agree on the decision. Accuracy refers to how often the decision is correct according to ground truth. Those are very different things. We don't want to optimize for consistency because you could be consistently wrong. We want to optimize for accuracy.

(00:50:56):
And so that is what canonical nomenclature is literally writing out all the words in their definitions, so when we communicate, we are using the same vocabulary. I really believe in visuals. I think sometimes just having a conversation or a big meeting where people are talking, I'm just not very auditory, I'm a very visual person, it's hard for me to follow along just by listening. I will often have a visual in a meeting. I will leverage that visual to literally real time edit what is being decided. For example, if we have multiple options, I will edit the slide that's being projected to say, "We decided on option one, here are the next steps, 1, 2, 3." A lot of times people are saying, "That's not what I heard. I heard this as a next step, or I heard that as a next step." I love that because that avoids leaving the meeting and being like, "I don't know what we agreed to. I heard this, you heard that." No, actually we haven't agreed upon set of decisions and next steps that we all real time edited and looked at together.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:54):
Just to double click on that one real quick, so what you're describing for the visual is you're presenting here's our options, here's our three options on a slide. You all decide we're going to go with option two, you edit the slide with a star, here's what we chose, and then maybe change some stuff. And this is exactly to your point of extreme clarity, people can see clearly this is what we're choosing. If they disagree and don't realize that's what's happening, it'll be really clear.

Naomi Gleit (00:52:17):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:18):
Awesome.

Naomi Gleit (00:52:19):
And one thing people make fun of me a lot for that I think is just a great example of extreme clarity is I never use bulleted lists because you can never refer to a bullet. I always use numbered lists because you can always in the visual in a meeting as referenced in number two, I have feedback on that, versus the third bullet, two up from the second, whatever, that is not extreme clarity. So it's very, very small tactical things to bigger things like canonical everything. But I can be a little bit strict.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:54):
I love that very tactical tip and that is awesome, that's exactly the stuff I look for. Is there any other very nuanced tip along those lines that is helpful in extreme clarity or canonical everything?

Naomi Gleit (00:53:09):
Canonical everything... And stop me if I'm getting too wonky, I can really get into this.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:16):
We got a ways to go.

Naomi Gleit (00:53:18):
When I had a face bursary, along the years people have given me posters and the posters say these Naomi-ism, so extreme clarity is one, canonical everything is another. I think people really associate me with canonical, canonical, canonical. I always want a canonical doc. This came from a place of me I work on a lot of different projects, a lot of times I'm ramping up mid-project, I'm like, "Where can I learn what I need to learn about this project?" I ask five different people, get five different answers, that is unacceptable. Everyone should know exactly where the canonical doc is. That's the one place I can go to get all the information I need about a project and it will link to all the other docs. Of course, I'm sure there's hundreds of docs associated with the project, but there needs to be one canonical doc, and that canonical doc really has to have the basic information that you need to know.

(00:54:05):
For any project, the basic information that you need to know is what are the discrete areas of work, I call those work streams, this is pretty obvious. Who are the owners on those work streams? So for every work stream there's an owner. Again, it seems pretty obvious. Sometimes I'm like, "Who's owning this?" And it's like people don't know. That's why I think it's very important to have a single-threaded owner. We used to call this a directly responsible individual or a throat to choke. We obviously don't say that anymore. Single-threaded owner, every work stream has a single-threaded owner. Sometimes work streams are really big. You have sub work streams underneath them. Everything canonical needs to recurse, so you should have an owner or an STO for the sub work stream. The other things on the canonical doc are what is the process by which the people on this team work together.

(00:54:54):
I hate pairwise conversations. I feel like they're a waste of time. I feel like you could have four conversations with four different people or one conversation with all four people. Everyone has the same context. Ideally there's a visual in that meeting and you real time edited it, there is extreme clarity. The canonical doc will have what is the canonical meetings that people have, what is the canonical email list that you're going to use, what is the canonical workplace chat. Let's not reinvent the same audience 10 different times with different permutations of the people on the working team. Let's just have one canonical chat. And then often the canonical doc will have the canonical nomenclature. I really believe in frameworks for things that helps drive extreme clarity. A framework is best understood when there's a visual representation of the framework in my mind, and so we'll have canonical visuals and that's what I mean by canonical everything. So anytime I start on a new project, everyone knows to send me the canonical doc.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:52):
I love this. If you come into a that you've given that's really gnarly and complex, what do you find are the first couple things you do that make a big dent on helping everyone align and understand what happens, what they should be doing and what they should be prioritizing?

Naomi Gleit (00:56:12):
A lot of times I'm simplifying. A lot of times there isn't a canonical doc and so I'll go through the process of creating that, but I think that really falls under the simplification thing. I often go into a project, everyone's operating at a PhD level, I'm coming in at a kindergarten level, and so I need to understand... It's almost like all of this complexity we're at a PhD level, I need to create the curriculum, go back to basic building blocks for the kindergarten level, how do I explain that and understand this project at a kindergarten level. It doesn't mean I want to oversimplify, that's not what a simplifier does. They're not oversimplifying, but what they are doing is identifying the most basic building blocks of a complex problem and then unfolding, or revealing or building on top of them additional complexity and details as you go along.

(00:57:06):
And so sometimes I talk about a school pyramid, but I need to establish the kindergarten curriculum and then the elementary school curriculum and then the high school curriculum and then the college curriculum, and then we can operate at the PhD level. But oftentimes people on the project are at really different levels of understanding or complexity. And until we have what we call the school pyramid, the curriculums for every level of the project, it's really hard to make progress. A lot of times that process of simplification will often identify what are the most important things to deal with on the project.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:48):
And so what I'm hearing is when you come into a project and the way you simplify is you start putting together a doc that describes these things you're talking about, here's the work streams, here's the owners, here's the process, here's our canonical meeting style, and that reveals here's what matters most and where there's confusion.

Naomi Gleit (00:58:07):
Yes, yes. Yeah, that is. And a lot of times what needs to happen in the project is sometimes there's a strategy or an execution issue and sometimes there's a people or a process issue. I would say 80% of the time I think it's a people or process issue. And that refers to not having the right people on the project, or having the right people but not having the right process by which they work together, a strategy or execution issue. When we get to that, I first try to tackle those or in general I think it's really important to have perfect execution. I want to make sure a project is perfectly executing, because only then can we really reevaluate whether or not this strategy is right or wrong. We're in the worst of all worlds where we are imperfectly executing and therefore, at the end of the day, the project might fail, but we don't know why.

(00:59:02):
Is it because the strategy was right or wrong or is it because the execution was poor? The ideal case is the strategy was right and you perfectly executed on it. The next best case scenario is the strategy was wrong, but you perfectly executed on it, because then you learned the strategy was wrong. Revamp the strategy and try again.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:22):
You're really in the PM part of my brain. I feel like most PMs listening are like it has clean documents, really simple processes, there's one person to charge, it links to everything. It just feels good.

Naomi Gleit (00:59:34):
Totally. And, again, sometimes I feel the need to defend that the process is not for process' sake, it's ultimately to help us all move faster and work better. So hopefully that comes through. But I deeply believe that it is through this approach that we can move faster. And you have to prove that nobody wants more process and more meetings and more, but my goal is that with this we're actually simplifying process and getting less meetings and just making things clearer and ultimately moving faster.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:08):
I'm going to read another quote from another one of your co-workers, Charles Porch, he's vice president of global partnerships at Instagram and he basically said what we've been talking about, some of the biggest strategic bets and biggest swings Meta has made have had Naomi at the helm. No one can hurt cats, drive clarity, and get to outcomes more seamlessly than she can. She's legendary within Meta for her canonical documents.

Naomi Gleit (01:00:33):
Great.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:34):
Maybe just following this thread a little bit further, what's the gnarliest project that you've worked on that would be a good example of you coming in and helping simplify and get it over the finish line?

Naomi Gleit (01:00:47):
Well, Charles may be thinking of the most recent project that we worked on. I don't know if it's necessarily the gnarliest, but it's definitely one of the most cross-functional projects that I've worked on before. Basically every team at the company in some way works on youth. And last week we actually launched teen accounts, which was a very complex project. Again, it involved the Instagram team, the central youth team, the different teams working on various aspects of this, every function, legal policy, comms, marketing product. And I think we definitely leveraged a lot of these Naomi-isms. And just to give you a sense of what teen accounts is, it was basically putting all teens into the safest settings by default on Instagram. And the reason I'm working on this, I work across multiple teams at Facebook, so obviously Adam is the head of Instagram and I work closely with him on this, like I was referring to yesterday.

(01:02:02):
But this is something, these teen accounts, is something that we are thinking about how we expand to the other apps that we have, including Facebook and WhatsApp and Threads. And I tend to work on projects that are across our family of apps and future platforms, and that's why I was involved in this. But basically what teen accounts does is put teens in these safest settings. It's super focused on trying to address parents' biggest concerns around their teens on social media. This has obviously been a really big topic. We've had a lot of these features and tools. What this launch did is simplify things, standardize things, and add a lot more functionality that gives parents control.

(01:02:42):
I think the thing you really need to know is that for under 16-year-olds, if they want to change any of these defaults, they're going to have to get their parents' permission. And so it's interesting that we're really going to create an incentive for teens to get their parents involved and to actually set up parental supervision, especially because one of the default settings is a private account. So there's tens of millions of teens that currently have public accounts today that we are going to automatically transition to private accounts unless they get their parents' permission to stay public. And so it's a relatively big shift, fundamental change for how Instagram works for teens, and I would say one of the more complicated projects that I've worked.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:28):
Yeah, and it just launched, right?

Naomi Gleit (01:03:30):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:31):
As a new father, I'm excited for you all to be working on these sorts of things. I don't need it yet, but I'm glad it's going to be there. And it's funny how Meta and Facebook is in this world where people complain about teens using social media and then you work on making the product better for teens and kids using social media, and then it's like, "Facebook's getting teens on social media." There's no way to make it feel good to people. No matter what you do, people are going to complain. That's what-

Naomi Gleit (01:04:00):
Totally. And I think the goal of this launch was to orient ourselves and really there's a lot of complaints, there's a lot of different voices. I think we just are focused on parents. We think parents know best. Every kid is different and parents know their own kid the best. So that has been our north star in terms of the approach here. When I talk about teen accounts, as product people I think one thing that you would appreciate is the thing that I think is really important when it comes to teens on the internet is really having an understanding of how old someone is when they're using our apps. And it's important that we know how old they are because then we can put them in an age-appropriate experience. So now we have teen accounts, we want to put all teens into teen accounts.

(01:04:49):
We all know sometimes teens lie. That's been the biggest feedback that we've been getting is teens are really smart, they're going to find workarounds, they're going to be creative, they're going to lie about their age. And as a product person, the way that I think this should really work is that instead of everyone entering... Teens use, on average, 40 apps, instead of Instagram and the other 39 apps that teens use trying to verify the age of the person using their app is for two companies to do this, which is Apple and Google, they do collect the age, they should make that available to developers. And we ask for information from the device all the time with user consent, can Instagram have access to your camera, can Instagram have access to your location information? Apps should be able to ask, can Instagram have access to your birthday? And that would, I think, elegantly from a product perspective, from a simplification perspective, from a privacy preserving perspective and what's easiest for parents, that would be the right product solution to solve this problem around age that we're all trying to grapple with right now.

(01:05:56):
And there's a lot of stuff that we're doing. Part of the reason that this project was so complicated, and I mentioned the age team, is we're building classifiers to try to predict how old people are based on not just the age that they've stated, but based on who they're talking to, what kind of content they're looking at, what the age of the people they're connected to is, do we think that this is actually an adult like they say, or is it really a teen. And so we're doing a lot to try to predict age or prevent people from lying about their age, but I think this would be a really big win for the industry.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:31):
Makes sense to me.

Naomi Gleit (01:06:33):
Okay. Thank you, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:38):
So to close out this portion in this chapter of our conversation on Naomi-isms, I know something else that you're really good at that I've heard from a few people is running meetings, something that a lot of people always want to get better at. Any tips? What have you learned about running a great meeting?

Naomi Gleit (01:06:54):
A meeting is a high value and it's high cost amount of time, and then I want to make sure it's as productive as possible. What I will do is send an agenda 24 hours prior to the meeting. That agenda will include a pre-read. I've talked to people who if the pre-read is not attached to the calendar invite or associated with a meeting at least 24 hours in advance, they will cancel the meeting. That just goes to show we want everybody in the meeting to have full context, have read the pre-read. Often what will happen in the previous 24 hours is because we're all sending pre-reads on Google Slides, there will be a lot of conversation and questions that get hashed out leading up to the meeting. During the meeting, like I said, I think it's really important for a group of people to be looking at something and anchoring people on something.

(01:07:48):
If somebody joins the meeting, say, five minutes late, they should know exactly where in the agenda you are in the meeting and what is being discussed based on catching up from the visual that's being projected. Usually a meeting can be and hopefully a meeting is really either is a decision meeting. So if there is a decision, I need three options and I need a recommendation that should hopefully help focus the meeting. And then, like I said, I will real-time edit the visual such that we document and have extreme clarity on what is the option that we agreed on and any next steps that we also agreed to.

(01:08:28):
After the meeting, anyone who wasn't in the meeting, that's fine because within 24 hours post-meeting I will send the notes, reply all to the meeting invite and send the notes. So just tactically, I use the calendar invite as the canonical unit by which to handle all of this communication because a lot of times meetings are one-offs, there isn't an existing email or chat thread that maps perfectly to the audience of the meeting, so for me that is the meeting or the calendar invite. So I'll click on the calendar invite, reply all, include the pre-read, pre-meeting, and then do this reply all again post-meeting 24 hours with the notes and the decisions and the next steps.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:11):
I love this. So many very specific tactics here. I love it. This is food for my brain. I love the always have three options and a recommendation, that's such a simple thing to recommend, but such a powerful way of operating as a PM, just like, "Here are the options, here's what I recommend, here's why."

Naomi Gleit (01:09:29):
Oh, one thing I forgot that I learned from Guy Rosen, he is our chief security officer, is when you have three options and a recommendation, in terms of evaluating the options, I don't love pros and cons. It's a flat list of text. It's hard to just get the big picture from that. Oftentimes we'll use a traffic light. That means that the three options are three rows. The columns in the table will be criteria by which to evaluate the options. Those could either be functions. So for example, if I have three options as the rows, column one could be the legal perspective, column two could be the policy perspective, column three could be the privacy or product perspective. Alternatively, the columns could map to different criteria like what we're optimizing for. So it could be the user experience, it could be the engineering feasibility, it could be the internal complexity, whatever are the criteria should be laid out in the columns.

(01:10:31):
And then obviously it should be color-coded, red, yellow, green based on how it stacks up against those criteria. And what this allows is to get back to the point of the visual is you can quickly look at the three options, see where's the most red, and rule that out. Ideally, the recommendation has some combination of the more green or yellow than the other options. And then obviously within these cells you can spell out the specific rationale for the coloring. But I think this is a really good way to run a meeting and just create extreme clarity around how you're evaluating the options in a way that a flat list of pros and cons just doesn't.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:12):
What other podcasts would have this level of detail of how to run a discussion on a decision? And this is exactly what people want to hear, so I love it. So product market fit for listeners of this podcast. I love it. I love it. And obviously the reason this is more effective is it's not just like, "Here's a quick sentence on the pro and con." It's like, "Here's what I actually think this is good or bad for the things that matter to the business."

Naomi Gleit (01:11:39):
That's exactly right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:40):
So that makes tons of sense.

Naomi Gleit (01:11:41):
It also gives people a framework to plug into. A lot of times the creation of a pre-read for these discussions involves many different people from many different teams and functions. If you have a traffic light, they can own filling out their cell, they can own the rationale behind the legal position on option one, two, and three. And, in general, I'm super into frameworks that allow people to plug into and clearly represent their point of view.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:08):
I love it. Final question, completely different topic. I saw a Wall Street Journal story about how you exercise and your exercise regimen, and how important that is to your life and career. Now, most people don't have a Wall Street Journal story about their exercise regimen, especially a tech worker. And I know this is just important to your work, and they wrote that this basically helps you become better at your job. Any advice there for folks that want to lean into exercise, exercise more for how to actually do that? Because your advice is this actually makes you better at work and life.

Naomi Gleit (01:12:44):
People are always like, "What are you training for?" And I'm like, "I'm training for life." I have four musties, it is eat, sleep a long time, and exercise. Those are the things that I need in order to perform. And the other areas of my life seems pretty obvious, but until recently I actually did not prioritize sleep. My boyfriend is actually super into sleep and we have the Eight Sleep, we have eye masks, we have blackout shades, we have good sleep hygiene, and so I'm getting much better at that. But exercise is something that I've always been on top of. Alone time is also a musty for me because I'm an introvert, I need that time to recharge, otherwise I think I get weird around people.

(01:13:28):
In terms of how I prioritize it, it's a non-negotiable or table stakes, every morning I have to work out. I am also lucky enough to work in an environment where I can wear workout clothes to work, which I often do. I think working out is sure the hour of the day that I'm doing my exercise, but I also view, like I said, life is a workout, performing at work is a workout. I need to be able to move. I need to feel comfortable. It's very physical, I think, especially if you're trying really hard to be a conductor, and I'm running around with a metaphorical conductor wand, I need to be able to move. A while ago, and that's what the Wall Street Journal article was about, I set a goal of doing five pull-ups. I'd read somewhere in an article that less than 1% of women can actually do. I think having a goal is really helpful.

(01:14:22):
That's something that I worked on, and anyone can do this truly if you train for it. I think it's potentially more technique for me than strength per se, and I worked up towards that goal. I think exercise, in addition to all of the physical benefits, primarily has a mental health benefit I think for me. And also there are just a lot of lessons that I think I take from exercise. For example, I think being able to do five pull-ups taught me I can do hard things in this really narrow, measurable way, which gave me confidence in other aspects of my life.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:01):
I had a friend who her goal was...

Naomi Gleit (01:15:00):
Another aspect of my life.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:02):
I had a friend who her goal was do one push-up.

Naomi Gleit (01:15:06):
One push-up.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:06):
She's like, "I want to be able to do one push-up" and that was really motivating to her. And then she finally got there and then she could do more.

Naomi Gleit (01:15:12):
That's awesome.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:13):
Yeah, similar. I have so many notes here as that you were talking. The other is sleep advice. So eye mask. I have an awesome eye mask that I'll recommend in the show notes. It's funny.

Naomi Gleit (01:15:23):
Please.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:24):
What is that? Of all the things I've recommended in all the various places I get the most comments about, "Thank you for this very specific eye mask. It changed my life." It's like WAOAW, it's one Tim Ferriss has often recommended.

Naomi Gleit (01:15:36):
Okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:37):
W-A-O... I'll link to it in the show notes, but it's-

Naomi Gleit (01:15:39):
Oh, great.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:41):
WAOAW, let me look it up real quick 'cause people are going to be like, "Oh, I got to get it." WAOAW eye mask.

Naomi Gleit (01:15:46):
The one that we have has cushions around the eyes such that it's not flush against your eyes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:54):
Yeah, this is the same. Okay.

Naomi Gleit (01:15:55):
Oh great.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:58):
W-A-O-A-W sleep mask on Amazon. It's 13 bucks and amazing. My wife and I both sleep with these eye masks. It's ridiculous until you're like, "I can't sleep without one now."

Naomi Gleit (01:16:10):
Totally. Well there's a lot of research that even ambient lighting results in lower quality sleep. So I think that's why the blackout shades and the eye mask just help ensure it's truly dark.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:20):
Yeah, I was just watching a podcast and the advice there is even your smoke alarm with a little light is too much light. You need to cover that up to create real darkness and why not just wear an eye mask? You don't have to worry about any of that.

Naomi Gleit (01:16:35):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:36):
Okay, and then one thing I didn't mention when you're talking about the conductor, the PM as a conductor, that's exactly the metaphor I've always used my entire career when people ask me about what is product manager? So we're alike.

Naomi Gleit (01:16:46):
Really?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:47):
Yeah, I have all these slides of here's the PM and it's like a symphony and the conductor standing there.

Naomi Gleit (01:16:52):
Lenny, do you know how happy that makes me? Because I feel like sometimes people are like, "That sounds crazy," but the fact that you actually came to that same conclusion makes me... Why did you come to that conclusion? I'm just curious

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:09):
Because as you said, the PM's not making the thing. They're just helping each of the people who are the most talented at their very specific skill do the best possible work and their back is to the audience. They're trying to stay out of the way even though they come in, everyone claps for them, the outstanding event, and then in theory they could step in a little bit to help out when they can pinch it on design here and there and research here and there, probably not engineering. So those are the reasons and they're not in charge. The chair wind violinist is the actual person that's making the music and the best at this thing.

Naomi Gleit (01:17:48):
It's so great to hear somebody else talk about this too. Thank you. And I think that that is really how I view my role and what I do and I think maybe just hearing you talk about it reminded me why I think I put so much emphasis on just elevating the people on my team and the people around me and candidly, one of the development areas for me, and it could be downstream because I do have this analogy of how to be a PM, is that the growth feedback or the constructive feedback for me is really learning when to lead from the front more. Maybe when to be less of a quiet conductor that's really elevating the first chair violinist and be more front facing.

(01:18:39):
I think a lot of my approach and my leadership style is really leading through the people on my team and helping grow them. And a lot of times I think that they're dedicated, they're experts, they know particular areas. Obviously as a head of product, I manage a portfolio of different projects of which each of them has the incredible leader on it. And so oftentimes I'm just really trying to lead from behind and help them be as successful as possible. But there is a time and a place when maybe that silent conductor needs to take more of a vocal and front facing role.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:16):
I know exactly what you mean. I had the same problem when I was a PM because there's always this fear that PMs in charge and telling everyone to do. And so I had the opposite of like, "Okay, and that's not me. I'm going to just let you do the things you think are best and I'll just make sure the best ideas come to the surface," and I have to learn exactly the same thing. Sometimes people just want you to point them in the right direction and make the decision in the end. And the best PMs are people that have the best opinions about what is going to work, how intuition of what users need, have strong product sense and all that stuff. I've had this post that I'm trying to work on along these lines where there's this reaction to PMs aren't the CEO of the product.

(01:19:56):
They're just like... No, don't call yourselves that. I think it's the opposite. I think PMs actually should think of themselves as the CEO of the product, not in terms of they are in charge and can fire people and manage people, but they're the closest heuristic for what the CEO and the founder wants. They think of what does the business need, what is going to help the customers, what's going to help us grow? And I think the PM is the closest to that role and so I think it's important to think of that role as that even though you're not technically in charge.

Naomi Gleit (01:20:25):
And maybe you could call it something different, but I totally agree with that sentiment. I think we were trying to push against the criticism that PMs were bossing everybody around, but actually I think you-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:42):
There's baggage there.

Naomi Gleit (01:20:43):
There's baggage there. I call it, there's something called the great non-technical. There was a period of time at Facebook where I think the PMs really had to prove their value to the engineers and show that we were not slowing things down with all this extra process. You can imagine an engineer hearing me talk about how to run a meeting and all the canonical docs and just be like, "What? This sounds terrible." So yeah, we had to prove that, but I actually do think the PM is the closest to really channeling what the CEO or the founder wants. Another thing that I've worked on and that I'm working on is really developing a much stronger first-party perspective. It's not enough for the PM to run this people in process that we talked about. Obviously I love that stuff. I lean that way, but at the end of the day, a PM cannot outsource their perspective or delegate their thinking through people and process.

(01:21:46):
And so for me that has been a learning curve and I am trying to, as someone who's very consensus driven, I want to hear all the different opinions from all the different people. I can still do that. I can still through people in process talk to all the different folks working on a project, hear their first party perspectives and then use all of that to synthesize my own because it will be unique given my role on the team and just what I'm trying to optimize for and really make sure that I both develop that first-party opinion and communicate it clearly. And like you said, the best PMs I think can do it all.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:27):
Just to follow this thread, one thread further, because this is something I think a lot of product managers work on and are told to work on, is there anything you've found to be helpful in building this skill in yourself that might be helpful to folks that are working on it?

Naomi Gleit (01:22:39):
I'm lucky enough because I have a big team. I have someone who helps me schedule my time and I used to goal that person and goal our work together on just being as efficient as possible. But now what I am goaling that person and what we're trying to accomplish here is giving me as much time to develop a first-party point of view. And so what is the most effective way to do that? And for me it is having two to three hour blocks of time where I can actually sit, think, have space, but maybe something that's different about me than other people is its very, very helpful for me to talk to maybe one or two people, not be in a big meeting with 40 people, trusted people.

(01:23:28):
I have an incredible person on my team that I talk to that I think really helps me clarify my thinking. And so to go back to the beginning, just I'm trying to find blocks in my day that I can spend time thinking and also within those blocks, they don't have to be alone time. They can also be scheduling my chief of staff and my head of data to bounce ideas off of as a sounding board because that is the process that I know best for me in terms of really developing a first party perspective.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:59):
Such a good tip. It makes sense if you're just spending all your day coordinating in meetings, checking things, reviewing things, you have no time to actually think about what you think is the right move and answer and strategy and next step. And so that's a really good tip. If you're finding that you don't have time to think about what you think is the right solution and the right strategy and the right product decision, fine, just block time to think about this stuff. I have these deep work slots in my calendar. I've written about this a few times where it's three hours and the invite, I don't know if you can do this these days, but it was just, if you book time during the slot, I will slap you. Nobody did.

Naomi Gleit (01:24:42):
That's amazing. And I think for me, some people might need three hours on their own. I think for me, and I don't know about you, talking things through with one or two people really helps me as well. So sometimes it was almost quite challenging for me to think of going into a room by myself for three hours and then I was just going to figure it out on my own. This is like, and I don't know how people help people think strategically the best, but it doesn't have to necessarily be alone.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:16):
That's a great tip. Just have a sparring partner.

Naomi Gleit (01:25:17):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:17):
Someone who is just interested in exploring ideas and not just have a clear agenda. I love that. Okay, Naomi, I love this tangent we went on as we were wrapping up.

Naomi Gleit (01:25:29):
I know, totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:30):
That was amazing. There was a lot of good stuff that we covered there, but I know you have to run. So before we get to our very exciting lightning round, is there anything else that we haven't covered that you wanted to cover or share?

Naomi Gleit (01:25:42):
Honestly, I think I just did it. I didn't even realize I wanted to talk about that, but it just all came out.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:47):
I love it. I love that. Those are the best nuggets. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Naomi Gleit (01:25:54):
I'm ready.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:55):
First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Naomi Gleit (01:25:59):
I really love narrative nonfiction, so I like the Eric Larson books. They're a very compelling and page turning way to learn about history. I recently read Devil in the White City and there was also one about Churchill's first year by Eric Larson. Another book that just the canonical book that I often recommend is Sapiens. I think he's a great example of what we talk about when we talk about simplifiers. He took a very complex subject, which is all of human history and tried to pull out the nuggets. I think his thesis that what differentiates humans from other forms of life is really our ability to tell and believe in myths or stories, and he cites money and religion as examples, but also there's a graphic novel version of Sapiens and so he almost has the PhD level and then he literally has the high school level, which is a graphic novel version.

(01:26:57):
He also has Unstoppable Us, which I think is a kid's version, and so clearly here is someone who is a master. There's a James Clear thing that a friend, Shirley, told me about where it's like if you're a beginner, you have ignorant simplicity and intermediate has functional complexity, and then a master of a topic has profound simplicity. And that's what I feel like Noah Yuval Harari really has because he can go all the way up and down this cool pyramid in terms of explaining this really complex topic.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:31):
What I heard about him is that he goes on a one-month meditation retreat every year where it's just him silent meditation retreat, and people ask him, "How do you have time to do that when you have so much work to do?" He's like, "The only way I'm able to achieve these books where I synthesize all of human history into a story is because I do that. Because I can clear my mind and just be."

Naomi Gleit (01:27:53):
And Lenny, to our previous conversation, that is how he himself is best. That's what he needs to do. I might need two to three hours a day and a sparring partner, Noah Yuval Harari needs a month in silent meditation.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:07):
Great point. Everyone has their own way of unlocking their brain. On Devil in the White City, a fun fact. When I read that, I was like, "I need to go to Chicago and see the stuff that they wrote about in this book about the World's Fair." And so I went to Chicago and-

Naomi Gleit (01:28:21):
You did?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:22):
Because of that book, yes.

Naomi Gleit (01:28:25):
Wow. Have you read the Splendid in the Vile?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:28):
Yes. That was the-

Naomi Gleit (01:28:29):
Churchill.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:29):
About the Telegram, right? Yeah. Right?

Naomi Gleit (01:28:32):
Oh, no, it was was Churchill's first year, but he has like six books. I haven't read all of them.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:37):
Okay. I think it was either that one or it was something about a telegram. I did read... It was less good though, is was what I find. I found the Devil in White City was-

Naomi Gleit (01:28:43):
The best.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:44):
Was the best. Amazing. Okay, we'll keep going. Second question, do you have a favorite movie or TV show you've recently watched that you really enjoyed?

Naomi Gleit (01:28:52):
We just watched Shogun. I thought it was really good. Have you seen it?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:57):
I have, yes. I loved it. Very gruesome but amazing.

Naomi Gleit (01:29:01):
Yeah. I was. I had to cover my eyes for some of it. And then we also, the movie that we just watched was Dune Two. Chris Cox, who's our chief product officer, actually recommended that as one of the best films that he's seen recently, and I really trust his opinion on that. So we caught up by watching Dune One and then watched Dune Two, and it was really good.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:21):
I watched that in IMAX Theater in San Francisco, this insanely large screen and highly would recommend that. I don't think it's still out there. Yeah. [inaudible 01:29:30] ridiculous. Amazing. I think there's another one coming someday.

Naomi Gleit (01:29:34):
Oh yeah, yeah. Dune Three.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:36):
Dune Three. Just keep them coming. Next question. Do you have a favorite product you recently discovered that you really love?

Naomi Gleit (01:29:46):
Well, I'm going to check out that eye mask thing that you recommended, the WAOAW thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:49):
That's it.

Naomi Gleit (01:29:51):
I know it's super expensive, but have you tried the Eight Sleep?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:56):
I have. My wife doesn't love it. She doesn't like the noise. It's like a very slight noise when it starts up, but it wakes her up, so we don't have it anymore.

Naomi Gleit (01:30:07):
And I noticed that too. I think maybe they just released the latest edition. One of the features that is the killer feature for me is that it does a vibrating alarm so that when I wake up at 6:00 A.M., I do not wake up everyone in the house at 6:00 A.M., and so it's a thermal alarm. It makes the bed on my side hotter and it also slightly vibrates underneath my ear to wake me up.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:32):
It's under your ear. I remember vibrating my whole part of the bed. I wonder if that's a new feature.

Naomi Gleit (01:30:37):
Maybe this is like... I'm on version three, maybe there's a version four. I don't know. Maybe that was version one.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:43):
Yeah, that's so funny. A nice thing about my life right now is that because I have no meetings or boss, I don't need an alarm.

Naomi Gleit (01:30:52):
That's awesome.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:53):
However, it's amazing. However, we have a young kid and he wakes up at 6:00 to 6:30, so that's my alarm usually.

Naomi Gleit (01:30:58):
Oh, and then the other thing I wanted to mention, I don't know if you have this problem, but I'm trying to get a hundred grams of protein every day. I think a lot of my friends and I are focused on protein consumption right now, and so my trainer who helped me actually do the pull-ups and the push-ups started a protein products company called Promix that I really love, and he has this Rice Krispie treat thing that I usually eat every morning and gives me 15 grams of protein.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:30):
I just bought that.

Naomi Gleit (01:31:32):
What?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:33):
Yes, I was reading, Kevin Rose had his favorite, his health stack, and I don't know if that's the brand, but it's exactly a Rice Krispie thing with 15 grams of protein. So I'm pretty sure that's it.

Naomi Gleit (01:31:45):
I'm pretty sure that's it, because the Rice Krispie part of it is very unique, so let me know what you think. I really like the chocolate chip flavor.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:52):
I hate them and I love them, so that's a really good tip. I just saw a funny TikTok where it's like I never thought when I'd grow up in be an adult, I'd be thinking so often about protein and how much protein I should be eating.

Naomi Gleit (01:32:05):
Maybe this is 40, I don't know. I'm not sure for me, but yes, I've been thinking a lot about protein. The other thing I really like is canned seafood, which has a lot of protein. So something called Fish Wife has, it's just Hipster, like Chicken of the Sea.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:23):
Oh yeah, they're very cute. Yes. My wife gets those. Another protein tip, they were a former sponsor, but no longer, but it's an amazing protein tip. Maui Nui venison beef sticks. It's 10 grams of protein and it's a delicious venison beef stick.

Naomi Gleit (01:32:39):
Thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:40):
There we go.

Naomi Gleit (01:32:40):
Look at what we've become Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:45):
Just protein obsessed. It's just going to be so protein rich. Amazing. Okay, what else we got here? Okay, two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to and find helpful in working life?

Naomi Gleit (01:32:56):
Last month we were watching, or I guess two weeks ago, we were watching the US Open and we discovered that as people come through the hallway to come onto the court to play, the players all passed the Billie Jean King sign that says Pressure is Privilege. And I really loved that because I think just with the Teen Accounts launch and just a lot of the more public facing stuff that I have done recently, I do, like we talked about, get nervous, and I think Pressure is Privilege just reminds me that a lot of this stuff is a really incredible opportunity that I have and to be grateful for it. I can still be nervous, but also recognize and be grateful for it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:48):
I love that. Just to remind yourself that you're lucky to be feeling this pressure because that means something is important. Slightly different version of that is Zuck at the event in the Chase Center that you were also at had the shirt that said in Latin-

Naomi Gleit (01:34:02):
Learning through suffering.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:04):
Learning through suffering. Perfect.

Naomi Gleit (01:34:09):
Learning through suffering. I like that one too. I mean, I think he spoke a little bit about this being an entrepreneur is really, really hard.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:23):
They had the Jensen line about people asked him if he'd start Nvidia again, and his answer was like, "If I knew how insanely hard and stressful this was, I would not." Very, very honest. Okay. Last question. So Charles, your former colleague, told me that you're an incredible surfer-

Naomi Gleit (01:34:42):
Oh.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:43):
And that you design your life almost around where and when you can go surf.

Naomi Gleit (01:34:47):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:48):
Any story or lesson or I don't know, takeaway from surfing and the impact that's had on you? Lessons about surfing?

Naomi Gleit (01:34:58):
So I think surfing and life have a lot of parallels. It is an incredibly mental sport for me. The biggest thing that I can do to improve my surfing is to improve my confidence. And so when I'm going for a wave, a lot of times I will hesitate or pull back or. Instead, the best thing that you can actually do in that situation is stand up into your fear, is to ride the wave. That is the safest thing you can do. That is the thing that you're actually supposed to do, but on every dimension, that's the right thing. And so it's almost, I guess the motto there is stand up into the fear when you're going, you're about to catch a wave and actually the things that you can do when you're afraid, for example, like I said, pull back or throw your board are actually quite counterproductive and actually unsafe and could lead to more injury. And so it's just another reminder that you really need to commit. Stand up into your fear.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:36:04):
I love it. Stand up into your fear and pressure is a privilege and learning through suffering. Naomi, this was so much fun. I'm so happy that you agreed to do this. Two final questions. Where can folks find you a line? Where they find Naomi-isms, and anything else you want to point folks to and how can listeners be useful to you?

Naomi Gleit (01:36:21):
So believe it or not, I have Naomi.com. I know Boz has Boz.com. I bought that URL, I think maybe 20 years ago, 15 to 20 years ago from a farmer actually whose wife's name was Naomi rather, and his wife was not using it. And so I got it for quite a steal. And I'll just say that I've had other famous Naomis, much more famous and much more well known than I, who would like to have Naomi.com make offers for this URL. But I really like having just a home on the internet where I can put my Naomi-isms. They're also available on Instagram, Naomi Gleit.

(01:37:03):
How can listeners be useful to you? I think Lenny, I mentioned this before we got on the call, I don't tend to do that much public speaking or talking about Naomi-isms. I did some of it two years ago when we first launched but I, as a result of being on the podcast and stuff, would love to do more of this. And so I think any feedback on what listeners would like to see or hear from me, questions that would give me a reason where I felt like it would be useful for me to do more on Naomi-isms would be super helpful.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:37):
Sweet. So if you have any of those, leave them in the YouTube comments is usually the easiest place for folks to leave that. Naomi, thank you so much for being here. This was so much fun.

Naomi Gleit (01:37:45):
Thank you, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:47):
Bye everyone.

(01:37:50):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
When clients come to you, what is the biggest gap they have that is keeping them from being successful as leaders?

Rachel Lockett (00:00:06):
Most leaders, especially technical leaders, assume they have to have all the answers. People have climbed the ladder because they've been dependable, reliable, the smartest person in the room. But great leaders know that when you try to advise and have the answer all the time, you're not actually equipping your team to go solve the hard problems. You're training your team to come to you with all of the hard problems.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:27):
Difficult conversations are difficult. How do we help people make them less difficult?

Rachel Lockett (00:00:32):
We operate in tech. We're supposed to give all of ourselves, all of our time, all of our energy to this endeavor, and it's purely logical. That's not at all true. It's completely emotional. Professionals have feelings. People, when they want to have a conflict, they come in ready to prove their point. There's a misguided view that the goal is to convince the other person that what they're doing is wrong. Actually, the goal of any conflict is to create mutual understanding.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:57):
Talk about what you've learned about helping leaders in tech avoid burnout.

Rachel Lockett (00:01:01):
When people are in their gifts and their strengths, they have more energy. We all have more energy when we're operating from the things we naturally are good at. It's no one else's job to help you live in your gifts. What I notice in big companies is people are often annoyed or frustrated with their management for not making their job more interesting. No, your manager's job is to help you perform in the job you are hired to do. It's your job to navigate your career.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:26):
The power of this is this makes your life so much better.

Rachel Lockett (00:01:28):
Lenny, let's try it. So, I want you to tell me a challenge, something that you're struggling with.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:34):
The main thing I struggle with these days is just... Today, my guest is Rachel Lockett, an executive coach and former longtime HR leader at Pinterest and at Stripe. She works with CEOs, and founders, and leaders at tech companies on both ways that they are, emotional and positive intelligence, resilience and courage, and what they do, setting vision and strategy, prioritizing, and building trusted and accountable teams. She's someone I've heard a lot about over the years from other podcast guests, and this conversation is powerful. It's jam-packed with advice, and tips, and frameworks that'll make you a better leader and also a better person. We even do a couple live coaching sessions to demonstrate some of Rachel's approaches. And as you'll see, I had a number of epiphanies during this conversation. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It helps tremendously.

(00:02:26):
And if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of a ton of incredible products, including Devon Lovable, Replit Bolt, NNN, Linear, Superhuman, Descript, Wispr Flow, Gamma, Perplexity, Warp, Granola, Magic Patterns, Raycast, JPRD, Mobin, and Stripe Atlas. Head on over to lennysnewsletter.com and click Product Pass. With that, I bring you Rachel Lockett after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:49):
1.3%, it's a small number, but in the right context, it's a powerful one. Stripe processed just over $1.4 trillion last year. That figure works out to be about 1.3% of global GDP. It's a lot, but it's also just 1.3%. Stripe handles the massive scale and complexity of many of the world's fastest-growing enterprises, including 78% of the Forbes AI 50 and more than half of the Fortune 100. There's a reason I've had more leaders from Stripe on this podcast than any other company. They know how to build great products that scale and that people love.

(00:03:27):
Stripe is also a lot more than just payments. They've also got a category-leading billing solution and a highly-optimized checkout experience built specifically to increase your checkout conversion. Enterprises like Atlassian, Figma, and Urban use Stripe to create fully branded and customized checkout pages with access to more than 125 global payment methods. Join the ranks of industry leaders like Salesforce, OpenAI, and Pepsi that are using Stripe to grow faster and grow GDP. Learn how Stripe can help your business grow at stripe. com.

(00:04:01):
My podcast guest tonight love talking about craft, and taste, and agency, and product market fit. You know what we don't love talking about? SOC 2. That's where Vanta comes in. Vanta helps companies of all sizes get compliant fast and stay that way with industry-leading AI, automation, and continuous monitoring. Whether you're a startup tackling your first SOC 2, or ISO 27001, or an enterprise managing vendor risk, Vanta's trust management platform makes it quicker, easier, and more scalable. Vanta also helps you complete security questionnaires up to five times faster so that you could win bigger deals sooner. The result, according to a recent IDC study, Vanta customers slashed over $500,000 a year and are three times more productive. Establishing trust isn't optional. Vanta makes it automatic. Get $1,000 off at vanta.com/lenny.

(00:04:59):
Rachel, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Rachel Lockett (00:05:03):
Thank you so much for having me, Lenny. I am honored to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:06):
I'm honored to have you here. I was going to start with a different question, but we were chatting ahead of this conversation and I always like to ask guests, what do you want people to get out of this conversation? And I loved your answer, so I just want you to share this. So, let me just ask you, what are you hoping people get out of the conversation we're about to have?

Rachel Lockett (00:05:23):
Genuinely, I hope that your listeners take away that the human side of business building is incredibly fun and impactful and that it's easy to do. They can do it with simple tools. So, I'm hopeful that through this conversation, heads of product, heads of engineering, founders walk away feeling more empowered and more motivated to attune to the people around them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:47):
So, what I'm hearing is just if you're struggling with the human side of building a product, building a team, building a company, there are answers. You can do it.

Rachel Lockett (00:05:56):
Yes, exactly. It is achievable, and it's actually most natural. Leaders want to care about the people they work with. They want to empower those around them. But sometimes the busyness of our world gets in the way and the urgency of the litany of things to do distracts you from the people in front of you. And actually, if you really understand the talent around you and you create an environment where they can be successful, your business will thrive.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:22):
I think the hardest part of this for people is just there's the knowing this can be helped with. The other is just being vulnerable enough to seek help and to take this on because it's so hard. Just like, "Oh, maybe I'm not a great manager." That doesn't feel good.

Rachel Lockett (00:06:37):
Yeah, that's true. I mean, it's vulnerable to seek help, but I think your audience, I know to be incredibly committed to growth. I hear of people who come on your podcast and they've spent decades focused on self-improvement. And I actually want to tell you a story about one of my clients who loves your podcast, and I was talking to him last week. He's a client I've seen for 10 years, and he's a person who exemplifies a commitment to personal growth.

(00:07:08):
I started working with him when he was a frontline engineering manager at Coinbase, and we talked about who he is, what his strengths are, and his bigger picture why. And he talked about this dream of creating a global movement one day. He was really focused on building community, and he thought the path for creating possibility in the world around him was creating a strong community around him. And he continually worked on his leadership capacity. And over the 10 years, at some point, he created a tattoo on his arm that's a sun with a redwood grove around it that reminded him of his core strengths and his purpose. And today, guess what he's doing, Lenny?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:59):
Killing it.

Rachel Lockett (00:08:00):
He's not only killing it-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:02):
[inaudible 00:08:02] vision.

Rachel Lockett (00:08:02):
... but he's running a community, a global community for Coinbase called Base and the Base app.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:08):
Oh, wow.

Rachel Lockett (00:08:08):
It's the largest Ethereum L2 in the world, and it's a community of creators and developers, and he's having a great time. He's having more fun than ever. And so, I think for the people who are committed to excellence and impact, recognizing that if they lean into their gifts and they get back into their purpose, they can have more fun while having an impact on the world.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:33):
This story reminds me of just why I love these sorts of conversations because the sort of stuff we're going to be talking about, and we'll get into it right after this final preamble, is stuff that's usually locked away in these very small rooms, are only accessible to folks with a bunch of money. This is stuff people pay tens of thousands of dollars, hundreds of thousands of dollars for over the course of their career. And I just love the idea of sharing all this with everyone to help all learn from the stuff that you've learned from all these people you've worked with. So, I'm really excited to be digging into stuff. The first thing I want to dive into, I actually asked you, when clients come to you, what is the biggest gap they have that is keeping them from being successful as leaders? And you told me it's essentially knowing when to coach versus knowing when to just tell people what to do and learning to coach. Talk about what you see there, why this is so important, and how you help people develop the skill.

Rachel Lockett (00:09:24):
I think that most leaders, especially technical leaders, assume they have to have all the answers. People have climbed the ladder in whatever realm they're in because they've been dependable, reliable, the smartest person in the room. But when you're leading a quickly-scaling company, you quickly have less context than the people you're around. And the way you were operating before doesn't work because you don't have the ability to wrap your arms around every problem in a deep way. So, I've seen leaders at every phase from frontline managers up to running an 8,000-person company struggle with knowing when do I have to have the answer, and when I don't have the answer, what options do I have?

(00:10:12):
But great leaders know that when you try to advise and have the answer all the time, you're not actually equipping your team to go solve the hard problems. You're training your team to come to you with all of the hard problems. And coaching is a different way. It's an alternative path that unlocks brilliance in your team and is way more motivating for the people around you. So, coaching is actually a learnable skill, obviously, because there's tons of coaches around Silicon Valley, but you don't have to coach in the same way that an executive coaches. You can shift your energy into curiosity when someone brings you a hard problem to solve, and create space to get curious, and help them solve their own problem.

(00:10:59):
So, obviously, sometimes advising is the right path. If there's an urgent issue, the person coming to you doesn't have the skill they need, that's a time to advise and help. But leaders over-rotate, assuming the people that they've hired who are experts in their domain need them to solve the problem. So, I think it's useful for your listeners to actually know that coaching's an alternative, and I can help them learn some basic skills around this.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:31):
Okay. I'd love to learn those skills. What this makes me think about is there's this famous Harvard Business Review piece. I don't know. It's like 30 years ago maybe about the monkey on the back. You know this piece, where it's-

Rachel Lockett (00:11:42):
Say more. I think I do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:44):
Okay, we'll link to it. It's this idea that as a leader, people always just coming to you trying to give you their monkey that's sitting on their back. And they're like, "Hey, this monkey is causing me all this problem. I don't know what to do. But this monkey, here you go. You take it, and feed it, and help it, figure out what it needs." And the role of a leader is to keep the monkey on the back of the person and help them figure out how to solve the problem, exactly what you're describing.

Rachel Lockett (00:12:04):
Yeah, that's a great analogy. I love that. I think leaders make things up when they don't have answers sometimes. A person comes to you with a problem and you just want to help. But the best way to help is actually doing something that most leaders don't do well. It's attuning to what is the context? What does this person need? What are they blocked on? And ask them with those questions so that they can solve their own problem.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:32):
Let's talk about how to get better at this. But first of all, when you said, "When is it actually smart to just tell them what to do?" You said it's when they don't have the skills to do it. Is there any other kind of heuristics of like, okay, just tell them what to do in these cases?

Rachel Lockett (00:12:43):
Yeah, it's an urgent issue and you actually have an answer that you want to drive. So, don't coach and make it a game. You want your person on your team to guess what's in your mind. That's not a good time to coach. You have something you absolutely want them to do. You know the right answer. You want them to be motivated to go do it. Advise them. Help them see the path. But most leaders over-index on that solution. So, I want to share. Maybe Lenny, I can teach you two skills that I think are the basics of leader coaching-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:43):
Let's do it. I'd love that.

Rachel Lockett (00:13:21):
... that you can use in your own life tonight with your wife-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:24):
She's going to love this.

Rachel Lockett (00:13:25):
... or anyone you operate with.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:25):
Let's do it.

Rachel Lockett (00:13:27):
And hopefully, your listeners can use them too.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:30):
Let's do it.

Rachel Lockett (00:13:31):
Okay. So, the first skill is active listening. And Lenny, you're probably a good listener because this is what you do for a living is you listen to the people who come on your podcast. But I don't know if you've seen Fight Club. There's a quote, "Most people aren't listening. They're just waiting for their turn to talk."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:49):
Absolute-

Rachel Lockett (00:13:49):
This is rampant in tech. And great leaders flip that script and tune in. They're the kinds of leaders who walk into a room, and they can see the elephants. They can name them. They can ask the hard questions to get people collaborating. So, there's actually three levels to listening. So, the first level listening, level one is internal. Let's say you're talking to me about a problem. I'm thinking about the implications of that problem on me. I'm completely distracted with my own inner dialogue. That's level one. Most people go through their world rushed and in level one. Level two listening is focused. So, you're talking to me, and I can repeat back what you're saying. So, I am listening to the words you're describing, and that's typically what happens in a good one-on-one. We're problem solving together and focused on your words.

(00:14:46):
Level three listening is global listening. So, that's what I'm hearing beneath the words. I'm hearing what you're communicating, not just what you're saying. I see your body language. I notice your tone of voice. I know the context around what you're talking about, and I can reflect back more insight about what's happening than you're aware of because I'm understanding everything you're communicating. So, dropping into level three listening is what great leaders do when they're influencing, when they're selling, when they're pitching a vision, and definitely when they're coaching. So, do you want to try it?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:22):
Let's do it.

Rachel Lockett (00:15:25):
Okay. How about this? I'll demonstrate some level three listening. I'm going to ask you a question.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:30):
Okay. Uh-oh.

Rachel Lockett (00:15:32):
You told me earlier, you're a father.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:34):
Yeah.

Rachel Lockett (00:15:35):
What is it like to be a dad?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:38):
Wow. What is it like to be a dad? It's amazing. It's like the most amazing thing I've ever done in many ways. I love it so much. It's also quite challenging at times dealing with setting boundaries and knowing when to just let him do the thing he's really excited about or just saying, "no," and just letting him cry for a while. That's something I've been dealing with recently, but it's like everything people tell you it is basically in every way except the joy is so much higher, so much higher than you hear from other people because people always talk about all the downsides, all the pain and challenges.

Rachel Lockett (00:16:15):
Yeah, and I see you when you talk about being a father, initially, I saw you really squirm in your chair. Well, this is a big question. And you looked up and down and kind of avoided my eye contact at first because my sense is you love being a dad, and it's so challenging. It's so tiring. And I'm hearing both of that in your answer. The high joy and the discomfort in having to sleep train, and having to disappoint, and navigating challenging behavior.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:51):
Nailed it. That was very nice to hear. Clearly, you listened to everything I said and that was a really good example of active listening.

Rachel Lockett (00:16:59):
What does it feel like to be seen that way?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:02):
It feels really nice. It feels really nice to be heard. And it's not just like you're repeating back my words. It's here's what I got out of the level below what you're saying, and the gist, and the bigger picture.

Rachel Lockett (00:17:14):
Yeah, there's some emotional connection when you listen actively, and that took less than a minute. So, what I want to invite listeners to understand is that active listening doesn't mean you're setting up an hour coaching session with every person on your team. No one has time for that. But even in the time you're already spending, just focusing on the other person in a way that is novel and really gives them your full attention so you can see their feelings under what they're saying goes a long way to motivating your team and helping them understand what's actually happening under the surface in this situation.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:50):
I think there's just so much power in different words, repeating back what they said. That's almost implied in what you're describing. It sounds like... So, I don't know, like a trick they'll see through. But knowing that you're listening to me and you're going to show me active listening, it still feels really nice to just hear back what I said. There's a lot of power in that and it's subtle.

Rachel Lockett (00:18:10):
Yeah. Great. Yeah, there's an element of synthesizing what I'm hearing verbally. That's the focused listening part, and then, mirroring back the emotions that I'm noticing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:18):
The emotions.

Rachel Lockett (00:18:19):
And even things that I'm guessing, and I can say, "Is that right?" And you can say, "No, actually, I'm not conflicted about the challenges of being a dad. I just am so joyful." And then, now, I understand where you're coming from and so do you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:33):
Awesome. Okay, so this is a core skill of coaching is active listening.

Rachel Lockett (00:18:37):
Yes. So, that's listening. Second skill, powerful questions. So, asking powerful questions means I'm curious about what's really going on, and there's not one right answer. So, a powerful question helps you gain insight and it takes you to a new solution set you didn't have before. But it's not me leading the witness. I'm not trying to guide you to a specific answer. That wouldn't be a powerful question. So, something that I like to equip leaders with is four kinds of questions that you can ask to unlock insight.

(00:19:17):
So, the first kind is I use a GROW model. So, the GROW model just is four different categories of kinds of powerful questions. So, the G in grow is goal. So, what does success look like? What's the outcome that you want to have? Any question that's around defining the best case scenario. The R in the GROW model is about your current reality. Where are you stuck? What are your current challenges? What have you tried? The O is about your options. So, let's expand the opportunities that you can understand of the choices you have in front of you. What are the various paths you could take? And the W in the GROW model is the way forward. What are you going to do next? So, this sounds simple, and it is simple if you take the time and space to listen carefully and ask any of these questions. The people on your team will appreciate the space and time to unlock an option that they didn't think of before and walk away with a concrete next step.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:21):
So, just to reflect back what you're saying, so someone comes to you with a monkey on their back. Here's a problem I'm trying to solve. This percent of my team is just not doing something right or this feature isn't working, something like that. So, first of all, it's listen, be very active in your listening. Reflect back what you're hearing, their emotions. And then, ask them questions around what does success look like for this? What is the goal? What is the goal? What does success look like for the thing you're trying to do here? What does success look like? Two is just what's today's reality? What's happening today? Then, options. Here's options that you think exist. So, this is you asking them what are the options?

Rachel Lockett (00:21:01):
Yeah, what are your paths forward? What could you do next?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:03):
What could you do next? And then, this is organic. So, it's not just like one, two, three, four, I imagine.

Rachel Lockett (00:21:10):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:10):
But the final step is just, okay, what's the way forward? What do you want to do?

Rachel Lockett (00:21:14):
That's exactly right. And you don't have to do it in this order. These are just four kinds of questions.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:14):
I see.

Rachel Lockett (00:21:19):
So, you might come and someone's super clear about their outcome. You know that. You don't need to spend any time asking them questions about that. Maybe you just want to really dig in on where are they stuck? And once they start talking about their reality and where they're stuck, then they realize, oh, I'm stuck because my cross-functional partner is blocking me, and I don't have any relationship with them. I need to go meet with them actually and just have a breakthrough conversation, tell them where I'm stuck. So, sometimes talking this out loud, just creating that space for them is going to help them tremendously.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:48):
And there's kind of an implication here that the person often knows the answer or can come to the answer, and they just need a little bit of nudge to get there.

Rachel Lockett (00:21:56):
Yeah, this is definitely you want to coach when you think the person you're talking to has the right context and can solve their own problem. That's a premise of coaching. You wouldn't coach if someone needs your guidance and comes to you and says, "Hey, I'm trying to take my company public. You took your company public. Can you tell me exactly the steps you took to get there?" Not a good time to coach.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:20):
This begs the question, what if they just come to a terrible conclusion and you're just like... Advice on when to actually just like, "What about this instead?"

Rachel Lockett (00:22:30):
Yeah, okay. I think that's great. So, if you have a really strong negative reaction to what they're sharing, of course it doesn't behoove anyone to hide that. I think you get curious. "Hey, help me understand how you came to that conclusion because here's my reaction to that." So, you're honest, but you're also curious. So, coaching in a manager or a leader context is not the same as in an executive coaching conversation. You're managing this person. You're responsible for their outcomes. You're not setting up an hour-long coaching session, you're just using coaching as an additional tool in your toolkit from advising. And you're creating more space, maybe 15% more space in your one-on-ones, in your meetings for open-ended questions.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:14):
I love this phrase, help me understand. One of my managers used to be really good at this, just like... You could tell, he's like, "Help me understand this part of your thinking."

Rachel Lockett (00:23:22):
Yeah. And the other thing that does when you're curious and you don't just shut down someone's idea, is you're helping them think. You're not helping them realize they're going to screw it up unless they come to you for advice. You're helping equip them with the right questions to ask and the right skepticism to have. And so, it's always useful to be in conversation when someone who reports to you has a different worldview than you do. There's some reason they came up with this great idea that you think is a terrible idea. And actually, that's where the learning happens.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:56):
And you may actually be wrong and you may realize, okay, they actually have the better solution. I get it now.

Rachel Lockett (00:24:01):
Yeah. This actually happens to me all the time in talent conversations. Because I have a background in being an HR business partner, and I'm working with CEOs and they're thinking about building their leadership team. And I want everyone to have a very rigorous stance on their talent because if you have an A plus squad, you're going to do great things in the world. And sometimes, they come up with an idea to performance manage someone who's clearly not working in the role, but think, oh, maybe I'll wait six months, and then, we'll have a conversation. I have a strong point of view. I'm not going to let that slide, but I'm going to say, "Help me understand why that is a good idea," and I'm going to press on that. And if they don't come to an idea that I'm aligned with, I'm going to share openly my perspective while still empowering them to solve their own problem.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:49):
To close the loop on this piece of advice, is there an example you could share to make this super concrete for folks?

Rachel Lockett (00:24:55):
Well, I'm going to give you an example of a client, I'm going to call him Jeff, who runs an AI company. And he was essentially playing the role of the head of product also. And he had a growing number of engineers and designers, and his customer base was growing rapidly. And he started to feel completely overwhelmed. So, he came to me and we started coaching together. And soon, he realized that he was the blocker on every decision, every business decision, every product decision. And he was resenting it. He wanted his team to take more ownership. But with some coaching, he realized he was training his team to come to him with every decision because he had always operated that way. So, he decided to create squads and have small pods of engineers, product leaders, and designers focus on subsets of the team. Very normal as you have a small startup scaling. But he didn't have an engineering manager and a product leader for every one of them.

(00:26:00):
So, this was a little bit earlier than he was equipped for because he did it out of necessity. And he also realized he needed to create some behavior change for the way he was interacting with that tech lead on each project so that they would take more ownership. So, we really invested in this idea of I'm going to start to set the system up so we have a product review every two weeks, they each have clear KPIs they're driving to that we co-design, and for this next quarter, I'm shifting from the role of deciding on everything to coaching. I'm going to really ask good questions in our check-ins. I'm going to align to the KPIs, ask how things are going, ask where they're stuck. And I just had a session with him last week. It's amazing to see him because he's so much more energized. He said, "The squads are moving so much faster. The teams feel more empowered and motivated." And he has time to pick his head up and plan for 2026...

Rachel Lockett (00:27:01):
And he has time to pick his head up and plan for 2026, and spend his time and his gifts. Which are product, vision and strategy. So that's more of a global example of what results from leaders shifting from the mode of solving every problem to coaching.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:19):
That's such a great example of just the power of this, this makes your life so much better. Because other people can start picking up the slack and not come to you for everything. And it's like, listen better, ask a few powerful questions and so much improves, so much changes.

Rachel Lockett (00:27:35):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:36):
Everyone around you gets better.

Rachel Lockett (00:27:37):
Lenny, let's try it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:38):
Okay, let's try it.

Rachel Lockett (00:27:38):
So I want you to tell me a challenge. It could be a personal challenge, a professional challenge. Just bottom line, something that you're struggling with.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:51):
Whoa. The main thing I struggle with these days is just endless work. I feel like this newsletter, I started this newsletter six, seven years ago at this point, and originally it was like, I'm just going to build this chill newsletter, do this on the side. Just kind of chill out for a while. And now it's just like, it just grows. I couldn't help but make it more awesome and bigger and have this podcast now and other stuff I got going on. So it's always this.

(00:28:18):
So I'm in a world now where it's just this ... the way I think about it is the Indiana Jones boulder is constantly in my back rearview mirror just coming at me. Because I need to get a newsletter post out, get podcast episodes out, do all the things associated with that. I'm also just in the middle of ... I have this large Slack community at Twitter and LinkedIn, so I'm just constantly being barraged with small little asks and things and all these little things that never ... it's hard to just ignore and say no to. So what I struggle with just endless work. I joke that be careful working for yourself if your boss is a workaholic.

Rachel Lockett (00:28:53):
I totally relate to that. Okay, so I'm hearing noise, barrage of needs and just constant requests of you online, in your work life. There's always something that you need to be doing. And you designed it that way yourself. So you're kind of aware of, I had this one intention of a path to freedom, insight. I imagine the newsletter was a fun passion project. And you couldn't help but make it this all-consuming full-time job.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:27):
That's right. Let me just add, it's like in so many ways the most awesome thing I could ever imagine doing also and extremely fulfilling. And I couldn't think of anything better I'd rather be doing.

Rachel Lockett (00:29:27):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:36):
So I think that's an important element.

Rachel Lockett (00:29:38):
Absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:38):
It's this Indiana Jones boulder constantly chasing me.

Rachel Lockett (00:29:41):
Yeah, I can feel the gratitude and the resonance with what you get to do every day. And yet I hear you questioning, why does it have to feel like I'm fighting for my life while I'm doing this thing I love?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:56):
That's one way to put it, yeah. This boulder is squishing me.

Rachel Lockett (00:30:00):
I mean, the Indiana Jones boulder is coming for you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:01):
Oh man.

Rachel Lockett (00:30:02):
That's a fight or flight instinct we all have.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:04):
That's true. That's true.

Rachel Lockett (00:30:05):
Okay, so thank you for being vulnerable enough to share that with your listeners and with me. I want to ask you, what would dream state look like? So let's say in six months you're still running this beautiful business that you've created. And you feel differently. What is happening?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:33):
What I imagine is the same thing mostly, just much more free time. So more time to experiment and play with other things. And at the same time, the newsletter continues to be awesome and high quality, the podcast continues to be awesome and high quality. So it's continuing to put out the same high quality stuff, just more free time, less ... the boulders may be smaller.

Rachel Lockett (00:30:56):
Yeah, okay. So what does free time enable for you? When you think about ... I hear your deep commitment to quality products and quality output. But this longing to feel a little bit more playful or flexible with those parts that are essential to you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:17):
Very practically, it's time to play around with AI tools. Just explore and just kind of tinker. Versus, okay, all the time I have, I need to focus on the newsletter, make it better for next week. Oh, it's coming out, here's things I got to do. Oh, this podcast, got to prep for that, got to edit this thing. So it's just time to tinker and explore and just like that kind of stuff.

Rachel Lockett (00:31:37):
That makes sense. And what's important about exploring and tinkering to you?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:42):
Because in the work I do, I need to stay ahead on where things are going. I can't just sit around and pontificate from a cloud. I need to really understand how things work, what's working, what's not, what's real, what's not. So being on the ground as much as I can with what's actually going on versus just putting out content.

Rachel Lockett (00:31:59):
That makes sense. Your voice is moving really fast. I kind of hear you feeling behind, even in the way you're describing what you're doing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:06):
A good [inaudible 00:32:09] listening.

Rachel Lockett (00:32:10):
What's interesting to me is when you're talking about exploring and tinkering, when you first said it, you said it in kind of a spacious way. It's fun to explore and tinker. You're deeply naturally curious. You find new insights. But then I also heard you say, "And it's a way to stay ahead, I have to do it in order to feel like I'm informed." So what do you make of that difference?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:37):
Yeah. Yeah. Those are two sides of the coin. There's another element of ... I guess let me answer that question. I think those are both true, I don't know. The reason I got into this is because it was so fun and so interesting. Just like, here's what's happening, here's what the future-

Rachel Lockett (00:32:53):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:54):
Here's advice, here's ways to improve in the work that you do. So I still love it. It's just I have less time to do that part and more it's just the machine of the treadmill of content, content, content. There's also just spending more ... I didn't even mention this. But just spending more time with my son and my wife, that would be really great just to have more freedom to go do stuff. Which we have a lot of that, but more is great.

Rachel Lockett (00:33:16):
That makes sense. Okay, so the goal that I hear is not so dramatically different from today. It's that you hold on to this high quality output, but you have space for exploring and tinkering. And for spending quality time with the people you love most.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:33):
Yes. One way I'm thinking about as you reflect that back is 25% more free time while everything else continues to be awesome. And the challenge I run into is I sometimes get that extra time and then I fill it with more projects and opportunities. That's the problem right there.

Rachel Lockett (00:33:50):
Yeah, there's that inertia of moving fast, taking advantage of the moment that's coming.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:54):
Yeah, yeah.

Rachel Lockett (00:33:54):
So that's a perfect shift into, what are your current ways of operating that get in the way of having that 25% of free time?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:03):
It's just agreeing to more things. Just like, oh look, I'm kind of free right now. Oh, okay, let's do this talk here. Let's agree to this thing here. So it's just once I feel freedom, I'm like, "Okay, I could do that other thing." And so I commit to more stuff.

Rachel Lockett (00:34:18):
Yeah. And how is that commitment to saying yes to things that come at you serving you?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:24):
Not great.

Rachel Lockett (00:34:27):
Well, it's serving you in some ways. You're doing it for a reason.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:31):
Yeah.

Rachel Lockett (00:34:31):
What benefit does it have to you?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:33):
Well, it depends on the thing. I actually have a rule of never doing a talk or going on another podcast or going to events really, because I find I never really get much out of it, and it distracts me from the stuff I could be doing. So I've set up a lot of policies of just turning down things that don't serve me. But I still crumble and say yes to stuff.

Rachel Lockett (00:34:33):
Yeah, that's smart.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:57):
So to your point, there's value here and there when I take on more work. And then I end up overworked again.

Rachel Lockett (00:35:04):
Yeah, I'm hearing there's just a pattern, it's like a reflexive pattern of even though you set a rule for yourself to say no to certain things and you seem proud of that boundary. You naturally break it or you fall into filling it with other things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:16):
That's right. Exactly.

Rachel Lockett (00:35:18):
Okay. So you're stuck in this kind of addiction to doing more and signing up for more, which is so normal in our world, and probably most listeners can relate to that. That's kind of the soup we swim in. So we have to be conscious of what inputs we have around us.

(00:35:34):
So let's explore your various options that you have in front of you. One that you mentioned already you tried was to make a list of the things you don't want to be doing anymore, like things you want to say no to. And really committing to that and sticking to that. What are the other kinds of things you could do to help you prioritize and create that sacred 25% of extra time for yourself?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:01):
Something I've already done, which hasn't kicked in fully yet, but that I'm really excited about is I reduce the cadence of my newsletter and podcast. Which in theory, should be a massive change. But the cadence of the podcast hasn't shifted down yet, it'll happen next year. The newsletter cadences, I basically changed my promise to readers instead of, you'll receive a newsletter every week. Now it's, two to four times a month depending on what's going on.

Rachel Lockett (00:36:01):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:28):
Which felt huge. The problem is I still like every week I'm like, "Oh, I want to write about this thing. Oh, every week there's nothing's happening, I got to put this out." So I'm almost not taking advantage of that opportunity. So something I could do is actually not publish every week.

(00:36:45):
Another is just bring on some more help. Which is difficult because I've got a lot of good help and there's only so many things other people can do for me that isn't writing an awesome newsletter and recording conversations like this. But I'm always thinking about, and I should think deeper about where can people take more load off my plate?

Rachel Lockett (00:37:04):
Yeah, I love that insight. What I'm hearing is do less in certain areas and think about your team and really expanding the capacity of your team. And be rigorous about the things you can hand off, that you may have limiting beliefs around the things you need to do versus the people on your team.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:21):
I might, I might. And then your point I loved, which is just improve my policies of what I say no to that don't serve me.

Rachel Lockett (00:37:29):
Yeah. What are the things you could be saying yes to if you said no to more things?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:34):
Just playing around with stuff. Just space to explore and tinker, and just sit around and think. Versus just go, go, go, go, go.

Rachel Lockett (00:37:43):
Yeah. I just see you feel so light and excited in that. Like you almost are giddy when you think about that spaciousness.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:50):
That'd be so nice.

Rachel Lockett (00:37:52):
And I just want to name reflect back to you how special that is and how much more creative you could be in your work when you have that space and time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:52):
I love that.

Rachel Lockett (00:38:01):
And your bucket's full with care.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:04):
I feel that, I feel that.

Rachel Lockett (00:38:05):
Yeah. So what's one thing you could do in the next two weeks that would help you get closer to the kind of spaciousness you want to create?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:14):
I love that ... as we go through this, I'm thinking about this growth framework and I love how you're executing it. Like I see it in action, it's so good.

Rachel Lockett (00:38:21):
Yeah, I'm trying to do very simple coaching right now, just [inaudible 00:38:25]-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:24):
Yeah, yeah. No, this is great

Rachel Lockett (00:38:26):
... that it's really easy to follow for your listener.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:28):
Yeah, yeah. This is great. Okay, so what's the one thing I could do in the next couple of weeks to help you move forward on this? I think one is at least skip a week or two of the newsletter and just actually stick to that plan. But it's tough because the next two weeks I got already planned. I got to write a gift guide, that's my ... okay, so the week after, I'll take a break. Okay, cool. So two weeks from the recording this I won't publish a newsletter. And then I'm going to revisit my policies on what I say yes and no to.

Rachel Lockett (00:38:59):
I love that. Think about everything you're saying yes to and what are things you want to say yes to that you could treat it with. So really consider that it's a trade off every time you say yes to something. The more resonant you are with the end state and what's possible for you, the easier it is to be disciplined in the near term.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:20):
I love just that element of here's what you'll get out of this. It's not just no, no, no, no. It's like yes to this other thing you really, really want to do.

Rachel Lockett (00:39:25):
Yeah. Exactly. Yes, say it like a resonant full body yes to the things that are in [inaudible 00:39:32].

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:25):
Hell yes.

Rachel Lockett (00:39:32):
Yeah, hell yes. With an exclamation, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:36):
Awesome.

Rachel Lockett (00:39:36):
Well thank you, Lenny, for letting me just demonstrate what powerful questions are. And the reason I wanted to do that with you is you brought an example that's actually pretty big. It's an emotional thing, it's a cultural norm, it's a way of being that we've all learned to be through growing up and operating in tech, especially. So even with that kind of topic, using a simple grow model can be useful. But people are coming at your listeners with topics that are very complicated, technical, urgent. But the same kinds of questions unlock new opportunity when it's about how to build technical infrastructure or how to influence the executive team or how to ship the go-to-market strategy. So I just want a name that's very transferable.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:28):
I love that I got great advice in this conversation already.

Rachel Lockett (00:40:34):
Good.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:35):
What a great ROI for me at least.

Rachel Lockett (00:40:37):
What did it feel like to be coached on your own podcast?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:41):
It was unusual. I'm just like, wait, I got to get back to asking you questions. That's where our minds are right now.

Rachel Lockett (00:40:44):
Okay, all right, all right. We can flip it, we can flip it. I do want to name that typically when you're coached versus told what to do, you're more bought in. So if I told you, Lenny, I've heard all kinds of leaders come to me talking about being too busy. Here's what you should do. Write a list of all the things you're doing, write the things you're going to delegate, cut out 25% of the things on your calendar. I could have given you a laundry list of things that I thought you should do without much context. But you're the expert on your own context and actually what resonates. And you're much more likely to do it if you came up with it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:22):
I was going to mention that earlier. That is so incredibly true. No one wants to ... unless you ask for advice, very few people are like, "Please tell me what to do."

Rachel Lockett (00:41:30):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:31):
I really love just unsolicited advice. That doesn't go well.

Rachel Lockett (00:41:35):
Yeah. And great leaders often say, "Do you want advice or do you want some space to think about it? Can I help you think it through? Or would you like me to tell you what I would do?" And both are fine in certain situations. So asking is useful too.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:48):
Yeah. Okay. That's such an important element of this that we should have mentioned and I'm glad you did.

Rachel Lockett (00:41:55):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:56):
Okay. So I'm going to go back to asking you questions.

Rachel Lockett (00:41:58):
Great.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:59):
This is a good segway to something I wanted to spend a little time on, which is burnout.

Rachel Lockett (00:42:03):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:05):
What I'm talking about is stuff that often leads to burnout. I'm definitely not burnt out, but this is a common problem in tech. Where people feel depleted and just go too hard. So many people I've worked with just left tech. I had a colleague at Airbnb, he's like a park ranger now near woods. That's how far tech-

Rachel Lockett (00:42:05):
So peaceful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:26):
So peaceful and so wonderful. But I think that's just people go so hard sometimes and then just get burnt out and never want to do anything like this again. I know that you've spent a lot of time on this with founders and you have a really helpful approach. So just talk about what you've learned about helping leaders in tech avoid burnout and feel energized and excited about their work for a long time.

Rachel Lockett (00:42:47):
Yeah. Well first of all, I'm glad you brought it up. It's a huge problem. I remember when I was coaching top talent at Stripe, Patrick Collison is really committed to retaining top talent. And I created a program with my team for the top 50 executives in the tech side of the house. And we looked at their engagement scores, we did coaching circles. And it was so sad to see how exhausted that group of incredibly creative and committed leaders was in that moment.

(00:43:19):
And it's so common that people who start with incredible inspiration and incredible capacity start to feel like they've been pushing and pushing and pushing for years. They're parenting, they're leading, crazy things are happening to the business. And they just can't muster the same kind of motivation they once had. And I see this with my clients all the time.

(00:43:44):
So I've also witnessed people who are still inspired and continually energetic and seem to have some secret well of some diesel battery, or I guess I should say a Tesla battery that helps them through really hard challenges, and they're still having a good time. And so what I make of that is that when people are in their gifts and their strengths firmly, most of the time, they have more energy. We all have more energy when we're operating from the things we naturally are good at and the things we innately love doing.

(00:44:25):
So I try to help my leaders see that they can design their lives so they're spending 80% of their time in their gifts. That seems really ambitious because you're stuck within a context that requires a lot of you. Especially when you're executive at a huge company. But I also interact with founders who started a company with great inspiration, an entrepreneurial vision, and their job has obviously changed every six months. Once you fundraise, once you grow a team. And sometimes, especially technical founders will start solving a technical problem they're absolutely obsessed with. They spend three years doing it, the product ships, and then they're stuck managing a board and a team. And they don't even realize they're doing a completely different job than the one that played to their strengths.

(00:45:17):
So one tool I like to give is for people to actually take two weeks and every night reflect on, what are the five things today that gave me the most energy? And what are the five things that depleted my energy the most? If you do that for two weeks and you look at patterns, you can tell, what are the natural gifts that I'm living in? And what are the things that I'm stuck doing that are exhausting? And they're just slowly ... it's like a slow leak in your gas tank that over time shows up in your daily amount of energy.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:52):
I so believe this advice is so effective. This is the way I actually approach when I left my job. I very actively did this. I paid attention every day, what gave me energy? And what sapped my energy? And let me just do more of the thing that gave me energy and less of the thing that saps me. I want to talk about just like, there's only so much you can change, but I want to talk about that. And so initially I was like, maybe I'll become an advisor and consultant kind of person. I actually found that was super depleting for me.

Rachel Lockett (00:46:22):
Interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:23):
Doing these calls and talking to people because it's like surface level, here are some things I would do. And it was just so unexciting and energizing. But writing was really energizing, which I'd never expected.

Rachel Lockett (00:46:23):
I love that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:36):
And that's what I did, and I just followed that pole.

Rachel Lockett (00:46:38):
And it sounds like maybe you need a refresh, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:42):
Oh, interesting.

Rachel Lockett (00:46:43):
There's always more tuning you can do to your gifts. You're in this amazing ... you've clearly been successful for a reason, you're in your strengths and you're paying attention to what brings you energy. We can always do that more throughout our life. I think it's a process of continually tuning in to where your spark is. And protecting that spark, feeding it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:05):
I love that insight, that just blew my mind.

(00:47:08):
So very tactically, the way you would do this is for two weeks every night is the idea, reflect back on that day and write down five things that gave you energy, five things that sap you of energy.

Rachel Lockett (00:47:19):
Yeah, there's so many different activities you could use. So that's one. I like an activity of actually asking five to ten people in your life with a very simple email. When I walk in the room, what shows up? What are my strengths? What are the gifts? If you really don't know them and you haven't spent a lot of time in this realm, that's also an opportunity of actually asking the people who know you best, what your core gifts are? And when do you have the most inspiration?

(00:47:46):
You can also look through your calendar and note themes. Okay, over the last month, what are all the things I look at on my calendar that I'm excited to do? What are the things I dread? Okay, why do I dread those things? What do those things have in common? So there's various ways you can get to what is your zone of genius? But what my invitation is to take that really seriously. It actually takes risk taking, it takes intention to design your life around your gifts.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:15):
Is there any advice for actually doing this? Say someone's just like, "Yeah, I got to do this." But most people don't actually do this. Is there a buddy you can nominate, just help you do this? Is it like if you have an EA, they can maybe help you with this? Is there anything you've seen?

Rachel Lockett (00:48:28):
That's a good question. Yeah, I love your ideas. I think that the people around you need to be on board and know what are your gifts. So for example, when I was an HR business partner, my boss bought into this and I explained to her, "Hey, I started at Stripe because I actually know I'm going to be a coach. I'm not going to be Head of HR. But I love working with leaders. So I'm going to do all the compensation strategy and all the org design, and I'm going to help product and engineering leaders. But what I have in the back of my mind is I'm honing my coaching skills."

(00:48:56):
And so when this opportunity to work on top talent retention came about, it was very aligned in the realm of coaching and L&D, background that I had. So she put me on that. So it's useful to name it to the people around you. What are your gifts? What are your interests? What skills are you really excited to hone? So that they are in a contract with you to help you and really apply your gifts to the business's needs. So that's one thing.

(00:49:23):
When you're a founder, a CEO, when you have the autonomy to consider, what are the role scopes around me? Then you can really hire around it. So I have some CEOs that I work with who are incredible visionaries, great strategists, really good at managing the board, hiring, et cetera. Terrible at managing their team. They hate it. So they hire a COO. And they work in partnership, they have one person who's really internally focused, they get to be externally focused. That works well, it's a symbiotic relationship. If you're honest about your strengths and you're weaknesses, then you can start to manage around them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:59):
This episode is brought to you by Persona, the verified identity platform, helping organizations onboard users, fight fraud and build trust. We talk a lot on this podcast about the amazing advances in AI. But this can be a double-edged sword. For every wow moment, there are fraudsters using the same tech to wreak havoc. Laundering money, taking over employee identities and impersonating businesses. Persona helps combat these threats with automated user, business and employee verification. Whether you're looking to catch candidate fraud, meet age restrictions or keep your platform safe, Persona helps you verify users in a way that's tailored to your specific needs. Best of all, Persona makes it easy to know who you're dealing with without adding friction for good users. This is why leading platforms like Etsy, LinkedIn, Square and Lyft trust Persona to secure their platform.

(00:50:48):
Persona is also offering my listeners 500 free services per month for one full year. Just head to WithPersona.com/Lenny to get started. That's WithPersona. com/Lenny. Thanks again to Persona for sponsoring this episode.

(00:51:04):
It's really nice to know what you want to do and understand what your dream life looks like. You also have a job, you have manager, you got things to do, you got responsibilities. So I guess first of all, as you have seen people that are not founders actually make a change to do the things ... to spend more time on their gifts, to actually not just be like ... like there is ... you have agency to move in a direction that'll make you happier.

Rachel Lockett (00:51:28):
Absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:28):
Is kind of an implied piece of this.

Rachel Lockett (00:51:30):
Yeah, I think sometimes people hire a Chief of Staff to help them and compliment them. Sometimes people design their team with strengths and gifts that they don't have. So it's really ... you can get creative once you really understand, oh, these things give me a ton of energy and these things are exhausting. But I still need to fill this need for the business. What are all the ways I can do it?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:52):
And telling your manager, I think, is such a simple and important part of this. Telling them-

Rachel Lockett (00:51:52):
Absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:58):
... here's where I want to go, here's the things I want to get better at, here's the things that give me energy. Can we just try to make as much of my role that?

Rachel Lockett (00:52:04):
Yeah. Especially if you're executing well, people want to retain you. They want to know, what's going to keep you here for the next five years? And typically they think that means moving up the ladder. But maybe it doesn't for you. I think it does take the courage to move horizontally sometimes to get into your strengths. I mean, I've moved horizontally a number of times and I love what I do, I feel like I'm in my natural gifts. But it took me a few risks and some uncomfortable jobs that didn't feel like they were worthy of my experience in order to get there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:38):
What's a good percentage of your work life that should be in gifts and things that energize you versus, okay, I actually got [inaudible 00:52:48] stuff.

Rachel Lockett (00:52:48):
My litmus test is 80%, that's the goal.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:48):
80%.

Rachel Lockett (00:52:48):
That's the aspiration. You're always going to have 20% of things you don't love doing. There's just the logistics of getting into the zone that you need to be in. But I really try to push people to think aspirationally, that if you're 80% of the time in your gifts, how much energy you have to give to the world. It's so much more inspiring.

(00:53:09):
So I want to tell you why I'm passionate about this topic because it actually is how I ended up as an Executive Coach. So 10 years ago, I was working at a small company called Remind, and I was running the UX Research team. And the CEO asked me to move into the Product Manager role for the Core Product team. And I was excited for the opportunity. I had non-technical background, but I thought, "Hey, all these strategists are up there creating the roadmap. I can do that. I know exactly what our users need." So I was excited for this.

(00:53:44):
I came into the team, there was I think 12 senior engineers, very opinionated, very skeptical, this non-technical PM, but we worked together. And what I did was I listened. I learned what do our users need? What does this team need? What's working and not working? And with-

Rachel Lockett (00:54:00):
What does this team need? What's working and not working? And within a month, this team was working well together. They were reviewing each other's code base. They were really disagreeing in a healthy way in our team meetings. They felt more connected to users. And I felt like, "Okay, this rhythm is working." But what I was also doing as I was at home stressing in the middle of the night about the new user experience, I couldn't decide which of the designs to go with. I was always over leveraging our data scientists, and I found myself swirling on decisions that didn't need to have so much stress involved. And one day I went for a walk with my colleague Zach Abrams, and he was a great product manager and he was listening to me ask all these questions about how to sell the vision of what this product would look like in the future.

(00:54:55):
And he said, "Rachel, you're a zone of genius or your gift is not being a product strategist, but I've watched you over the last few months, and you have gotten the team more motivated than I ever could, and you've influenced the entire executive team behind your ideas, and that's impressive. You're a people person." And at first I was offended. What? You think I don't have the ability to be a great product leader? And yet I sat with what he said, and I knew he was right. Both my parents are therapists. I never wanted to be a therapist. Here I am. I'm basically a work therapist. I love entrepreneurial energy, I love big vision, but I'm a people person. 

(00:55:40):
And I left that, and I realized I love what my coach does. I got trained as a coach. I went into HR leadership. And Zach, who was a gifted product strategist, went on to lead product at Coinbase and BREX and most recently Bridge, which was acquired by Stripe, and he's still my client. And we've watched our journeys over the last decade, and we've both been honing our gifts. Life is more fun when you're in your gifts, and you have more inspiration and capacity to offer the world. So I just want to share that story because it's helpful to be honest with the people you care about when they seem energized and when they seem depleted because sometimes it's a wakeup call for people to really think about what is their spark and to protect it and to feed it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:36):
I love that story because I think most people when they hear this advice and this topic of, "Okay, I am feeling depleted, I'm feeling burnt out," I feel like most people jump to, "Okay, but I can't actually do anything about it. I have a job. I got responsibilities." What I'm getting from this is the most important step is jump to figure out what you actually should be doing. What gives you energy? What your gifts are. It feels like that's the biggest gap for people because once you know that, there are ways to do that. Talk to your manager. "It may not be possible today, but here's where I want to be going. Here's what I want to be spending time on." I love your point you made though about you actually have to be doing well for your manager to listen to you. You can't just be sucking and then like, "Oh, but I want to work on strategy."

Rachel Lockett (00:57:19):
Yeah. Well, it's no one else's job to help you live in your gifts. And what I notice in big companies is people are often annoyed or frustrated with their management for not making their job more interesting. It's like, "No, your manager's job is to help you perform in the job you were hired to do. It's your job to navigate your career." So over the arc of your career, how do you match your gifts with the world's needs? And if the world right now is your company, how do you understand the needs enough so that you can apply your strengths to those needs?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:54):
This reminds me, there's a couple of guests I've had on the podcast who did this. They're both founders, so this is specific to founders, but Rahul Vohra at Superhuman, he realized he's not the best executor operations person, so he hired a president that took all that office plate. And then Darmesh, co-founder of HubSpot, he knew from the beginning he didn't want to manage people, so he made a rule with his co-founder, "I will never have reports." And he's the CTO, I believe, and has zero reports, has no one-on-ones.

Rachel Lockett (00:58:23):
Yeah. And I think that it's a beautiful thing to recognize that, but then to actually address the needs of those reports also. I think often people know, "Ugh, I don't want to have one-on-ones," but just not having anyone to manage those people is not going to be healthy for your company. So you have to both take your strength seriously and actively manage around your weaknesses.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:45):
Is there any maybe last piece of advice on this topic of helping people get to a place where they're feeling much less depleted and just more energized at work?

Rachel Lockett (00:58:53):
I would start small. You don't have to leave your job and redesign your life. You can stop going to the optional things that are exhausting. You can leave space between the things that are depleting that you have to go to outside and go on a 30-minute walk and refuel your tank. Start with tomorrow. What are the three things you're going to do to plug up that gas leak and re-energize your spark? It might even be you love to read and you're going to start reading 30 minutes before you go to sleep every night. It doesn't have to be a dramatic life change, but recognize that only you know what is resonant and what is depleting, and it's your job to take that seriously if you want to show up purposeful and impactful in the world.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:41):
I love that advice. I've actually started reading before bed for 30 minutes, and that's been so joyful, like a physical book with a little nightlight.

Rachel Lockett (00:59:48):
I agree. I love a physical book. I have a Kindle, I got all the things, but a physical book on the couch is the best.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:55):
Yeah, it's just that nightlight is key because sometimes at nighttime you need a night book. So we've been talking mostly so far about individual improvement, how to figure out what you should be working on, just helping learning to coach, things like that. I want to take us up a little level above and talk about team skills, how people get better at working with other people. Something that you are in many ways known for is helping co-founders build better relationships. And in my experience one of the most challenging parts of starting a company is the co-founder relationship. A lot of people don't realize what they're getting into. You're basically getting married to this person in a very high stress situation, and you sometimes don't know much about them.

Rachel Lockett (01:00:38):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:39):
And then you not working well together is just a huge issue because that all trickles down, and everyone sees it. And when co-founders leave, it's really bad for everyone. So let me just ask you this, what have you found most helpful in helping co-founders build great relationships, stay happy and productive?

Rachel Lockett (01:00:56):
Yeah, thanks for asking this. I love working with co-founders because I think your core values as a person come out when they interact with someone else's core values. Conflict, healthy conflict or otherwise, is actually where your core values come out. So it's fascinating to watch people try to do something incredibly hard in the context of someone else's vision, someone else's strengths and weaknesses and navigate that together. So there's so much energy in the co-founder dynamic for me and for co-founders themselves. It's actually something that people don't feel comfortable going to their board about or talking to that many people about because it's a private matter. It's almost like in a marriage you go see a couples' therapist, but you don't tell all your friends that you can't stand your partner, but it keeps you up at night. So it's a really tender, important relationship, and there aren't enough supports for co-founders to navigate it. It's very normal. 

(01:01:50):
In fact, I know you probably know this stat, 65% of startups fail because of co-founder conflict, and co-founders are in a moment where they're trying to build the future for their business, but also trying to build their own livelihood. So there's so much at stake to get along with your co-founder. I think the core at its core, what you need in a healthy relationship is, one, self-awareness. What do I bring into this dynamic, and how am I being experienced by the other person? What does this other person bring into the dynamic, and how am I reacting to that? So the first is just collective awareness about what is our dynamic. I like to use the Enneagram for this, but there's all kinds of tools, self-awareness tools that you can use to give a common language to what is my thing and what is your thing.

(01:02:46):
A very classic one has to do with roles. CTOs tend to be skeptics. They love facts, they seek knowledge. They want depth of awareness and understanding, and they also like to be self-sufficient. This is a total generalization, but I've seen this pattern over and over again. The CEO is the person who had to sell the vision. They're a person who loves big picture vision strategy. They often are great at influencing others. They love to sell ahead of the reality of what the company's actually built. This creates an inherent tension between blind optimism and skepticism, and it's a dance that these two roles play together. So the first part is knowing the dance you're in, so you're not just stepping on each other's toes blindly. 

(01:03:34):
The second step is actually being conscious about the commitment you're making to your relationship. In a marriage, for example, I talk about co-founder vows and recommitments and renewals because in a marriage you get married, and a lot of times people build a family and then they think, "Oh, the relationship will just continue around each other all the time. We're doing this thing together." But just like couples need a date night, co-founders need time and space to connect with each other to come together and say, "How's this working for you? Are we still aligned on our vision and our strategy? How are we working together? What am I doing that's pissing you off? What are the things that have gone unsaid and that we need to talk about?" 

(01:04:20):
But if you're just in the hustle and bustle of running and scaling your startup, you don't make time for that conversation. So I think it's incredibly important for co- founders to make space for their relationship, whether that's a dinner every other week, whether that's going out to lunch regularly, whether that's just touching base business-wise, but having an in-person quarterly check-in. That space is critical for the health of a co-founder relationship.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:50):
On that second piece, the vows idea is such a good idea. Is that something you actually recommend, here's what I vow to do?

Rachel Lockett (01:04:56):
Yeah, here's what I commit to do. So recently I actually wrote an article with First Round, and we created a document to help co-founders think about what to integrate into their check-in. So we put out weekly check-in, monthly check-in and annual and just questions to sit down and ask each other. Active listening skills will come in handy in those conversations, but it's about taking space out of hustling and running the business to think about the business from a like to say, instead of being on the dance floor, you need time on the balcony to look down at what's happening. How are we doing? Is this still working for both of us? And the vows are really about, how are we going to be together? How are we going to show up? What's our culture that we're creating? 

(01:05:43):
Even if you don't want to go through a whole culture exercise early on in building your company, you should have some sense of how you want to show up for each other. How are we going to make decisions? How are we going to deal with conflict? These are things you can go into intentionally and design with your co-founder.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:03):
Awesome. We're going to link to that post The first step, Enneagram sounds like that's what you recommend, and this is basically a personality profile that a lot of people love.

Rachel Lockett (01:06:12):
I really like the Enneagram. I think you can also simply tell each other, "Here are my strengths. Here's what I see as my weaknesses, and what do you think? Give me some feedback. Do you agree?" And you can do that with each other without any personality assessment. If you want to just be scrappy and have an open connected conversation about, you could even say, what are the gifts I bring and the weaknesses I have, and how will I cover those? How will I lean into my gifts? How will I cover my weaknesses, and how will you? And then I think it's worthwhile having a conversation about, what are the gaps neither of us cover that we're likely going to need as we build this business?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:50):
What do you recommend people do when they are just like, "Our relationship isn't working great. There's a lot of tension"? All this advice we've been talking about, at the beginning, here's things you can do to set things up for success. Understand what you're good at, what you're bringing to the table. Consciously commit to, here's what I'm going to do, here's what you're going to do. Have these dinners or lunches. I love this metaphor of going out on the balcony and just reflecting on how it's going. So that's all really great. What if you're just already in it and it's really annoying, I don't like this person that much or so much tension constantly. What are a couple things they can do this week, next week?

Rachel Lockett (01:07:27):
Co-founders typically come to me either in this early phase where they want to intentionally build something great and they want to set it up for success. More often co-founders come when they're really frustrated with one another. They feel the tension is palpable. They can't stand it anymore, but they're still really deeply committed to the business so they don't see an out. And they knew that at some point they really loved this cofounder, so they see a possibility of recovering, and that's why they want to go get a coach. I'm going to give you an example of this PR duo running a fierce business scaling really fast. And at one point when they started, you had the visionary who was great at selling business. They were both incredible with PR, and the partner was incredible operationally. 

(01:08:17):
So as the business scaled, one took on a lot more business development and the other took on all the internal things, but was exhausted by all this people management and all of the elements of running a scaled team that she didn't expect to have to do. And when they came, I think both of them weren't sure, can we figure this out? Do we want to just sell this thing? Do we want to keep going? And I think someone said, "End it or send," was what one co-founder said to me. They're coming at this decision point. And what I saw them do is, one, they named current state really well. They were both able to share. We did use a 360. So they got feedback from their teams and then shared it with one another, but they were able to be open and vulnerable in what was working and what wasn't working. Not immediately, but over time. 

(01:09:16):
And they realized they used to love being partners in this work, but as they began to lead different teams, they grew very distant from one another. They were living on opposite sides of the country and actually just coming together and realizing what each other was missing and how lonely it is to lead this scaling company without each other's support and how they actually needed the counterbalance to their strengths and didn't have it was a important start to their healing.

(01:09:48):
And over our coaching, they turned back towards each other and they created more of a rhythm of how they would get together without me involved. And they ended coaching after our arc feeling renewed and really recommitted. They made some changes on their leadership team to fill their gaps. They also started, I think, meeting once a week virtually, and they started a cadence of getting together in person quarterly. And I don't mean to say that just that time means you're going to heal, sometimes coming together and really grappling. I had one last week where we all came together, we had a great full day in-person discussion about how they were making this co-founder duo, how they were making decisions. 

(01:10:36):
And after that conversation, it was really clear that one of the co-founders was unhappy and didn't appreciate the other one and was not going to change and realized he was a big part of the problem and I think is going to leave the business. But that's still success because it's clarity. You're not muddling in the dark, frustrated, unconscious about the interpersonal dynamics you're in, you're making a choice based on your strengths and what the business needs and this relationship dynamic that you're in to either be in it or to lovingly step out of it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:16):
I love how similar this is to just the marriage, all this stuff. This is the same sort of thing you would do.

Rachel Lockett (01:11:21):
Totally. I mean a marriage, you're building a life with a partner. So the only difference is a marriage is rooted in sexual attraction and love, and that's not the case always in the co-founder dynamic. But I have worked with couples who are also co-founders, but there should be some element of love for your co-founder. In fact, I think that when you work closely with colleagues and you really are able to see their gifts and enable them, you can't help but love them.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:52):
That's a big statement. The other takeaway here is that just get coaching. It feels like that's the solution if things are just not working great. There's only so far you can get just talking.

Rachel Lockett (01:12:01):
It takes an evolved facilitator, one of the co-founders, being able to hold space for both their frustration and their empathy in a dynamic that is challenging. So outside support is useful. Sometimes it's actually a team member, it's an HR leader. It's the GC who happens to have great people skills. You don't always need a coach, but you need space to be vulnerable, open, and curious. So if you can create that on your own, that's great. I think it's definitely possible.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:35):
Outside of the co-founder relationship, do you have any just tactical tips for people to improve their interpersonal skills with just team members, anyone they work with, just people that may struggle like, "Man, I have a hard time with this person. I just have a hard time with a lot of people"?

Rachel Lockett (01:12:50):
First of all, people when they want to have a conflict or they want to engage in something that's not working, they come in armored and ready to prove their point. It's natural. You've been thinking about this, perseverating over whether you should mention it. You finally get to the point of engaging, and often there's a misguided view that the goal is to convince the other person that what they're doing is wrong. Actually, the goal of any conflict is to create mutual understanding. So when I go in to have a conversation with, let's say my husband who's not doing his share of the parenting, my goal is to help him understand what I'm struggling with so that he can empathize, see clearly what's happening, and perhaps meet my needs in some way. But it's not for me to prove to him how little he's doing in the house because he might have a totally different story about what's happening. 

(01:13:54):
So I'm going to give you a framework that I like that many of my clients use. It's from Marshall Rosenberg's Nonviolent Communication. It is a book and a framework. So it's four steps. The first step is observations. So my job is to note what is happening factually. For example, I noticed that in the last three sprint planning meetings, you didn't invite me to those conversations or share with me the roadmap. That's an observation. It's a fact. I could take a picture of it, and no one would argue with it. The next step is feelings. So I'm going to express my feelings without blame. So I felt anxious not knowing what was on the roadmap for the week. I felt confused about whether that meeting happened or not because I wasn't included. So this is me sharing my feelings so the other party can empathize and understand what I'm going through without being defensive.

(01:14:59):
The third step is needs. What are my universal human needs related to this topic? We all have needs. This is not requiring anything of the other person, just helping them understand my needs that are not met. So I have a need for clarity, I have a need for collaboration, I have a need for connection, whatever that is. And lastly, the step is to make a request. Now, in this model, the request is an olive branch to help the other person meet you and see you. It shouldn't be something that's impossible to do. It should be actually something quite small and easy to achieve for the other person to feel successful in connecting to you and understanding you. So in this case, I might make a request. I'd like to ask you next time you have a sprint planning meeting to include me as optional or to send me the roadmap afterwards that you align on. 

(01:15:54):
Now, the other person doesn't have to meet my request. They might make a counter proposal, but the most important thing of this model in this conversation is that the other person understands what I'm going through and they don't feel reactive so that we can have a mutual conversation about what's going on.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:12):
Wow. This point about how when you're trying to convince someone of something, when something is going wrong, this point that your goal is not to convince them, that your goal is to have mutual understanding, that just blew my mind, and I think it's going to change my life. Wow.

Rachel Lockett (01:16:32):
Lenny, try this with your wife tonight. NVC is a powerful tool, and actually it's very akin to most models that are about connection. The Stanford Business School course that has a T, it's called Touchy Feely that everybody loves.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:48):
Yeah, we've had Carol on the podcast.

Rachel Lockett (01:16:49):
Great. Yeah, so Carol Robbins created this movement. There's lit. A lot of founders go to her model that's for founders.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:55):
And tech.

Rachel Lockett (01:16:56):
And this is all about, they talk about a net that you can talk about your feelings and your reaction, but as soon as you cross the net to blaming someone else or making an assumption, they're going to have a defensive response. But you can be incredibly bold and brave if you stay on your side of the net. So this model helps you do that because it's really about sharing your emotions and your needs and making a request without blame.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:21):
Yeah. So what I was going to say as you were going through this framework is here's me, here's what I saw, here's what I'm feeling, here's what I need. And then now that you have that in context, here's something I'm asking for versus you did this and you're feeling this and you thought this.

Rachel Lockett (01:17:37):
Exactly. It also acknowledges that professionals have feelings. I think that we operate in tech. We're supposed to give all of ourselves, all of our time, all of our energy to this endeavor. And it's purely logical. It's not at all true. It's completely emotional. And if we ignore our feelings, they will bubble up, and we will be unconsciously acting from them.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:00):
And there's this implicit power here that if the person cares about you and loves you or values your relationship, knowing that this makes them feel bad will make them want to change. It's not like you need to tell them, "Change this thing. Oh, I didn't realize this made you upset or that you have this need. And now that I know that, okay, now I see why this is important to you."

Rachel Lockett (01:18:22):
That's exactly right. And sometimes the other person will hear that and have a different story or a different perspective. So they might say, " Okay, I can honor that request," or, "I hear that request, and I hear your feelings, but let me explain what happened for me." And one way you could do that is, are you open to hearing that? So they're able to share their side too. You don't have to just agree with the person's request. As long as you're setting this tone, the other person's more likely to contribute in a way that achieves mutual understanding because once you're vulnerable, they're going to share their vulnerability.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:00):
Let me remind folks of the framework. I'm going to try using this. I wish it was a handy acronym off. So the framework is share what you've observed, just the facts of what is happening. Just simply, I saw you didn't close the fridge fully. Your feelings of how that made you feel, the needs that your core human need that drives that feeling, I imagine. And then the request you have of the person.

Rachel Lockett (01:19:28):
Yes. And I want to make one note I forgot to say, which is feelings are emotions. So sometimes people say things like, "I feel like you're being a jerk." That's not a feeling, obviously. A feeling is a sensation in your body that results in an emotion. So naming a feeling is actually not easy for technical leaders sometimes. I want to make that point because emotions are what get you to the underlying humanity of connection. Emotions are the key to soliciting empathy.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:05):
Are there phrases that are just examples of non-feelings, like using the word "you" in the way you describe a feeling probably is not a good sign?

Rachel Lockett (01:20:14):
Exactly. If you can say, "I feel like... " even if you add like or, "I feel that... " you're probably going to add a fact. It should be an emotion word after I feel.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:24):
So don't say like, don't say you, don't say that?

Rachel Lockett (01:20:27):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:29):
Awesome. Along this topic, I chatted with a number of clients that have worked with you over the years, and one of the most common themes that they said you help them with is having difficult conversations. And I think we covered actually much of this in what we just talked about, but I'm curious if there's any other advice you have for helping people have difficult conversations. Let me read a quote from one of your clients.

Rachel Lockett (01:20:52):
Oh, wow. I love this.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:54):
So she said, "Rachel is exceptional at making difficult decisions clear and making it feel possible to get these decisions actualized." Is there anything more-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:00):
... these decisions actualized. Is there anything more there for, because difficult conversations are difficult. How do we help people make them less difficult? Any tips?

Rachel Lockett (01:21:11):
Yeah. Well, first of all, difficult conversations makes you want to run away. The marketing on conflict is poor, so I want to reframe that. My belief is when we feel internally ambivalent, we have two inner parts at war. And there's something really beautiful and important to pay attention to, there's something to learn, when we have ambivalence. When we are in conflict, something important is at stake. We care deeply about what we're building, about the person that's letting us down. So the reason it's hard, is because there's such an emotional component to it. And there's something to learn from it.

(01:21:57):
So first, I want leaders who are listening to think, "This is hard, because I have something to learn here, and because it matters. So instead of avoiding it and running away, I'm going to lean into this moment. And I'm going to come out of it not just having solved this dynamic, and not just having said my piece, but having built a skill." The reason I focus on interpersonal dynamics is because the quality of our relationships determines the quality of our life. I really believe that. And if you cannot have conflict, you can't have healthy relationships. We are going to disagree with the people we love, or care about, or are building a business with. So first, I just want listeners to reframe ambivalence and interpersonal challenge, think of them as a growth opportunity.

(01:22:56):
Second, there is always something that we're doing to contribute to the conflict, even if it feels like the other person is insane, and is driving us crazy, and we're the innocent party. So entering any conflict conversation with humility, and curiosity about the other person's experience, is critical to setting the table for a commitment to come out better and stronger. So no model, NVC or otherwise, can fix a person who's coming in rigid and full of blame. I really love the 15 Commitments to Conscious Leaders, I don't know if you know that book, but one of the concepts is about taking a hundred percent responsibility. Not being in the world of blame, being a victim, or being a hero. And I see many leaders, when they're in a challenging interpersonal conflict, being in victimhood, being in blame, or being in hero. "I'm just going to do it for them, and forget it. They're having such a hard time getting this done, I'm just going to do it."

(01:24:10):
Instead, take responsibility for your part. "What is my piece in making this dynamic happen and how can I address it?"

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:18):
That makes me think about, Jerry Colonna was on the podcast, and he has this famous line that I've always remembered. How are you complicit in creating the conditions that you claim you don't want?

Rachel Lockett (01:24:29):
Yes, I love that. Love that question.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:32):
And there's so many, there's three parts to that whole question, I won't get into it. But what you're sharing here is, think about that, figure out how, because your point is, you're always somehow complicit in creating the issue you're complaining about. And use that to help kind of put down the defense of the person like, "Here's what I've contributed to this problem." Do you use the nonviolent communication framework? And I don't know, is that just a general way of trying to have difficult conversations, or is there not a framework?

Rachel Lockett (01:24:58):
Yeah, no, I think that's a great framework for when you want to go interact with someone around something that's not working for you. I think typically a difficult conversation arises because some feelings are coming up for you, and you have a need that's not being met. And so, that's the instigator to know, "Okay, I need to talk to this person. We need to clear this up."

(01:25:17):
For example, I was working with a CEO whose co-founder was constantly undercutting his decisions, and criticizing him. And there was something happening, where they'd gone from being this great dynamic duo, fundraised, hired a few leaders, and then all of a sudden he was getting daggers thrown at him all the time. And it was exhausting, and frustrating, and confusing. That was a time where he used NVC to address, "What is happening, here?" And it turned out that the co-founder was really frustrated with how he was spending his time. He didn't want him to be off selling, he wanted him to be helping him with product vision. And they had a totally different conception of how the CEO should be spending his time.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:02):
Awesome. Just remind folks of the NVC framework, because this is the thing that's hard in the moment. Like, "Oh, what should I be saying?" Observe, feelings, needs, request.

Rachel Lockett (01:26:11):
Yeah, exactly. And there's a nonviolent communication book, if folks are into the framework, and want to check it out.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:17):
People need a little... Who was it, you said one of your client's tattooed the vision he had, on-

Rachel Lockett (01:26:22):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:22):
Okay, there's, let's just get something.

Rachel Lockett (01:26:24):
Maybe don't tattoo NVC.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:25):
Because that may be [inaudible 01:26:25]

Rachel Lockett (01:26:27):
It doesn't have a good acronym. You could just print it out, and put it right next to your screen, or something-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:27):
All right, okay.

Rachel Lockett (01:26:30):
... if you want.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:31):
No tattoos. I just want to highlight the first point you made in this answer, of having difficult conversations. And then I have one more question for you. Just this point about, if there's something you're afraid of, that is a sign you should do that. There's a quote I often think of. "The cave you fear contains the treasure you seek." And the advice there is just, the thing you're afraid of is a compass too, the thing you should do. Because there's something important there.

Rachel Lockett (01:26:58):
I love that. Yeah. It's like, "What's important here? What do I have to learn here?" Is a question you can ask yourself when you're avoiding something. I often see this in talent management situations. A CEO has an underperforming COO. They're avoiding a conversation, because they keep getting let down, and actually they kind of know deep down, this is not working out. They don't want to face it. It's too much work. They need to just keep plowing forward.

(01:27:27):
And when we really take space to think about their feelings and needs, they realize, I ask them, "Would you enthusiastically rehire this person for the same role?" Which is the question we always asked at Stripe. And when the answer is no to that, no matter how many difficult conversations you have, this is not going to work. So then you have to take action. And even engaging in the hard conversation, and seeing what happens, can lead you to the clarity that you need to take action on talent that's not working.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:01):
That is a really cool tip. I did not know Stripe operated that way. We had the CTO of Netflix on the podcast, Elizabeth Stone, and this is very much how they operate. They're always asking a question like that. The way you phrased it was, "Would I enthusiastically rehire this person for the same role?"

Rachel Lockett (01:28:18):
Exactly. It's very clarifying, because it's binary. People have a physical sense, just like we talked about a full body yes, before? You have a immediate reaction that is honest, to that question, that provides clarity.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:33):
And the answer isn't, if it's no, it's not, "Fire them." It's, "You need to do something about it." It could be talk to them about it, put them on a performance plan, put them in a different role. It doesn't mean you have to fire them immediately, so it's not necessarily as scary as it sounds, if you say no.

Rachel Lockett (01:28:47):
Yeah, I think that also it depends on the stage of business you're in. So I see a lot of companies build a leadership team, and then a year later, the size and stage of their business is dramatically different. And they start to realize, "Oh, the CFO that was really fine back then, is now completely wrong. He should be the controller." Okay, great. So reckon with that. Recognize that in how you're interacting with your current CFO, put out a search. There's many things you can do that aren't firing someone. But in quickly scaling businesses, it's natural that the leadership team's job will change, and that you'll have to make some evolution over time.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:28):
And I guess it's very important to highlight the importance of operating this way, if you're trying to build a really successful company, is that should be the bar. Is, if you would not enthusiastically rehire this person for this role. If you're trying to build something that's never been built before, and build a company that actually works out really well, you need to really only have people around that are hitting that bar.

Rachel Lockett (01:29:50):
Yeah. My perspective, I talked at the beginning about how I'm obsessed with the human side of business building, and my belief is that talent and the environment that you put your talent in is everything. Yes. Building a product and a business is about building something that users need. It's about product market fit, and then the wave you're on. Timing is important. You're going to build a different size business, if you're in a sector that's not growing, than right now, if you're in the middle of AI. True. You're riding a timing wave, and you're solving a core need. But everything besides that is so human. It's about talent, and it's about the environment that you put that talent in. So you need to create the conditions such that your talent can thrive.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:37):
Such a simple concept, that I think people overlook, is just everything you do is going to be the people that you have around you, and the environment you create for them to operate. I think your point about when you're doing something difficult, just to close out this element, I love this idea that if it feels hard, think of it as a learning opportunity. I think anyone listening to this is like, "Oh, cool, I'm going to learn something. I'm going to get better." It's such a easier, more motivating way of approaching something that's difficult.

Rachel Lockett (01:31:05):
And I want to make a distinction between that and what we talked about earlier, which was, lean into your strengths. Because I don't believe people should suffer through the day grinding, doing work that's depleting. That's not a learning opportunity. Interpersonally, when you're avoiding something, it's because you care about something. Avoiding your emotions is what I want to encourage people against. We have to feel our feelings all the way through, be present to our feelings, and interact with others in a way that acknowledges our feelings. That's what I want to encourage, because actually that's not deadening, that's enlivening. And there's learning there.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:48):
A final area I want to spend a little time on is, something that I've heard from everybody that you work with, which is the way that you help them operate. So you just talked about the importance of the people you hire and the environment you create for them. And something that you help leaders do is create a very specific way of operating around a one-page plan, and how that kind of trickles down and just makes everything at a company more effective. Talk about this one-page plan, how you recommend companies operate with this.

Rachel Lockett (01:32:17):
Yeah, thanks for asking that question. I think, typically, companies have complicated the process of aligning their vision, their strategy, their goals, and the way people behave with each other, their values. So that all of these things live in different places, are talked about to a different degree, resonate to employees differently. And if you asked anyone at the company, "What are your top three priorities, and how do they relate to the vision?" It's not an easy answer.

(01:32:50):
So the reason I like the one-page plan concept is, it's simplifying. It's a way for the leadership team to come together and align around, " What are we doing here? What is our role in it? And how do we communicate it, so that the whole company has clarity, and knows how the work they're doing ladders up to our big picture vision that we're all committed to?"

(01:33:14):
So I actually got this idea of the one-page plan from Alpine Investors. They have something called the People First Operating Rhythm, and they've successfully implemented that at their portfolio companies. And I work in concert with Alpine, so I work with some of their portfolio CEOs. To execute this rhythm. So it's not just about a one-page plan. It puts your vision and your values on the first column, your strategic intentions and your KPIs on the second column, your annual goals on the third, and your quarterly goals on the fourth. So that no matter what you're talking about, in terms of, "What are we doing for the next year, or the next quarter? How do we prioritize?" It's always in tandem with your core KPIs, your strategy, and your vision.

(01:34:04):
And I love how they instituted that with their portfolio, and I saw the power of it. They've collected some data that their portfolio companies that actually institute the People First Operating Rhythm result in higher returns. So they're very committed to this strategy, and after operating with CEOs in their rhythm, I took some of those ideas and started to help other founders and other leaders with some of the same concepts, in my own way.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:30):
We're going to hopefully link to a template of this one-page plan?

Rachel Lockett (01:34:33):
Yeah, sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:33):
Okay, cool.

Rachel Lockett (01:34:33):
Happy to share.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:34):
Okay, so let's do that. And then, what kind of impact do you see from companies starting to operate this way to motivate people to do this?

Rachel Lockett (01:34:41):
Yeah. What I see is clarity and alignment. And I also see more connection. So I want to name that it's not just about having a plan, it's about how you create it, how you reflect on it, and how you come together around it to celebrate wins.

(01:34:57):
So in my opinion, a very under- attended to part of building a business is an operating rhythm. When do you come together to kick off the year, and share your strategy and vision again, and talk about the goals? When do you come together to reflect on what's working and not working, and how do you do that? And in what groups? And are you honest, or are you just kind of doing it as a quick exercise to move on to what's pressing?

(01:35:25):
So just like I said in co-founder dynamics, a key is to step out of the dance floor and to get onto the balcony. Executive teams leading a complex business need time away from being in the business to work on the business. So around this one-page plan, the reason I like a rhythm, is you can kick off the year with the plan. That's really simple, easy to understand. Everyone can have it accessible and every quarter, you can get together to reflect, "What worked, what didn't work?"

(01:35:56):
I really like the question, "What's an inconvenient truth?" Air the things that need to be talked about, that no one's talking about because you're too busy. That's the power of combining a simple plan, whether it's one page or not, that aligns you from the top to the bottom, your vision all the way down to your quarterly goals. And a time where you stop, pause, discuss, reflect, have a little spacious energy.

(01:36:26):
It's not unlike what you said about your own time. You are the executive team. You want a little bit of spacious time to tinker, reflect, create, and come back to the meaningful work you're doing more energized. And leadership teams need that too.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:36:45):
Wait, Alpine Investors, Graham Weaver. He was on the podcast.

Rachel Lockett (01:36:45):
I saw that. I saw that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:36:49):
I love that. Okay, final, final question. I want to take us to AI corner before we get to the very exciting lighting round. I'm going to do kind of a tweaked version. Usually I ask people just, how has AI impacted their work and life? I guess that is the question here, just how has AI changed, I guess coaching, as a coach? But also just, from a client's perspective, how are people using AI to help them in their, I guess life, from a coaching perspective?

Rachel Lockett (01:37:13):
Yeah, it's a great question. So as a coach, I use AI in a couple of key ways, that I'm grateful for. One, I use Granola, which I saw you give away to your listeners.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:23):
One free year of Granola, for becoming an annual subscriber of Lenny's Newsletter, lennysnewsletter.com.

Rachel Lockett (01:37:29):
There you go.

(01:37:29):
So I use Granola to take notes in our session so I can be fully present with my clients, and I can give them a synthesis of what happened and the next steps they committed to after our session. I also use it, I put them in a folder for every client, and so I can look at insights across our work together. What are the deeper things that are happening? What are the patterns that are taking place? I have these in my head, but actually it's a great tool, to see over time. "Oh yeah, we talked about that in our first session. Let's bring that back, because that's what you're struggling with now." So it helps me create the kind of transformation that I want for all my clients.

(01:38:08):
Secondly, I just use ChatGPT to help me plan my retreats. I run a women's organization, and we have eight retreats a year, and it's a great tool to think expansively about new activities. Once I've gotten the core objectives down, and I have a bunch of ideas about what I want to do, it gives me new creative ideas. So I can put in like, "Here's my objective, here's my goal, here's my audience, here's my last retreat that I ran. I kind of want three new ideas for this session." So it'll give me creative energy that I otherwise would need to get together with other coaches to discuss. And I do that, too.

(01:38:50):
Finally, I'm experimenting with AI in a way to support my clients between sessions. So I've gotten some feedback from my clients that they would like more interaction between our sessions, and they're always allowed to email me, or text me. I'm available to them. But I think they want to be really respectful of my time, and so some people do reach out and ask me questions, and other people wait for our session.

(01:39:17):
So I'm curious about the future of coaching, how in between sessions, clients can get access to more of an AI support, where the bot has all of their context, their development plan that we create at the beginning. So that's their goals, for our work together, how they want to grow. Some of my core frameworks, and my beliefs, and my training. And the Granola notes from all of our sessions, so that they can access between, just some extra spot support. They're going into this conversation, how should they approach it? They're anxious about this team meeting. How can they make the most of it? More tactical support. I see personal coaching as still critical for, "What is your vision of your life? How do you want to shift your core behavior to align with that vision?" But then, AI can play a real helpful role in between, on the tactics.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:40:15):
That is super cool. So that's something you already do, where they have access to this kind of GPT-

Rachel Lockett (01:40:19):
It's something I'm building right now.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:40:20):
You're building, that is-

Rachel Lockett (01:40:21):
My clients don't have that yet.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:40:22):
Okay. That is great. That is a really good idea. It's not replacing coaching and therapists, let's say, but it's adding a lot more in-between time where you could just talk to us, based on everything you've talked about, all the frameworks that you use. That is extremely cool. All right. There's a billion-dollar company coming.

Rachel Lockett (01:40:39):
I don't want to build that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:40:43):
It's not your zone of genius.

Rachel Lockett (01:40:44):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:40:47):
Rachel, is there anything else that you want to share or leave listeners with, before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Rachel Lockett (01:40:55):
What I want to share is that the world is getting more lonely. There's a lot of research on this, but it's also obvious in my coaching sessions, that people feel more alienated from one another. And actually, building businesses is an inherently human endeavor. So I am a fan of this AI boom, I appreciate that we have more technology at our fingertips than ever before. But I want to encourage listeners to think of themselves as leaders who bring humans together to self-actualize, and that they have to actively overcome the default state, which is blind, grind, and loneliness. So I think this is a call to action for your listeners, to connect with the people around them, lead healthier teams, create environments where connection is inevitable. And that they will have more fun, and build better businesses, because of that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:42:03):
What a beautiful way to end it. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got five questions for you. Are you ready?

Rachel Lockett (01:42:10):
I am ready.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:42:11):
First question, what are two or three books that you find yourself recommending most to other people?

Rachel Lockett (01:42:16):
One of them I said before, The 15 Commitments of Conscious Leaders. And I love Designing Your Life, by Bill Burnett.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:42:25):
I love that book, too. People don't talk about that book enough. Next question. Favorite recent movie or TV show you really enjoyed?

Rachel Lockett (01:42:31):
Oh, God. I just went to KPop Demon Hunters with my daughter. It's so embarrassing, but that's what we dressed as for Halloween, like everyone else in the world.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:42:38):
I have not seen that. I hear everyone talking about it. I am going to try to avoid it, I think. Next question. Favorite product you have recently discovered that you really love? Could be an app, could be a gadget, could be clothes.

Rachel Lockett (01:42:48):
I really love Loom.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:42:50):
Amazing.

Rachel Lockett (01:42:51):
I've been recording trainings on Loom for some of my clients that are, it's a scaled holding company, so I'm able to scale training in a really human, connected way.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:43:02):
Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to, in work or in life?

Rachel Lockett (01:43:06):
I have a quote that is on my desk. And I love it. Ready? "If you can see your path laid out in front of you, step by step, it's not your path. Your own path, you make with every step you take. That's why it's your path." That's a Joseph Campbell quote.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:43:27):
Beautiful. Final question. You've got two kids, you said. Do you have any favorite children's books that you most love reading to them, that they've loved most?

Rachel Lockett (01:43:36):
Oh my gosh. So my daughter is really into Roald Dahl. I love Roald Dahl, because he's completely irreverent, and he has a crazy imagination. So we've been reading Witches, Matilda, all of his books. And both my kids love it. So, they're five and seven.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:43:54):
Have you seen the Wes Anderson stories of his stories, where he takes [inaudible 01:43:58]-

Rachel Lockett (01:43:58):
Some of them, yeah. They're great.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:44:00):
Yeah, they're so amazing. Oh my God. And it's like Roald Dahl is like, I think it's personifying him. He's like a character in the story.

Rachel Lockett (01:44:06):
Yeah, he's a character, from what I hear about his life.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:44:09):
Rachel, this was incredible. I feel like we've very much accomplished what I set out to do, which is just give people all this advice that they never have access to that, costs tens of thousands of dollars. I think we're going to help a lot of people improve their lives and their careers. Thank you so much for being here.

Rachel Lockett (01:44:26):
Absolutely. Thanks for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:44:28):
I almost forgot to ask you two final questions. Where can folks find you if they want to reach out, maybe consider working with you? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Rachel Lockett (01:44:36):
Yeah, find me at lockettcoaching.com, and how can listeners be useful? Listeners should turn towards each other, build great relationships, and send CEOs and co-founders my way if they need coaching.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:44:48):
Thank you so much for being here.

Rachel Lockett (01:44:50):
Thanks for having me. Take care, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:44:52):
Bye, everyone.

(01:44:55):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating, or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast.

(01:45:09):
You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny (00:00:00):
We rarely get a peek into what it's like to work at TikTok. What are some core principles or values or just how TikTok operates?

Ray Cao (00:00:07):
The number one thing is context, no control. That's the reason why we're always encouraging people to see themselves as a business owner.

Lenny (00:00:14):
You give them all the information they need and then let them just do things without specific instructions.

Ray Cao (00:00:18):
How do you actually solve the puzzle by connecting all the dots together? Just like how I see some of my friends, their kids playing Legos, if you don't really see the full picture, you won't be able to make the Lego as one thing at the end of the day. You have to see the other pieces.

Lenny (00:00:31):
What else are important cultural values of TikTok, of how TikTok operates that everyone always has in mind when they're building?

Ray Cao (00:00:36):
We always have this mentality we are a startup, we're a young company, we're always hungry for growth. And a very wacky way is like, "How can I run my second half of my marathon faster than the first half?"

Lenny (00:00:49):
Today my guest is Ray Cao. Ray is the global Head of Monetization Product Strategy & Operations at the Global at TikTok where he has been for over four years. Prior to TikTok, Ray spent six years at Google helping scale Google shopping globally.

(00:01:05):
TikTok is interesting for two big reasons. One, it's one of the most successful businesses in history, last valued at over $80 billion. And its parent company is the most valuable private company in the world, last valued at over $200 billion.

(00:01:19):
Two, TikTok is quickly becoming one of the biggest advertising platforms alongside Meta and Google, and generated nearly $10 billion in advertising revenue just a couple of years ago. So for both these reasons, TikTok is a really interesting business and team to learn from. And I've seen very few podcasts and even media get a peek inside how TikTok operates.

(00:01:39):
In our conversation, we discuss TikTok's culture, their core principles and values, how they hire, how they move so fast, their emphasis on working hard, how they do OKRs and planning. We also get into how to succeed on TikTok's ad network, why you want to be testing at least 10 videos a week, how it's different from running ads on Instagram, how to make content that does well on TikTok, and so much more. This episode has a lot of interesting lessons and insights. Obviously TikTok is at the center of a lot of debate globally. Some people love it, some people hate it. But no matter your opinion of TikTok, there's a lot that we can learn from their success.

(00:02:14):
If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow the podcast on your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Ray Cao after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:29):
This episode is brought to you by WorkOS. If you're building a SaaS app, at some point your customers will start asking for enterprise features like SAML authentication and SCIM provisioning. That's where WorkOS comes in, making it fast and painless to add enterprise features to your app. Their APIs are easy to understand, so that you can ship quickly and get back to building other features. And 100s of other companies are already powered by WorkOS, including ones you probably know like Vercel, Webflow and Loom.

(00:02:59):
WorkOS also recently launched AuthKit, a complete authentication and user management service. It's essentially a modern alternative to Auth0, but with better pricing and more flexible APIs. AuthKit's design is stunning out of the box and you can also fully customize it to fit your app's brand. It's an effortless experience from your first user all the way to your largest enterprise customer. Best of all, AuthKit is free for any developer up to 1 million users. Check it out at workos.com/lenny to learn more. That's workos.com/lenny.

(00:03:35):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing and feature management platform built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams. Companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth and for understanding the performance of new features. And Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does.

(00:04:05):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most was our experimentation platform where I could set up experiments easily, troubleshoot issues, and analyze performance all on my own. Eppo does all that and more, with advanced statistical methods that can help you shave weeks off experiment time and accessible UI for diving deeper into performance, and out-of-the-box reporting that helps you avoid annoying prolonged analytic cycles. Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insights with your team, sparking new ideas for the A/B testing flywheel. Eppo powers experimentation across every use case, including product, growth, machine learning, monetization and email marketing. Check out Eppo at getEppo.com/lenny and 10X your experiment velocity. That's getEppo.com/lenny.

(00:04:55):
Ray, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Ray Cao (00:05:00):
Thank you Lenny for having me. It's a pleasure.

Lenny (00:05:02):
It's my pleasure. I am really excited to have you here because it feels like we rarely get a peek into what it's like to work at TikTok, how TikTok builds product and operates, also how to be successful in TikTok as a business, as an advertiser. So I have all these kinds of questions for you, and so I'm really happy to be chatting. I wanted to start with a little bit about your time before TikTok, which was at Google and comparing that to TikTok. So, you're at Google for six years, I believe. Now you're at TikTok. I'm curious on what stood out to you about the cultural differences between how Google operates and TikTok operates.

Ray Cao (00:05:37):
Three major things, I would say. Number one is really how these two company thinking about innovation. So, I think Google has a very strong philosophy of we're engineering lab and that there's a lot of technology-driven, and a lot of pieces. They are not necessarily always trying to, I would say, cope with the market even, right? However, I think at the TikTok, I think besides the technology part, we do have a very keen, I would say, appetite to really understand what the markets really want and also how can we really service our clients in a better way and the clients here is not necessarily only for advertisers including our user and also creator altogether. So that's one of the things I think it's very different in terms of TikTok way of work. It's very customer-centric in a way, and again, the customer here is not necessarily only for the business partner but also for our regular user and creators on the platform.

(00:06:39):
And the second one is really thinking about how we take approach on product development. So a lot of times that we take a very rigid approach in terms of product development and oftentimes you see us that experimenting a lot of different things all the same time. And also we do have a lot of engineering and [inaudible 00:07:04] project in the backend to really understand how can we optimize better for the platform. So a lot of time, these are the things that I think TikTok is doing really, really well.

(00:07:14):
The last piece I have to say is the approach for global prioritization. A lot of times that you see a US-born company go global and oftentimes still they are really rooted with the US market and there's nothing wrong with it to be honest, because this is the biggest market for them as I would say for East-born company. I think a lot of times that we can take approach with truly how do we think about globalization and for example, we launched a lot of product not necessarily first in North America. We launched it in South Asia for example, for our shopping, really very big initiative internally for shopping and we launched our really creator fund here in North America. We launched our gaming approach, really serviced our EUI gaming advertisers. Really, really strong over there. So there are a lot of different approach in terms of how do we prioritize our go-to-market and also product development. So that's the part I feel like we're very unique in the market or unique to some of that was the tech company born in the US.

Lenny (00:08:24):
It reminds me there's this piece by this smart guy, Eugene Wei who wrote a few things about TikTok over the years and just why it's been so successful and one of his really big points is that TikTok can work really well in other markets 'cause it's basically... you don't need to know a ton about the market because it's this algorithm that figures out what people in each market want. Is there anything along those lines you've seen that just has been really fundamental to it working so well in many different markets?

Ray Cao (00:08:51):
The algorithm is definitely helping because it is basically the machine is doing a lot of heavy lifting. That's actually I think across the board on a technology company today. The difference is actually how much you are willing to take the heavy lifting over there in the market. By that I mean really sending your troops into the market, hiring your local talent, understanding the culture and really understanding the behavior from those users. I understand the machine can do things, but also at the same time that we need to actually get local talent to fine tune the machine. So there are a lot of conversations about how I would say technology is able to change our life, but I do think that at the end of the day, I do believe technology is a tool.

(00:09:34):
So if we do have a ambition to go global, you have to do one more thing is actually take your step into global. Rather than having the machine do the heavy lifting, you have to really understand in local culture. I had a fun background for my first job is to really doing go-to market research in the Southeast Asia area. I think there was only one thing opened my eyes after a year and a half in this career path is different market have totally different, I would say, culture and these market behaviors are actually coming out of this culture. One of the fun example I always been using was I was doing market research for one of the suppliers for toner and also these ink cartridges for Thailand as a go-to market research. One of the things is always concern to my, at that point, the client was they cannot figure out why their premium product cannot sell in Thailand and then we just figure out because the quality of their printing machine and also their ink cartridges are premium and the quality of the paper and everything is very good.

(00:10:51):
But when you actually do talk to those consumers in those market, the answer is very eye-opening. They literally told me at that time is I don't care. I don't care if your ink cartridges or your printer is at the premium quality, maybe the printer I can use, but I can use compatible ink cartridges or toner for that because my consumer won't care about your printing quality or the majority of my consumer won't care. So in that case you should not necessarily worried about if you are a premium product, it's actually more about how durable, how reliable you're able to print things and people can read.

(00:11:30):
So I think these are the insights I think a lot of times it will be neglected from some of clients or the manufacturers or even the owner of the business because they think that we want to serve this segmentation, but, however, this segmentation is that big in this area. So that's reason why the culture is really the key part from the market. If you don't understand the culture, you won't be able to understand the behavior over there. It's more about that, I think, when we say about globalization or take the product go to market in a global scheme or even build it apart, you have to get your hands dirty and to really understand the local culture so that you can understand local behavior.

Lenny (00:12:16):
I love that advice, the way you described it, which I love also is that you kind of have to fine-tune the algorithm and the product to work in different cultures. Is there an example of how that was done with TikTok, like a tweak that had to be made or some kind of fine-tuning that happened for it to work in a different market?

Ray Cao (00:12:32):
Yeah. I think we did a lot of fine-tuning on our user product side to really think about content. So that's the number one thing going to be super different coming from each of the market and also from each of the culture. For example in Japan, how do you actually get more content that relevant for the culture? A lot of people may think, okay, are you guys only doing dancing or doing singing for Japan? The answer is not. It is actually more food on the TikTok side, like how do you actually introducing new food restaurant or new recipes and also sometimes that you're introducing a new technology. I would say 3C like consumer electronics product over there. So these are the content get really popular sometimes in Southeast Asia or even Japan area and versus in the US as everybody knows that we're starting from really lip-syncing at a very early stage but now really we're expanding to shopping behaviors and also a lot of people using us as a main platform to acquire new discovery for the product.

(00:13:40):
So these are the things I think different market definitely deserves and demand different kind of treatment and if you are able to do this a lot, you're able to find success over there.

Lenny (00:13:53):
That's really interesting because you could think it's just this algorithm that figures everything out for you, but I think what you're pointing out is you have to seed it with the right sorts of use cases that that culture is most excited about.

Ray Cao (00:14:04):
Another good example will be creative, so it's a very good example how human can work with technology together. We have a ton of creatives and we have a ton of content so, of course, we use machine to label those content use metadata to analyze those content. However, a lot of times you can find that when we're really thinking about how creative can help advertisers? Humans actually make a more interesting or more, I would say, influencing decisions over there. For some of the verticals we can say that, "Oh, you know what, maybe we can try a coupon image with a new product like a sticker on the top?" This maybe actually work better compared to some of the price promotion even. So a lot of things really depends on how do you actually interpreting the numbers and interpreting the data points but also at the same time your business acumen is going to be very important here to make a judgmental call for some of the situation like that. I think we're still rely a lot on both machine and also our own experts to analyzing those trends and give it the recommendations.

Lenny (00:15:11):
Awesome. Okay, so there's a few threads I'm going to follow later. You talked about the product development process, so I'm going to want to spend time there, also about how to be successful in TikTok both as a creator also as a business, I'm excited to hear your advice there. But I want to spend a little more time first on just what it's like to work within TikTok and the culture of TikTok. What are some core principles or values or just how TikTok operates if you had to identify, here's the ways that we all think about what we want to do and the most important to your day-to-day work, what words and concepts come to mind?

Ray Cao (00:15:43):
The number one thing resonating really, really well with me is context, no control. Oftentimes when we are looking around companies different sizes, we're looking at how to collaborate. Oftentimes we see the behavior that a lot of people just working on a smaller piece based off their job description. So hey, you're working on go-to-market and you're working on data analytics, and you're working on this book of business and commerce, and you're working on auto industry for example. A lot of times that these human-made silos is actually slowing things down because humans are not, or our talent, they're not supposed to be categorized into different basket. They may have their own majority responsibility for sure, but we don't want to cap them into this kind of a box we created. That's really why we're always encouraging people to think out of the box and think more and think themselves as a business owner rather than a piece of machine that keep the machine running.

(00:16:49):
Oftentimes that will say context, no control. That means you actually can go above and beyond to really think about your whole business problem as your own problem and your piece is maybe one part of it to solve the puzzle, but how do you actually solve the puzzle by connecting all the dots together, we're encouraging all the people to think like that way and by that I think we kind of mentally break out those walls. So encouraging our team members to do a little bit more thinking is very important. It's a little bit more thinking because the think part is very important.

(00:17:23):
And then, now in terms of getting things into behavior or changes or getting to action, then you need to really collaborate with other teams because we don't want to necessarily creating, hey, you're on other people's working group now you're actually stepping on other people's toes now. It is not the situation we're trying to encourage in, but where it's encouraging more is context, no control, think more about how you can change it and then we you do really actually take some actions, be active. You reach out to who's supposed to be the owner of that and then have a discussion so then you you're able to connecting the dots altogether.

(00:18:00):
So that's one thing I think it's very unique to our culture. I think it's very, very important for us to continue to grow at this speed because everybody have a, I would say, full visibility towards our full ownership to their mindset, how they can contribute.

Lenny (00:18:16):
And the key there is context implying you give them all the information they need and then let them just do things without giving them specific instructions, "Hey, I need you to hit this goal, work on this project, launch this thing. Here is what we know, do the things you think are best, roughly." Right now, I know it's not just like anyone does anything, but I imagine that's kind of the implication there.

Ray Cao (00:18:35):
Yeah, I think it's context, no control plus proactive thinking and reactive doing so you have to do more proactive thinking with these contexts. Now reactive doing means that you need to collaborate, but when everybody has this kind of mindset, the collaboration should be very smooth because people have the context altogether. The part that I see maybe some of the other company are facing challenges is actually there's too many IOs in between and you have people that are just protecting their own thing and working their own thing and then I'm delivering. But just like how I see some of my friends, their kids playing Legos, if you don't really see the full picture, you won't be able to make the Lego as a one thing at the end of the day. You have to see the other pieces. So that's the part I think it's really powerful and reasoning really, really well when we're really thinking about product development and also product go-to-market. So it's a pretty full cycle. People have to see this and then they have the context.

Lenny (00:19:35):
I love this, and this has come up actually a few times recently when I was talking to the CTO of Netflix and also OpenAI. They're very similar in culture where it's give people a lot of autonomy and freedom and not a lot of do this, do this, do this. The key there is to hire very high quality people and very high caliber people because if not, then things won't work out too great. Is there anything along those lines that you can share just like yeah, the kinds of people you end up hiring and how you hire people that can work well in that environment?

Ray Cao (00:20:05):
I agree with you. So the caliber of these people is actually pretty important to support the structure I just talked about, and oftentimes I can see some people that with the quality of always curious. Curiosity is a very important quality when I'm actually talking to my interviewers because I want to see that they are naturally curious to new things. They want to learn more about the new things and don't really get stuck with their own things. That's one thing. And the other thing is the discipline because like I said, it is actually a double-edged sword in this case. So it could potentially introducing some of the chaotic situation in a company because everybody is thinking everything. The discipline here is actually how you are really following the guidance on reactive doing, be always thinking about how to collaborating, and the discipline here and also the rigorous approach here is also going to be very important.

(00:21:07):
One of the good example that is the ability to prioritize because I don't believe one thing is everybody can do everything. You have to prioritize properly so that you're able to push the right agenda. So I think that's more of the quality of the people we're looking for is... it is hard, don't get me wrong. It is really hard to say that we can find everyone like that, but we would love to believe that we can train our employees like that so that they're able to even do better in their longer-term career.

Lenny (00:21:38):
Essentially what you look for when you're hiring people is making sure they're always curious, they have high discipline, and that they prioritize well. Coming back to the cultural pieces of TikTok, so the main one you've shared so far is this idea of context, not control. What else are important cultural values of TikTok, of how TikTok operates that everyone always has in mind when they're building and new meetings, making decisions?

Ray Cao (00:22:04):
Yeah, another internal thing that we always say is always day one, we want to make sure that we always have this mentality we are a startup. We are a young company. We're always hungry for growth. We don't want to fall into the trap that people may think, "Oh, you guys are very successful in the market and then you are not necessarily need to worry about your existence anymore." I think it is actually something we're trying to avoid. We always want to make sure that in our team members always think like, "Okay, if this is actually a new day for you, I know what other things that you always want to keep in your mind you want to do." And also to keep that spirit is very important.

(00:22:42):
A lot of times that I can see some of the mature company, they're not necessarily losing the edge of, I would say this competition or losing the edge of being innovative. I think it's more about some of the culture has been shifted because you have a lot of new employees that live in your culture. So not necessarily it's not going to be like the old days that the co-founder is sitting among you, but I do think this company has a very interesting behavior. I see there is I can talk to anyone at any time via our internal communication system. I can ping Shuo right now. I can ping the co-founder if I want to tomorrow.

(00:23:24):
We always keep this kind of mentality internal is that we're still a young company, we want to grow and you can feel free to talk to anyone. We don't have a limitation for that as long as you have a good opinion, I would love to hear from you. Is that creating some of the, I would say chaotic situation? It might be, but I do think that this keeps the company very energetic. People are willing to share, people are willing to engage. That's very important.

(00:23:50):
I want add one more thing. We just talked about, you asked me what is actually the uniqueness of TikTok versus the other company. It's very tied up to that is I have never seen a company, the engineering team and the product team and the sales team are so close. That's definitely one of aha moments I had because if you're thinking about if your engineer does not really know what the market wants and if your PM doesn't really know what is actually the client's feedback, they won't be able to get a right product in the market. They just won't be. And they won't even tell a good go-to-market story to advertisers or even to our users because they just don't know what the end users are thinking.

(00:24:39):
So I think it's a very secret sauce for us is that our sellers and our engineering team and our product team and also data scientist team, we're all collaborating really, really closely and that's very much, I would say a such big advantage for us compared to when a company becomes too big and nobody talks to each other. So I do hope that it is the thing that we're going to continue reinforce along the years where we'll continue to grow the company.

Lenny (00:25:09):
What does that actually look like? I imagine people hearing this are like, "Yeah, we're going to make sales and product and hinge very close." I imagine many people don't actually do this too well. How do you actually execute that? Is it they report to the same leader, they sit next to each other or I don't know, zoom next to each other? What actually makes that work?

Ray Cao (00:25:28):
Yeah, I think a couple of things. Number one is a structure. Everything has to go at a structure. So we do have a meeting structure that we called it... it used to be by month and now it's actually a quarterly level. We get everybody together, engineering leader, product leader, and also not necessarily only the leader level. Some of the team members, we're joining the force together to have a big meeting. That meeting is 180 people-ish. It's crazy to have a meeting at that size, especially that there are different kind of functionality there. But one thing we keep really well is actually we are using a reading format of meeting. So it's a doc reading. We just read in comments and understanding the context again. It is the doc, bring everybody together, and then we discuss the things that we want to make a decision with or the things that we feel is a blocker or things that we need to celebrate.

(00:26:24):
So that meeting structure keep everybody together and consensus, again, not necessarily only for the top leaders. It's normal for the engineering leader and product leader and sales leader at the company level, they talk to each other, but we made that happen for their core team members. And the very beginning of my time here, that was literally getting to the IC level. So it is pretty eye-opening for me to join that meeting first time because I was get so used to their level of different meetings at Google, but here it's like, okay, everybody read one documentation and then you just understand what are people talking about or thinking about. It is intentional. But I do think that that structure is a very big secret sauce, I would say, not necessarily we invented it, right? We also learned from the other companies. So it is actually one of the things that we actually deployed pretty well today here to keep that structure running.

(00:27:22):
And the other thing is really feed those, I would say, first-hand market information to our PMs and RDs. That means we took them out with us. We're just inviting them together to join the force together to meet the clients and a lot of the company, if you want to meet APMs, if you want to meet the engineering leaders, it's literally once a year maybe, and also if you're investing a ton with some of the platforms. For us, I think it's always on to junior PMs, senior PMs and engineering leaders. We invited them together to these immersion trips recorded to really get face time with our clients, to really feel the heat. They are actually really facing a challenge by using our own product.

(00:28:07):
So that kind of, I would say, the aha moment is bringing a lot of, I would say, insights to them and also get them to feel the heat of the pains the sellers may feel. So that worked really well, too. I think oftentimes it is a battle. It is not necessarily the general, you have to stay in the back, you sometimes have to go to the front, but we just make sure that the general go to the front quite often in our company to do that.

Lenny (00:28:36):
I love that concept of having them feel the heat. An interesting trend I've noticed is there's a lot of Amazon influence on the way you all operate. It's always day one idea. There's the memo culture you just described. Any idea where that comes from? Is there like a senior Amazon person that came in and helped influence those sorts of things? Is it just hey, Amazon's killing in there? I've noticed interestingly, Amazon has influenced the most companies in all of their ways of working, so it's not a surprise. I'm just curious if there's anything else there that's interesting.

Ray Cao (00:29:04):
I think we have the benefits to standing on the shoulder of all the giants. So we learned definitely always there when the culture that Amazon was always championing, I think we learned from them. So this is something that we, I would say, always trying to listen and trying to learn from industry. The dark fashion is also learned from Amazon, so we kind of studied, oh, this is maybe one of the best practices we can employ here, how we deploy here. So we tried it, not even mentioned we have the OKR system, so it is actually a very good learning from our early stage from Google. So all these, I think definitely we do have some of the, I would say, benefits being the newcomer to the market and then learn a lot of the best practices coming from our industry peers and really deployed here hopefully successfully.

(00:29:53):
And some of the things that we just tweaked. So for example our culture always day one is definitely very similar to Amazon, but the implementation of that could be different. And also the context, no control piece is, I believe other companies may have the similar idea, but for us I think we just really need to implement it in a way that's going to be fitting to us. I happened to listen to your podcast with the Airbnb co-founder the other day. He also mentioned that how he break out the IOs. I think it is very similar approach among industry right now trying to really make sure the team is able to talk to each other because I think a quote from him, "If your PM doesn't know how to sell the product they're creating, you won't be able to do your job better." So this is literally how we're thinking about it, too, in a lot of way.

Lenny (00:30:40):
I know that you all move very fast and I want to actually talk about that next. And with that it feels like your value should be, it's always the first half of the day instead of it's always day one. It's always the morning of the first day.

Ray Cao (00:30:53):
I think the value, if I put it in a very reactive way is, "How can I run my second half of my marathon faster than the first half?" So that's how I think about it and how do we really continue pushing for it.

Lenny (00:31:09):
Wow, that sounds very hard and painful, but I like that metaphor. Okay, so let's talk about how you set up the product org to move as fast as you move. I think there's this idea of just running fast. I don't know if that's a phrase you use, but just how is the product org set up, especially different from other teams that you've seen that allows it to move as quickly as you move and innovate as often as you all innovate?

Ray Cao (00:31:34):
Our product teams are setting, I would say, very importantly is global. So we want to actually, like I said, the number one step is if we really want to do global business, we have to go global. So we set up teams really across the board in the global locations to really acquire global talent who knows the market and who knows the competition, too. So we're able to really getting the, let's say jumpstart, in the local market. So for example, we have the majority of the engineer and also PMs currently located in the west coast of North America, so Los Angeles and also San Jose. These are the key hubs we have for our tech folks and also for North America wise we do have our majority of the go-to-market leads sitting in New York to get closer with our seller and also with our clients at the same time.

(00:32:27):
Also, it is not necessarily only for North America. Like I said, we heavily invested in Southeast Asia, so you can see that a lot of our engineering and also PM resources are deployed over there in Singapore to enable them to get closer to our clients over there as well. So really deploy your resources globally and also focusing on the key markets you want to penetrate. That's the commitment. I think we're doing pretty good in this case. And the second one is to really, again, I think the PMs and the product team of settings are oftentimes I would say because we're growing so fast, oftentimes we have to do a lot of minor team adjustment to catering for that. So it is very usual or common for teams to do a little bit of work on an annual basis or even on a two years or three year cycle. The stability is important, don't get me wrong, but I do think that as a faster growing company, we need to consistently to reiterate not only the product but also our teams.

(00:33:33):
So how can we do reiteration on the PM side, on the go-to-market side, it is actually something that I have seen this company doing really, really well. Not necessarily we're bonding to one team structure. We're actually bonding to the market need and we're bounding to the growth we're looking for. So we're not afraid to break our seams. And actually I literally break out my team last year to make sure that my team having more go-to-market mindset to actually embedded them with seller directly. So these are the things that very, I would say conventional to a size of this company, but I do think that's necessary and also that's a good mentality for the team to really run faster with this kind of a rigid approach. So yeah, these are the two things I think very unique to us, I think could also be continuously helping us in the next phase of the growth.

Lenny (00:34:33):
Today's episode is brought to you by OneSchema, the embeddable CSV Importer for SaaS. Customers always seem to want to give you their data in the messiest possible CSV file. And building a spreadsheet importer becomes a never-ending sink for your engineering and support resources. You keep adding features to your spreadsheet importer, the customers keep running into issues. Six months later you're fixing yet another date conversion edge case bug. Most tools aren't built for handling messy data, but OneSchema is. Companies like Scale AI and Pave are using OneSchema to make it fast and easy to launch delightful spreadsheet import experiences, from embeddable CSV Import to importing CSVs from an SFTP folder on a recurring basis. Spreadsheet import is such an awful experience in so many products. Customers get frustrated by useless messages like, "Error on line 53," and never end up getting started with your product. OneSchema intelligently corrects messy data so that your customers don't have to spend hours in Excel just to get started with your product. For listeners of this podcast, OneSchema is offering a $1,000 discount. Learn more at oneschema.co/lenny.

(00:35:38):
I know you mentioned earlier when we were chatting offline is when you were trying to build the go-to-market org for this stuff, you failed in some ways and there's some things you learned from that experience. What went wrong when you first tried to approach this?

Ray Cao (00:35:51):
Yeah, when I joined the company, there were only two people on the go-to-market side.

Lenny (00:35:57):
For the advertising business.

Ray Cao (00:36:00):
There are only two people and by that time the US and plus, I would say, Europe business together, we're having less than 80 people, but the business needs to grow and we need to hire really fast. The first mistake I made was... By the way, the goal is to hiring 100 people in a six month to support the go-to-market. That is the speed we're into. So that is early 2020 to middle of 2020. So within six months I need to hire, I would say, 100 people to supporting the global go-to-market structure and build everything. Then the first mistake I made just at the right point because we're trying to grow too fast and sometimes as a hiring manager I have to compromise the standard we're trying to hire. So that's the mistakes I think I made first and I think nobody should repeat that mistake is you need to always run for the quality rather than the quantity. So it's a easy mistake. You can fall into the trap because the business demands you to go faster. If you don't have the manpower, you won't be able to.

(00:37:11):
But I would say, believe me when I say this, this is a pain, right, when you have the wrong people on the team, it's not necessarily going to make you move faster, it's going to actually slow you down. So that's one of the biggest mistake I made for my first year when I created the team and not necessarily myself only. So also the managers reporting to me, they're facing the same pressure and then it's cascading down. So it's definitely the mistakes we made at early stage.

(00:37:43):
The second thing I can think about is really on the context, no control. It is not necessarily I'm born into, to be honest, because I was trained really like, "Hey, this is your box, finish your work here and then you're good." But the reason why I value that really the attitude more today is literally I failed at the very early stage of my time here because I was trying to creating that kind of a very black and white discipline for my team, "You can do this, you cannot do that." But technically speaking, that's literally slowing things down because a lot of times you can see that, "Hey, we're delivering our go-to-market strategy and we're good." But literally what you don't know is your goal is not to deliver the go-to-market strategy. Your goal is to land your go-to-market strategy with sales together. So if your job only is delivering, no, you're failed oftentimes because you're not really getting the market context, you're not even talking to your clients. So that was literally another mistake I think taught me how to really embrace the culture. Here is context, no control.

(00:38:52):
And the third piece, I think, it's also a mistake, really a hard moment for me as well is, for the past couple of years now, I've been managing a such big global organization, oftentimes even not myself, my managers, they don't have time to go detail and to go talk to the clients, which is very scary because again, if you don't know, you don't hear what is happening in the market, you won't know the details in the market, you won't be able to take the right movement or take the right approach to go to market or even give the feedback to the engineering team.

(00:39:32):
So it's very important that the leader at any level needs to be situational. You cannot always down to the wheat and you cannot really distance yourself from the reality. So you need to find the balance to really get engaged and also see yourself out there to getting, I would say, getting deeper into the problems, to identify the problems, and then you're able to perform even better. Because I don't believe one thing is you are the pure, I was the people manager. You cannot do that because when you do that, you're very, very at the very, I would say, position to really thinking about your career because you're losing your competitive edge from the other, I would say equivalent talents in the market.

Lenny (00:40:18):
I love these stories. I love stories of things not working out, so I appreciate you sharing these things. When someone doesn't work out at TikTok and they have a bad time and they get let go or they leave, what's the most common reason other than just they're not good enough? Is there something that just doesn't stick with people that often leads to this is not the place for me?

Ray Cao (00:40:36):
Yeah, I would try to really thinking about this in a different way. I can tell how people can be more successful here. So I definitely can see we're just talking about people being very curious and people are very, being nimble. They can be more successful here. At the same time, I think we have to admit one thing, join a start-up and join a rocket ship is a lifestyle. It is not necessarily a job you are working on from 9 to 5. So it is a different lifestyle and it is not built for everyone. So if you are not able to adjust your mentality towards some of the work that we are here to do and it's maybe not right fit for you. I'm not saying that that candidates is incapable. I think they could be capable in the other scenario for sure, but is the right fit? I think that is, I would say very much towards the situation or the company status in the market.

(00:41:33):
I can see a lot of people that they left and become very successful, too. So it is not necessarily that, "Oh, we think you're not good and then you're going to be not good for every single other company." That's not the case.

(00:41:46):
And one thing, and also this is my team culture I try to create is, I'm happy to say that when an employee reach out to me, say, "Hey Ray, I'm actually leaving the company," as long as they're telling me that they're going to a better place or a place that they can continue to grow their career, I'm happy for them because oftentimes my last question during my interview is, "What is actually your goal in the next three to five years?" And also I'd be really honest with them, say, "Hey, I don't think this is the job for you forever. Nobody going to work in this forever. If you can, great. But what is really your North Star?" I think that's the part that I would love to co-partner with you because I always believe one thing is it is not only about achieving the company goal, it's also achieving really the career goal or your employee's career goal together.

(00:42:41):
So I want to creating that culture here as well. So yeah, I think I'm doing so far so good. Most of my team members when they actually are moving on internally or externally, I'm able to say that, "Okay, that's a good choice. If I were you, I may probably do the same thing." It is actually a very good culture, I think, I would love to champion across.

Lenny (00:43:03):
On that first point, I'm also a huge advocate of just, "You'll be successful if you work very hard." I know there's a bit of a backlash at working along and thinking too much about work-life balance. And I feel like it's actually really important to work a lot and work long hours often to be successful, especially at a company that's going through this 'cause that's not going to last forever.

Ray Cao (00:43:22):
I think at the end of the day it's a personal choice. It's very much like a personal choice. If you are excited about this, if you want to grow together, yeah, this maybe is a good thing for you. And also depends on the life stage. So some of the people they want to actually getting more family time, I think that's also the right choice, too. But it just depends on your, I would say, your personal choice rather than if the company demands that. I mean, I cannot force my team to working long hours. I don't want them to working long hours. I think it's more about if you are able to deliver, right? If it requires a bit, a longer time to contribute, I think it's okay, but you'll also get rewarded very well too. So what's get in, what's get out. So I think it's, again, I do believe that this is the quality and also the value we're evaluating here as well.

Lenny (00:44:19):
And even though it's hard in the moment, I find that those are the times you remember most and most fondly in your career, when you just go all in, "I'm going to work really hard and do the best possible job I can do." Assuming that doesn't last forever, those end up being the most impactful, helpful to your career. Most proud moments when you're just like, "Look what I had accomplished." And so I'm on the same page. I want to talk about being successful on TikTok as a creator, as a business, as an advertiser. But a couple more questions real quick on how TikTok operates. You mentioned you do OKRs just briefly, is there anything that you've learned about being successful doing OKRs within TikTok? Maybe is there anything different that you all do versus how other companies think about OKRs?

Ray Cao (00:44:59):
It is definitely a company alignment that we are using OKR as our basically the system to make sure that everybody is working towards the same goal. I think definitely we have a lot of room to improve. So how often do you actually see your team able to go to OKR at the end of a quarter and also putting OKR really two weeks or one week before the beginning of a quarter? I have to say that shame on me. I sometimes delay it a little bit, but I think the goal is always there to using OKR system as our North Star to drive the behavior and also to align. Again, it's very important to align on the OKRs because I can see a lot of times the OKRs are putting in, but they are very siloed and that is not really necessarily helpful for the company want achieving really high growth. So I think it's very important that we know we don't take OKR as a shell, but we take OKR as its core is cross-functional alignment, cross-functional goal silo. So these are the things we're still continuing improving.

Lenny (00:46:06):
Is the way that OKRs work at TikTok, is there an OKR per team and they all kind of trickle up to a company level OKR? Is it less structured that way and teams decide if they want to use OKRs or not? How does that roughly work?

Ray Cao (00:46:17):
The structure is, basically the guidance is, using the key result to evaluating and then you put the steps in between. So that's how at least my team has been using this. I think the things that we can improve is the input and output. So the output is very clear, but what is actually the input sometimes is debatable, sometimes I have to say. And also oftentimes your output is other people's input. Are you able to connect the dots over there, too? Then that's actually the part that requires a lot of, I would say reinforcement alignment. Definitely we're getting better, don't get me wrong. We're totally not perfect, for sure. But I do see there is a lot of, I say momentum, to leveraging the system better. If you know other companies doing this really, really good, please shoot them my way. I would love to learn from them.

Lenny (00:47:07):
One last question here. You do planning, you have OKRs. Just briefly, how often do you all do planning? Is there a yearly plan that you put together and then a quarterly detailed plan?

Ray Cao (00:47:16):
Yeah, we do have annual planning cycle, but I have to say that our annual planning cycle is the baseline. We often do a lot of iterations in the middle of the year and also on a quarterly basis that we're able to pivoting really nimbly to really catering to the things that we see in the market. Some of the longer term strategy won't change, just like the platform we want to always creating, inspiring and also frictionless and immersive experiences for users. This won't change, but anything into the core of how do we realizing that you're always a consistent experiment over there. I cannot speak for the user product side, but at least from advertising product side that this is always the approach we're taking. And for the go-to-market part, that's also creating a very different behavior for us because oftentimes if we have a solid and kind of a static product roadmap, you can do go-to-market relatively easy, I would say, because everything is planned. But with a environment like that that basically make the go-to-market and also the product feedback loop much more short and faster.

(00:48:23):
So there's a lot of, I would say, pressure or actually put it nicely, there was a lot of innovative things that on the go-to-market side. Also on the sales side, the company or the teams need to actually do to make sure that we're able to catering for that. But again, this is a teamwork rather than only one side of the work. So far so good, I would say. A lot of things that we've been able to achieve within the past couple of years has been already proven that this approach has been working for us, but not necessarily they're always is perfect already, always room to improve, to make sure that we have more structural approach as well so that the market able to keep the pacing with us. We don't want to overwhelm our advertisers or our users either. So that's also the other part that we need to continue optimizing, too.

Lenny (00:49:12):
Okay. Let's talk about a different topic which is being successful on TikTok. So the way I think about it in my head is, there's how to be successful is just a regular human creator person. How to be successful as a business, trying to just create viral content and then being successful as an advertiser, which I know is where you spend a lot of time. So let me just ask, is there a tip you could share for someone to be successful, say aka go viral on TikTok? I imagine your answer will be just produce something people love and want to share and like. But I guess is there anything that could be tactically useful when you're creating content in TikTok to help you go viral?

Ray Cao (00:49:47):
I think if I know that I definitely will already become a very successful creator, I have to say. Our system is very much smarter than I am. I cannot trick the system, but I have seen a couple of good cases. So number one thing is that you have to really be unfiltered. I mean, you don't really need to be perfect on this platform. I mean that's the beauty of it. You can be yourself, you can really share the things that you like. And if you're really master at one thing that you're really, really good at and you want to showcase, this is the platform for you to shine because not necessarily that we are fully saturated and also all algorithm distributing the content in a very different way. Some of the other platforms they are, I would say like a people-based or friend-based.

(00:50:32):
I think for us it's purely based on actually you're creating something that everybody want to see. So let's see if we can distribute it more. So I think continuously to bring new content to this platform and testing and finding your own competitive edge going to be very important as a successful creator. And most of our creators have been doing that. And I can see some of our biggest TikTok stars, they're literally practicing this every single day. And I do think that creativity and that part of, I would say, getting the nuances is the key part that to be more successful on the T TikTok community.

(00:51:11):
And the second thing is it's including also for brands as well, because I consider brands as our creator as well. They really need to embrace the culture and the community here to really listen and understand what are the user behaviors on the platform to understand what do they like to see. And also the messages or the presence could be very different from your other media channels, or as a creator, it could be very different from your other, I would say, platforms.

(00:51:40):
So that's the other thing that it's going to be challenging because for them to shift in the mindset. But I do think that definitely was trial. Some of the, I would say, our early adopters has already been proven that when you do embrace the culture here, you're able to acquire a ton of different kind of a user or the audience to your channel and you can show a different side of yourself as well. So yeah, I've been trying to do that. I have not really finding my competitive edge I have to say, but I'll keep trying.

Lenny (00:52:14):
Is there an example you could share of someone that has done that really well, either be really authentic and also embrace the community of a business specifically that has done this really well and has taken off not as an advertiser?

Ray Cao (00:52:25):
There was one creator I remember called Sheba. She's a singer and she is able to caught my eyes because she was able to basically rap and also during some of the songs cover in a very different way because she's a minority and she was able to basically using her minority identity as actually everybody was thinking, "I'm supposed to be doing Bollywood music, but actually, you know what I'm not. I'm doing a lot of very just hip hop and also the music that people may think like I'm not good at."

(00:52:59):
So it is pretty fun to watch that kind of a comparison or the contrast between a creator and also she's able to put a lot of original music on the platform to really inspire more people to do the same thing. There's another music, I would say TikTok creator. So he was pretty big on the other platforms, but the total approach from him is he's basically changing the lyrics, make it very relatable as a personal life. Because for example, he can totally change the lyrics from a old Backstreet Boys song or Nsync song to make it related with his daily communication with his wife. Make it really relatable and fun. So these are the things I think is very unique to us. If you are able to test and find something new like that, you're able to find a new batch of audience and even go viral on the platform.

Lenny (00:53:49):
So then switching to the advertising network, a lot of listeners here are thinking about, I imagine, advertising on TikTok. There's kind of classically been Facebook and Google are the two places to do run paid ads. Paid ads are a huge growth driver for tons of companies. It's one of the easiest you could say, or one of the most traditional way to grow. TikTok obviously is emerging and has already emerged as one of the newer advertising networks. So there's a lot of people thinking about how do I succeed as an advertiser on TikTok. So what advice do you have for people? One, who's it best for? I imagine TikTok isn't the best place to advertise for every sort of business. So what sort of businesses are best aligned to be successful on TikTok? And then just what advice can you share to do well as an advertiser on TikTok?

Ray Cao (00:54:37):
Yeah, I see a lot of really different type of advertisers already find their success on the platform. One thing that they actually can do that is really due to a couple of things that they're doing. Number one is, like I said, they're embracing this platform. They actually do a lot of things is TikTok first. I have a couple of advertisers. They have actually creating their own internal creative team just dedicated for TikTok. So they actually produce a ton of creative every single day to actually test and learn to understand the platform and understand the community they are engaging with. So I would say leaning in is the first part. It's harder, but it is not that hard. As long as you try it, you'll feel that every single day is getting easier. And also we make a lot of tools to make things easier for them as well. Like creative, we have also a lot of resources on the platform, the creative hub and also we have creative analytics to help you. So these are the things that we're able to basically help the advertiser to leaning in more.

(00:55:42):
The other angle to leaning in more is test and learn. A lot of times that people don't know how to really run ads on this platform. Google is very much search, like search fronts. They are really leading on the intent graph. And Meta is really on the people graph they're making. I mean TikTok is the content graph. It's very different, I would say machine compared to the other two. And it requires different way to optimizing and to leveraging the tools we have. So if you're applying the same logic from Meta or Google into TikTok, not necessarily you'll be able to see a great success, I have to say.

(00:56:27):
So you have to really get to the detail and to learn how you're operating this platform at the very beginning. Of course, like I said, we're trying to make things as simple as possible because we strongly believe that an advertiser's job is to taking care of their own business and our job is to service them. So we definitely make things a bit easier and along the way, but still it's a little bit learning for advertisers to change their mindset when they engage with us the first time. And I can see that again, for example, last Q4, I can see a lot of advertisers taking this approach to really listen to us and understanding what is our best practices. They actually see a very successful Q4 on the platform. So I do think that if you want to do more, just do more test and learn with us and to really understand the impact from TikTok.

Lenny (00:57:17):
Just to understand this point about versus Instagram, I think a lot of people probably run on them on both platforms and try to see which one's working better. Your point is the same content won't work as well on one versus the other. So just so people understand what the main difference there is. I know you talk about there's the friend graph versus TikTok just spreads it all over and anyone can see it. You don't have to be friends and it's really good at getting content out. So what is it that you would do differently if you're making an ad video for Instagram versus TikTok?

Ray Cao (00:57:44):
I think the TikTok video, it's more about the backend settings, right? So how often do you actually changing creatives? I think for us it is actually pretty... you want to actually test more creatives on this platform and see which one is actually working. And then we also have really detailed guidance on how do you set up your campaign structure to make sure that you're able to be more successful on the platform. So these are, I would say, the basic hydrangeas we talked about. You can see these guidance are very different from what Meta has today or even Google has today because we're just basically different platforms. And oftentimes you can also hear that we requires a bit more real time react on the platform due to some of the trends we have seen.

(00:58:30):
So that is the part I feel like if advertiser wants to engage more with really the sales team and they're able to provide more guidance to you and you're able to see more success there. But a lot of things will be counterintuitive I would say, because the intuitive you have learned is coming from the other platforms, but technically we're not. So a lot of things that, "Oh, this doesn't make sense to me, but why don't you try it?" And we make actually that really easy because we are sharing a lot of, I would say added credit to intensify incentivizing our advertisers to try it at the end of the day that hopefully they can see the result is proven itself.

Lenny (00:59:11):
Got it. I think that's such an interesting point, this idea of testing more, which basically you're saying with Instagram certain people will see it and that's not going to be shown tons of random people. So you basically have one shot at getting this in front of the Instagram crowd versus TikTok just tries it, this explore and exploit kind of approach is like, we'll just keep trying stuff until something sticks.

Ray Cao (00:59:33):
Yeah, I think exactly like that 100%. I think a lot of times that I think advertising, especially when digital advertising becomes a thing, so we kind of think everything can be calculated because you have the data, but the beauty of advertising is never like that. The core value advertising is to tell people don't know you exist and tell them that what you're doing for them and then creating these demand, right? Discovery is the core of advertising to me because I was never expecting my wife telling me that what she going to buy when she walk into a shopping mall, if I know that I'll stop her already. She oftentimes that get out something different. So this is not planned. I think that's literally one of the behavior I would love to emphasize more is you want to be open up your door to more consumer.

(01:00:26):
Because we are a digital version of word-of-mouth, I always compare us to that because it is the way that how the digital era becomes more human because it is actually helping user to discover new things, just like what they used to do. There's a new place in a certain area, you just go explore. It is just like that. So I think that's the reason why I think at the very beginning, continue doing this kind of open-minded testing with us will be a very good approach to get some early learning and eventually that you can refine your approach. But at the beginning I would highly recommend that just be open up and also take some risks with us together and we're able to show you how much we can actually benefit in the business.

Lenny (01:01:15):
Awesome. And on that point, that was the other piece of advice you shared is pay attention to the trends so that you can connect your ad to things that people are already laughing at or finding really interesting. I feel like Duolingo is incredible at this. Their videos are hilarious and I think they're all just organic videos and a lot of them connected trends that are-

Ray Cao (01:01:34):
Yeah. It's funny you brought up Duolingo because I'm actually now become a heavy user of Duolingo myself because-

Lenny (01:01:39):
Me, too.

Ray Cao (01:01:40):
I watched the video on the TikTok. I think just basically kids just randomly learn a different language and make a lot of mistakes and it's really funny. And then I just download the app because I didn't know. I've been using Duolingo for the past 40 days as a New Year resolution. I'm convincing myself to learn Japanese.

Lenny (01:02:01):
Wow, 40-day streak?

Ray Cao (01:02:03):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:02:04):
Amazing. I'm at 25 days.

Ray Cao (01:02:06):
Okay, great. We're on par pretty much.

Lenny (01:02:09):
Are you in the Ruby league or Emerald league? Which league are you in right now?

Ray Cao (01:02:09):
Emerald, right now.

Lenny (01:02:13):
Emerald. Okay. I think I'm in Emerald, too.

Ray Cao (01:02:15):
So we're on par here.

Lenny (01:02:17):
Just to close the thread on this, so you're talking about one of the benefits of TikTok ads is awareness-building basically more top of funnel. I know you also focus a lot on taking action, not just brand awareness. There's also a lot of, so maybe talk a bit about that, just like that's also a big part of advertising and TikTok.

Ray Cao (01:02:35):
Yeah, I think the beauty of word-of-mouth is actually that word-of-mouth leads to actions. So I think TikTok, we oftentimes people are thinking that, oh, TikTok is really good for building awareness, building upper funnel or some of the discovery funnel. But I really want to say that we want to prove, and also we already proved that from the studies we have seen from third parties that we're driving actions at the same time, and this is literally the ambition we're trying to really talk to out of the advertisers, especially on the commerce front, that shopping and TikTok shop and shop ads. It is actually the proven points that we see. And also, this is not necessarily coming off of our illusion, right, because we see there was a biggest trend on TikTok is "TikTok made me buy it." We have billion level views on that.

(01:03:27):
It's continue growing and this literally inspire us to do this product. Like I said, one of the very important things here is we drive our product by listening to our user and see the behavior from them and we see the behavior and now we're trying to capture that and provide the best service to our user and also help advertisers to reshaping their product. So I do think that this year people will see us more as a full funnel solution platform rather than only building the brands because we want actually impacting on full funnel for our advertisers. Again, driving their business result is more important to us.

Lenny (01:04:03):
Say a startup is starting to think about advertising on TikTok, maybe they've done some Google ads and Facebook ads. What do you recommend they plan for in order to just see if this could work for them? How much time should they give it? How many ads should they run? How much budget should they allot to just explore this as a growth channel for them?

Ray Cao (01:04:23):
I would say at the very beginning, the investment will be coming from their leaning into creating a business account with us. So this is actually how you're engaging with your community. But even before that, I think just do some research on a platform and be the user as a TikTok to really experiencing it and see the differences. And then you are thinking about how can you actually connecting your behavior or your desired behavior coming from a user with your business and then you're creating content around it. And that's the moment I think this first step is creating your business presence on the TikTok.

Lenny (01:05:00):
And the idea there is just an organic account you create, let's say Lenny's Podcast, which I actually have... my Lenny's Podcast is on TikTok, so we can use that as an example maybe. So you're saying start off just creating free business accounts on TikTok and posting videos just to see how it feels and how it goes?

Ray Cao (01:05:15):
Yeah. Just see how it feels, right? So maybe some of the videos you don't get any views and some of the videos, you get more views. At the end of the day you can test some of the advertising products, drive those awareness and see if it's actually driving impact for you. And then you have to do more maybe testing with us or AB testing or geo-splitting testing eventually, depends on how big the investment is. You can see there is actually a directional impact on your business and also we are giving you reporting and insights on how you're doing on the platform, so you can optimize in towards that.

(01:05:50):
But obviously very important part is trying to get a feeling of the platform by creating your organic presence and then try to launch the ads account to make sure that you're able to drive more traffic to your desired destination or to a desired actions that you want user to take and continue refining that. Along the way, there are a lot of things that you're going to learn. For example, how can you leverage in automation solutions on the platform and how can leveraging some of the, I would say, creator trends you detected on the platform and also some of the tools that we're creating to help you to generating those scripts.

(01:06:24):
So these are all the things that you can learn from the platform. In terms of time investment, I think at the beginning of the month, definitely it's going to be, I hope it'll be a little bit more intense of learning so that you're able to get a rhythm in there and along the way that as long as gets become more automated and also get more understanding towards the business, you're able to actually creating, I would say, more relevant content for the platforms by leveraging our creators or by leveraging some of your own, I would say, resources from their third party, for example. So I think, yeah, it takes a little bit a learning curve, but I do think that the result will surprise you.

Lenny (01:07:02):
And was the implication there, give it a month? Like spend a month of running ads or is that not what you're saying?

Ray Cao (01:07:07):
I think oftentimes we'll say a month minimum to run ads because I think it's actually a learning curve for advertisers to really get into understanding the behavior and the platform.

Lenny (01:07:17):
And how many ads would you suggest, and I know there's not a rule of thumb, but just how many ads would you suggest they try to run in that month, to give you a real sense of this could work or no?

Ray Cao (01:07:27):
The more, the better. I would say at least 10 different ad creatives will be ideal per week and the more the better.

Lenny (01:07:37):
10 per week. Oh, wow. Okay. So 40 potentially.

Ray Cao (01:07:39):
Yeah, 10 per week. Also, I would say we can see that it is a little bit of, I would like nuances there because a lot of, "Oh, I don't have that resources," but as simple as possible, it can give you a tool. We have CapCut as a tool. I created my anniversary video for my wife by using that tool. Don't tell her one-minute now everybody knows, but she thinks that-

Lenny (01:08:04):
She might not listen all the way this long to the end of this episode.

Ray Cao (01:08:06):
She thinks it takes a lot of time. Literally the production is amazing. We are creating that tool specifically for our creator and also for our monetizer and the user in general. So you're able to do a lot of, I would say, automated and customized way in the app so you're able to generate those content on your fingertips. So it will be a really good help for advertisers that want to be more self-service. On the other hand, we also have third parties, certified TikTok service providers on the creative side to help you as well. So depends on the level of how advertiser you are.

Lenny (01:08:42):
Is there a most common mistake people make when they try this out where you're just often being like, "You fool, here's what you did wrong?" Is there something in there that's just like, "Just don't do this thing because a lot of people make this mistake and then they fail on TikTok?"

Ray Cao (01:08:53):
Yeah, the first one is I can see a lot of advertiser instantly they want to do remarketing or they want to do a very small niche targeting on the platform because you're limiting yourself. Like I said, it is more about getting to the rhythm to understand more about platform. So a broader targeting approach is actually recommended at the very early stage and most of advertisers are already doing that today because previously I can see for the first two years in the business, especially when we acquire new advertisers, oftentimes they get on the platform, say, "Hey, I want to do this and that. I want to really refine my targeting, et cetera." And then we just recommend, "Hey, why don't we do this comparison? You have a campaign set up like this going on, but this is our recommendation and you can see the difference." And literally most of them, they'll see a very big difference over there on it.

Lenny (01:09:44):
Amazing. Ray, I know you have to run, I'm going to skip the lightning round, but let me ask you just one question from lightning round. Do you have a favorite TikTok account that you've been just really loving these days? I'll share mine real quick and then see if anything comes to mind. There's this lady who I found recently who does silent baby product reviews where her baby's sleeping in the room and she is like, "Shh." And then she just goes through 20 different baby products very quietly and it's hilarious. I'll link to it in the show notes. If you have a kid, you'll love it. Is there anything that you love or want to highlight?

Ray Cao (01:10:18):
I do have one creator I am actually active following is on. He's a magician. He basically uses very, I would say, very normal things, just handy around him to make something that look very cool magic. I always were like, how did he make that? So I'm actually following that and getting more inspiration on myself is like, "Can I do that? No." I think that's more about my personal hobby to see something like that. It's very, very cool to see people can do these kinds of tricks by using normal stuff around them.

Lenny (01:10:54):
Ray, thank you so much for being here. Two last questions. How can folks reach out if they ever want to learn more about this stuff, if they can, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Ray Cao (01:11:03):
I think feel free to reach out to me on LinkedIn if you want to discuss more about some of the go-to market challenges you're facing. I think we're facing a lot of, I would say similar challenges every single day. And also in terms of on the product standpoint, different companies have a different product philosophy. I don't think we are always right. I was always recommending to receive a lot of feedbacks or recommendations and that would be really, really nice to have to form these kind, leveraging your audience, be my community to teach me a lesson sometimes. That'll be even better.

Lenny (01:11:39):
Amazing. Ray, again, thank you so much for being here. I feel like people don't have a ton of insight into the way TikTok operates, and I appreciate making time to do this.

Ray Cao (01:11:47):
No, it's a pleasure, Lenny. Thank you very much for having me.

Lenny (01:11:50):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at Lenny'spodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:00:00):
Make sure you go somewhere where you have a good engineering partner. Because if you have great ideas of what to build but you can't get them built, then you go nowhere. So that has to be part of your evaluation criteria that you meet and value your engineering partner before you join. And then I think what's really important is that you're aligned. You understand your roles and responsibilities and where you're going to divide and conquer and where you're going to be aligned. You don't want any of this ... Like people in the organization, they ask mom, they asked dad and they got different opinions and playing one against the other. That doesn't work.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:36):
Today, my guest is Tamar Yehoshua. Tamar is currently president of product and technology at Glean, one of the most successful enterprise AI companies out there right now. Prior to joining Glean, Tamar was chief product officer at Slack for four years where she led product design and research as the company scaled 10Xed their revenue, went through IPO and then got bought by Salesforce. Tamar also led product and engineering teams at Google, where for many years she was responsible for the Google search experience. She also spent five years at Amazon as director of engineering and vice president at A9.com. She was also a venture partner at IVP and has been on board of directors for ServiceNow, Snyk, RetailMeNot, and Yext. In our conversation, we get into all kinds of juicy advice, including why companies don't have to be run well to win, why you don't need a career plan, the two habits she credits most for helping her succeed throughout her career, what she learned from Jeff Bezos and Stewart Butterfield and Marc Benioff, how to build stronger cross-functional relationships and a bunch of advice on AI including how it will likely change your jobs, examples of how she and her colleagues are already using AI to be more productive in their work and what she's learned about building AI-based products that are non-deterministic and can be very unpredictable.

(00:01:51):
This episode is for anyone looking to level up as a leader and get a better sense of how AI will change your job. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Tamar Yehoshua.

(00:02:12):
Tamar, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:02:15):
Thank you so much for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:17):
I've had so many people recommend you coming on this podcast. I'm really happy that we're finally doing this. I want to start with a question that I've started to ask people who have had extraordinarily successful careers, which you've had. So let me ask you, what are one or two specific skills or mindsets or habits that you think most contributed to your success during the course of your career that you think might be helpful to people who are trying to figure out how to accelerate their career or just be more successful in their career?

Tamar Yehoshua (00:02:47):
One of the things that I think is overlooked is do a really good job at whatever your job is at that point. People have a tendency ... Especially product managers are very ambitious and they want to get to the next level and they're always eyeing the next job, but you're not going to get the next job unless you do really well at the job that you're in. Knock it out of the park. However simple, however easy it may be to you, do a great job. And in tech jobs, there's table stakes. There's table stakes of you need to be technical, you need to know the latest technology, you need to understand your product, the product you're working on. No matter what your role is. You have to understand it deeply. You need to understand metrics. So especially product managers have a wide breadth of things that they need to understand. So those are a given. You need to do that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:40):
This episode is brought to you by Explo, a game changer for customer facing analytics and data reporting. Are your users craving more dashboards, reports and analytics within your product? Are you tired of trying to build it yourself? As a product leader, you probably have these requests in your roadmap, but the struggle to prioritize them is real. Building analytics from scratch can be time-consuming, expensive, and a really challenging process. Enter Explo. Explo is a fully white labeled embedded analytics solution designed entirely with your user in mind. Getting started is easy. Explo connects to any relational database or warehouse, and with its low-code functionality, you can build and style dashboards in minutes. Once you're ready, simply embed the dashboard or report into your application with a tiny code snippet. The best part, your end users can use Explo's AI features for their own report and dashboard generation, eliminating customer data requests for your support team. Build and embed a fully white labeled analytics experience in days. Try it for free at explo.co/lenny. That's E-X-P-L-O.C-O/lenny.

(00:04:52):
This episode is brought to you by Sprig. What if product teams knew exactly what to build to reach their goals? From increasing conversion to boosting engagement, these challenges require a deep understanding of your users, something that you can't get from product analytics alone. Meet Sprig, a product experience platform that generates AI powered opportunities to continuously improve your product at scale. First, Sprig captures your product experience in real time through heat maps, replays, surveys, and feedback studies, then Sprig's industry leading AI instantly analyzes all of your product experience data to generate real-time insights. Sprig AI goes even further with actionable product recommendations to drive revenue, retention, and user satisfaction. Join product teams at Figma and at Notion by uncovering AI powered product opportunities at scale. Visit sprig.com/lenny to book a demo and get a $75 gift card. S-P-R-I-G dot com/lenny.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:05:55):
So now the question is the difference in leadership and executive roles and when you're getting there. So how do you start transitioning? So after you've done a great job at everything and you understand the core skills that you need, another thing you really need to know is understanding people and motivations. And when you're building products, you have to understand why does somebody want to use your product? What problem are they solving? Why do they want to click on that button? What's going to make them feel good when they click on it? What's going to give them delight and what's also going to make them feel bad and frustrated and what do they not want to do? So you need to understand motivations in people for building products and for building teams and organizations. So just like why does somebody want to click on a button, why does somebody want to join your team? Why do they want to work hard? What are they trying to accomplish? What's the goal for their career?

(00:06:54):
So you have to be able to read people, ask lots of questions to understand them. And I'll say one thing that really helped me, this is a strange segue, but my father was a psychiatrist and when I was growing up, we would have family occasions, go to events, whatever, and afterwards in the car ride back, he would always give his perspective of analyzing what happened at the event. What this person was thinking. Why did they say this? And then he would quiz me of, "Why do you think they did that?" And it was really interesting because it taught me to see the whole room. To see how people react. Like Lenny, if you say something and somebody else is there, look at the other person. What's their face saying? You can understand so much if you're paying attention. So I think when you want to build for people and lead organizations, it is about the people and understanding them and motivating them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:58):
I love this advice. I feel like we could do a whole podcast on just this topic. So on this last point about understanding people, is there an example of this in either a product you built of just like, "Oh, here's something I noticed about someone using Slack or Google or Amazon that changed the way I think about building this specific feature."?

Tamar Yehoshua (00:08:17):
One of the things that I caution product managers about is that you don't want to be too overly reliant on metrics and you want to also have an intuition. You want product managers who understand intuitively their customers and their product and sometimes you'll make decisions because you just know it's the right thing to do because it feels right and it usually is right if you understand your product well enough. How do you get good at it? Ask a lot of questions. Don't assume you know. Marc Benioff would always say, "Have a beginner's mind. Go in assuming that you know nothing and listen to your customers, listen to the people." Because I also see this as you're building a feature and you think it's the best thing. Because of course everyone's going to want it because you worked on it and you're going to put it front and center in the interface where everybody's going to see it. Well, no, you got to earn that right. And that is another thing that people do is they want the thing they worked on to be right there, but it might not be the most important thing that a person needs at that point. So have perspective. Have perspective of what your users are actually trying to achieve.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:33):
Going back to your first point about doing a great job at the job you have, I imagine some people hear this and the advice is do a great job at the job you're already doing, and they may feel like they are, and there's other reasons they aren't being promoted. Is there an example from your career or a story you could tell of just like to clarify what doing a great job look like where it's not just like I hit my goals. It's like, here's what it looks like. Here's how you actually get ahead.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:10:00):
Are you helping the business move forward? So it's not about I achieve what I was asked to do, but did you build something that people actually used? It's not about just launching something and did you do the right thing for the company? And that is different. It's a different mindset. Did you enable the entire organization to be more productive despite you? I remember very early in my career I was working as an engineer and I was offered a job to manage a team that was across different programs. I took a vacation, I came back and I said, "I don't think this team should exist." It was my first management job and I wanted to be a manager. And I said, "Here's why I don't think that this team should exist. It's not the right thing for the company. It's not going to be productive." And my manager was so stunned. He was like, "Wait. You're saying no?" I'm like, "Yeah, because here's how you should organize it." And then he's like, "You're right, and I'll find you something else," and he did.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:15):
If I were to put this into one word, it's impact. Drive impact.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:11:18):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:19):
Amazing. Okay. Going in a different direction, we were chatting before we started recording this and something that you shared with me, and some people may be really surprised to hear this, but I completely agree with this take, is that you don't need to be a well-run business to win. I've seen this myself. I'd love to hear your insights here and especially where you notice this. What parts of your career noticed this to be true?

Tamar Yehoshua (00:11:45):
I love working at well-run companies. It's more fun, your people are happier. I like running a well-run team, so I aspire to have a very well run team and to work at a well run company. But what I've seen is when a company isn't well run like IT isn't working, marketing is broken, there are not enough people in HR, there's a lot of turnover. All of these things I've seen that they're not correlated to the company being successful. So I can think of a couple examples right now of companies I know ... Not Glean, where I'm working today. Where there's high executive turnover. Where people get yelled at. There are lots of people fired. There's reorgs all the time. People I talk to are super unhappy, but the numbers are amazing. They're growing like crazy. And the opposite sit is also true. I can think of one company I know really well, amazing, CEO, well run, well oiled machine, everything. Hired good executives and they flat lined.

(00:12:51):
So you just see it. You see it over and over again and people get very upset about these things that aren't working. And one of the things that I try and do is give a perspective of what matters and what doesn't. And it might even be to the sales team because you get all these requests for features all the time. If you did every single one, it would be impossible. Even if you did, 80, 90% of them won't matter for the success of the company. But then there are some that really matter. So what are the things that really matter? We always talk about product market fit. Nobody really knows what product market fit is. Everybody has a different explanation, but it means people want to use your product. That they're clamoring for it. So you've built something that people value and that people value and that solves a problem for them, but that's also not good enough. You need to build a great product, but you also have to have distribution and you need to have a sales team that works. And you have to have enough money in the bank to get there. So those are probably the things that are the most important. I might be missing something.

(00:13:58):
And then within each of those, there's the things that really mattered and there's so many features that we built at Slack that were the most important features ever that failed and nobody used so it clearly didn't have an impact. And you can see that in retrospect, but I think after being at multiple different big companies and small companies, I have that perspective of let's just make sure that we do the right things and don't get too worked up about all the things that are broken because every startup has so many things that are broken.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:29):
So I think a really interesting insight here is that if you're working at a company that is just chaotic and it feels like we don't know what we're doing, I don't know how this thing is running, I don't know how this will continue to be successful, your experience is it ... Is it that most of the successful companies you've been at are just chaotic internally and aren't incredibly run and that's normal, that's very typical?

Tamar Yehoshua (00:14:51):
Until they get to a certain scale. Now, once you reach a certain scale and you've already conquered the market, then you need to be well run. Then you bring in professional managers and things are about the cost and executing and getting all the ... Once you get to over 5,000 people or 10,000 people, you got to have things that ... Then you're a growth engine. You have to know what phase you're in and what's important at that phase. So it isn't that at every phase, chaos is okay, and also some chaos is okay and some chaos is not okay. If you're changing your strategy all the time and you're changing your direction and you're changing projects on people all the time so that they can't actually achieve anything ... So this is again, so you can't simplify it that some chaos is okay and some isn't. And also some chaos is right for you as a person. There are some really great companies I would never work at because they don't fit me. They're not a company I would enjoy going to work in the morning or they're not aligned with what I'm good at. So just because a company is doing well, if the chaos is chaos and something that's going to make you upset and unhappy don't work there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:11):
Is there a correlation there? Just like companies that have strong product market fit, things are just breaking as they're going through hyper growth? Just thoughts on why this is the case.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:16:21):
A lot of it is that because if you are in hyper growth, you've got customers coming at a really fast pace, you're growing your company really quickly and the number of employees and it's just really hard to keep up. Because things in the infrastructure break, things in the communication breakdown. You've got at any given point 50% of the company has been there less than six months. But you have to grow really fast because once you hit product market fit, if you don't, then your growth will stop. So if you're suddenly growing, especially if you're an enterprise company, you have to have salespeople, if you're a consumer company or systems have to keep running as you scale. And look at companies like MySpace, well, they died because their product got too slow. And so some companies have initial product market fit and then they don't keep up. So I do think a lot of it is it's very hard to grow that fast. And so things really do start breaking, but then once you get all the right leadership in place, processes in place, then it starts to get better. So it goes through ups and downs in level of chaos.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:28):
There's one takeaway here that product market fit solves a lot of problems. Strong product market fit.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:17:33):
Well, no product market fit is a death sentence. I would say it more like that. If you built a product that people aren't really excited to use, then you don't have a company because it's very hard to do that unless you have distribution machine and then you catch up over time. But we will not name companies like that. So there are other ways of doing it, but yeah, that is the most important thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:00):
Yeah. I will say during my experience at Airbnb, I absolutely saw this. It was just nonstop chaos. And I always felt like, well, how is this continuing to operate and succeed? Things are just out of control. Everything's changing every six months. I don't know what's happening here. And I think a lesson here is just that's normal for a hyper growth business that has strong product market fit. But again, not a good excuse to just allow chaos. And it's not like chaos means success, right?

Tamar Yehoshua (00:18:30):
And it's not a good excuse to not have an organization that's functioning. You should still strive to have an organization that's functioning and keep people happy and motivated and all that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:39):
Great. Okay. Another maybe contrarian opinion that you hold along the career track is that you don't need to plan your career. I also 100% agree with this. I had no plan for my career. I never knew where the hell I was going to go. I never had this vision of here's what I want to do. I just followed things that were pulling me and things that seemed interesting. I love that you also tell people this. I'd love to hear your insights here. Especially for someone that's either struggling with their career or just stressed. They don't have a plan or their plan's not working the way they wanted it to.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:19:12):
Really recently I was talking to somebody in their twenties who was asking me for career advice. Should I be a product manager, et cetera. And I'm trying to put together my five-year plan and I said, "I never had a five-year plan." So to be clear, some people need that. That's the kind of people they are. They want the planning. I said, "It's great if you want that, but I never had it." And the person I was talking to just relaxed and they're like, "Oh my God, that's so great to hear because I have no idea what I want to do in five years." I'm like, "I still have no idea what I want to do in five years. I've never had an idea what I want to do in five years." Early in your career you have a lot more angst about it because the forks in the road are more significant because they can go, do I go get an MBA or do I go work for somebody? Do I be a product manager or an engineer? And those really take you in very different paths.

(00:20:09):
And I meet a lot of kids in their ... I shouldn't call them kids. My kids are my kids' friends. But a lot of people who are younger in their career who are struggling with this a little bit. So what I believe, and I've always believed is that you follow people. You learn the most from people. I don't look for domains. Some people have a domain, like I'm super interested in climate or whatever and they really want to work in that area and that's fine so maybe within that area. But you follow people who are the best at what they do. So it's not good enough to follow somebody who you like. You want to follow somebody who's either the best product thinker or the best engineer or the best salesperson. And so that you will learn the skill of how to be the best at that.

(00:21:01):
So you follow people where you're going to learn the most. And a way to do that also is you look at where the great people are going. So you want to go to companies where there's also a nexus of great people because they together will do great things. And even if the company fails or succeeds, but not as much as you'd like, you still have those connections. Everybody talks about the PayPal Mafia and how they've gone on to do things. I was super lucky to be at Google for so many years and I spent a lot of time with Googlers that I met and that are all working in different companies now because you build those relationships by working together. So if you follow people and where you're going to learn the most and you go step by step, I think that's a great way of progressing in your career.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:53):
That's such tactical advice. And I've seen this work for a lot of people that just go where their favorite former employees work. And not favorite to your point, but the people that they most respect and have been most impressed by. And I think it's such an easy thing to do. It's a really easy heuristic for understanding where to go. There's something Marc Andreessen once shared that I'm reminded of when you say this. There's a term for this, I forget the actual term, but there's certain companies have this gravitational pull where they are acquiring all the best talent. They're currently the gravity in the space and everyone awesome is going there. And you have to, as a company, know you're one of those companies or you're the opposite. You're losing all the people and they're all going to this other company. I guess any thoughts on that?

Tamar Yehoshua (00:22:43):
Yeah. And it's really bad when you don't have a gravitational pull. It's super hard. I would say that one thing that if you're a manager, I always advise managers, go somewhere where you can recruit. I got a piece of advice from a friend that I thought was amazing advice as a leader. She said to me, "Take a job where if you hire people, it's going to make their careers." I was like, "Whoa." Because I was getting offers for some turnaround jobs. And if you think you can turn around, great. But if you're going to hire the best people, you want to make sure that it's going to be a good place for them and that they're going to learn and they're going to grow. And so you want to do right by them. And you really earnestly want to say you can make your career by coming here.

(00:23:36):
And I thought that gave such a higher bar for every job I was looking at as a leader that I thought it was just amazing advice. And then on the flip side, on the negative side, some people are putting too much emphasis on where will I get a big financial return? And I've found that financial returns are the hardest to predict. You know who's good. You know who you want to work with. You can predict where you're going to learn. Because even if a company fails, you learn a lot. But predicting financial success is so hard because you don't know what's going to happen with the market, with the world, with crypto, and Meta AI. And people who do that and say ... I had one person say, "I took this job because I'm a mercenary. They just paid me a ton." Did not work out for him. And I feel really bad when people do that, but I think that it's a dangerous thing to do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:40):
I imagine some people hearing this advice are going to feel like, "I'm not going to get a job at OpenAI or Glean or other awesome companies that everyone wants to go work at." Any advice to those folks?

Tamar Yehoshua (00:24:52):
There's lots of good companies and there's lots of smart people. You don't have to be at the top brand. And if you go somewhere where you're going to learn and it's going to get you there. I made mistakes. I went to some companies, multiple companies that failed or stopped growing and didn't do well or didn't have all the right people. Careers you don't make every step is to the right place. You remember in what you cited, all the companies I went to that did well, you left out all the ones that I went to that didn't do well. And so then people will assume that every time I made a job change, it was to a company that did well. No. That was not the case. So if you focus on that learning bit, you will get there. And there are lots of paths. There isn't just the OpenAI or Glean or Anthropic.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:42):
Awesome. And again, I love how tactical this is. If someone is trying to figure out where to go work if they're unhappy in their current job or don't have a job right now is just make a list of the people you most respect that are the best at the thing they do, see where they work and there's your list of companies to potentially go after. There's a lot of benefits to this as you shared. It's not just helping you pick the place to work, it's the network. It'll level you up. Is there anything else along those lines that is helpful for people to think about why this is a really good strategy?

Tamar Yehoshua (00:26:10):
Skills can't be taken away. A company can fail, but if you learn a skill, you will always have that skill.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:15):
I love that. And I've totally seen this to work, so I really love that you're focusing on this advice. You've mentioned places you've worked and folks you've worked with. You worked with folks like Jeff Bezos, Stewart Butterfield, some of the top product thinkers, leaders in the world. So let me just ask, what's one thing you learned from Jeff Bezos and Stewart Butterfield?

Tamar Yehoshua (00:26:37):
Probably can't narrow it down to one, but I'll talk about Bezos first. I was very lucky to join Amazon early when I still ... I had quarterly meetings with Jeff Bezos. And this was before AWS launched, so it was before Amazon was known in the Valley. This is another example. I went there because I went to work for Udi Manbe who started A9 and he was talking to me one night trying to recruit me and he spent two hours on the phone with me telling me how amazing Jeff Bezos was. And this was before there were any books on him. And that really convinced me to go there. So there's a lot written on Bezos. Read his shareholder letters, read the books about him, read Colin Bryar's Working Backwards. The Everything Box I think it's called or The Everything Store.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:25):
The Everything Store. Yeah.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:27:27):
There's so many good books and there's so much to learn about how he works. So I won't try and cover those things. The things that stood out to me from the meetings I had with him were a couple of things. One, a lot of people have written about these six pagers, so he doesn't believe in PowerPoint. You write a six pager about ... It's like studying for the final exam is writing these six pagers. So you go into the meeting and there's the people around the table, his executive team and him. First he does not speak until everybody around the table speaks. So he goes around to all his leads and said, "What do you think? What do you think? What do you think?" And I'm sitting there like, "I don't care what anyone think. I just want to hear what Bezos thinks." But he wants to make sure that it's a team effort and that he's listening to what everybody in his organization thinks.

(00:28:17):
And he always spoke last. He is by far the smartest person I've ever met in my life. I've worked with a lot of smart people. But his ability to go deep in any domain and nail the core issue, and remember. We would've quarterly meetings and from quarter to quarter he would remember things that he had talked about before and then he would go into the architecture of search and why are you doing it this way or that way? And you're just blown away that he knows that. For me, the biggest takeaway from those meetings was his consistency, which is he had principles that it made it easier for you to operate in his company because you knew what he cared about because he always had these principles. Everything had to be customer driven, everything had to be relevant for the customer.

(00:29:12):
He hated icons. That was just the thing. You had to write what they were because people couldn't figure out what they are. So anytime you showed an icon, he would get annoyed. But you would go in and after a couple of meetings you're like, "Okay. I know what he's going to ask about. I know how he's thinking and I know what his principles are." And I think that consistency enables you to operate a large organization more effectively. And then there's one other thing that I really remember was one of the few really small meetings I was in with him and we were presenting working on a new product, and I was like, "Our competitors have 10 times as many people as we do on this." And he looks at me and he said, "That is your advantage." And then he goes into his talk about how it's a hill and it takes seven years to build a product. You can't look at it in the near term. You have to be in it for the long term. You can be sure I never went in and said, "I need a lot more resources." So that was Bezos.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:14):
Awesome.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:30:17):
Stewart. Again, I went to Slack because I wanted to work with Stewart Butterfield. I think he is the best product thinker in the Valley. He's not working in product right now. He's taking time off. But he's got this combination of long-term thinking and in the details. So in 2014, he wrote a master plan for Slack, which was build a product people love, build a network. That's Slack Connect. Build a platform that makes all of your other SaaS products more valuable. That's Slack Platform. And then do some magic AI stuff. Magic AI stuff took a lot longer, but-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:54):
That was part of his plan early on is magic AI stuff.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:30:55):
It literally was. There was a grid with four boxes in 2014 and it never changed. That was his master plan and what we worked on each year changed. But somebody recently asked me, "You guys did Slack Connect much later?" I'm like, "Yeah, but it was always part of the plan." It was always part of his vision. So he saw forward in the vision, but he also was very much into the details. And I think the thing that I learned from him the most was the power of prototyping. And that even though he was such a great product thinker, he would always say, "I can't tell you if this is going to work. I have to feel it. I have to try it. And a mock-up doesn't tell you what it's going to feel like." And he would push people to do prototypes, not incremental of just to get a feature out, but really to think. Very soon after I started, we launched ... I hired a design lead, Ethan Eismannn, and he led a redesign of the new information architecture for Slack.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:59):
I worked with Ethan at Airbnb.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:32:00):
Oh yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:01):
He was head of design for the search experience and the search team.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:32:04):
Yeah. Ethan is awesome. And he came in and his first task was to work with Stewart on this redesign. And Stewart came in and said, "I want you to take everything in the interface and put it behind one button." And everyone's like, "That's never going to work." And he's like, "Do it. Just do it." And so we had our prototypers ... We had also engineers, front-end engineers who were really good at prototyping, literally took everything in the interface and put it behind one button and he said, "This is how you're going to see what you really need in the interface." So we were never going to ship that, but it was the beginning of the redesign.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:43):
Let me tell you about a product called Sidebar. The most successful people that I know surround themselves with incredible peers. When you have a trusted group of peers, you can discuss challenges you're having, get career advice and just gut check how you're thinking about your work, your career and your life. This gives you more than a leg up. It gives you a leap forward. Having a group of trusted and amazing peers was key to my career growth. And this is the Sidebar ethos, but it's hard to build this trusted group of peers on your own. Sidebar is a platform for senior tech professionals, director to C-level to advance in their career. Members are matched into peer groups to lean on for unbiased opinions, diverse perspectives and raw feedback. Guided by world-class programming and facilitation, all running on Sidebar's technology Sidebar enables you to get focused tactical feedback at every step of your career journey.

(00:33:35):
If you're a listener of this podcast, you're already committed to growth. Sidebar is the missing piece to catalyze your career. 93% of members say Sidebar helped them achieve a significant positive change in their career. Check them out at sidebar.com/lenny.

(00:33:52):
As a product leader, how do you think about just the time it takes to create a prototype in something like this? As a pm I'm just like a lot of times we don't have time to build this whole prototype. We got to ship stuff, we got to hit these calls, we got experiments to run, we'll just build it and see how it goes. How do you think about making time for something like that?

Tamar Yehoshua (00:34:08):
If you're doing it right, it'll be faster and you need to have an engineering infrastructure that enables prototyping. So some engineering infrastructures are too heavy and they don't actually enable prototyping. We had a problem with our mobile apps that it was too hard to prototype and we actually redesigned our mobile apps until we got to the point where it was easier because our desktop app was pretty easy to prototype. But you have to have a layer of abstraction that enables you to do that, and you have to have engineers who have a prototyping mindset, and if you build multiple things and you have this mindset as I'm willing to throw it away, you write code that is never going to make it to production so you can just crank it out much faster and then you can see what works and then you build the production code. Until you actually get to your end goal of something working faster.

(00:35:02):
But you need the engineering team to have the same mindset. The product and engineering have to work together and design because design is just in it. Sometimes you can get design engineers who are doing the prototyping. So your first prototypes are like Figma prototypes, and then you get prototypes on real data. When I was at Google, one of our teams, a front-end team, I remember we hired a bunch of prototypers and our head of front-end engineering said to me one day, this is my secret weapon. This is how we move faster. So I do think it's a mindset shift and a tech stack shift.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:39):
We're going to talk about AI later, but it's also getting easier to build prototypes with AI. There's this video recently that went around on Twitter where an eight-year-old girl was building an app and in like 45 minutes, she built a chatbot using this product called Cursor. So I think that'll unlock a lot of great product on opportunities and just accelerate this sort of work. I asked about Jeff Bezos and Stewart Butterfield. I'm curious if there's another leader you've worked with that maybe is less known that you also learned a ton from that might be worth talking about.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:36:12):
I think that there are people who are really, really good at what they do. So Marc Benioff is an amazing marketeer. His marketing mind ... After the acquisition, I got the opportunity to onstage with him at Dreamforce for ... Because Slack was a new shiny thing so of course Slack was going to be in the keynote. And so I was in the Benioff's keynote two years in a row. And so I watched how he approaches his keynote and the whole thing around Dreamforce. Dreamforce is incredible at the impact that it has on the ecosystem. And so I think that as a product, people don't think of him as much, but as his marketing abilities are amazing what he's done.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:07):
I've written posts about how various companies got started in Salesforce history. Always comes to mind where they go to conferences where's there's no software mascot walking around. And I remember they did something around one of their competitors where they just created some real controversy around someone.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:37:22):
Well, they went into their competitor's conference and stood outside their competitor's conference.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:27):
Mm-hmm. Right. That's what it was.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:37:29):
This is in the Beyond Software. This is in his book that he wrote about the early phases of Salesforce. And it takes his guts. He pushes the envelope.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:40):
I love that. It's a really good point that people don't think of Marc Benioff as a marketer. And that's interesting that that's maybe the main thing you took away from him is just the power of marketing and the skill.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:37:49):
He approaches his marketing presentations like a product person approaches their building their product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:58):
Amazing. Okay. Speaking of former colleagues, I asked one of your former colleagues, his name is Fuzzy Khos. He's now the CTO of Notion. You worked with him, I believe at Slack.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:37:59):
And at Google.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:10):
And at Google. Wow. Okay. So I asked him what to ask you, and he said that you're amazing at building strong cross-functional relationships, especially with engineers. I know you used to be an engineer, so I get where that skill come from. What can you teach people about building stronger cross-functional relationships, especially PMs to build better relationships with their engineers, designers, other folks on their team?

Tamar Yehoshua (00:38:34):
Probably the most important thing that a product leader does because if you have great ideas of what to build, but you can't get them built, then you go nowhere. So one, make sure somewhere where you have a good engineering partner. So Henderson was the co-founder and CTO of Slack, and I couldn't have asked for a better engineering partner. He's just awesome. And that has to be part of your evaluation criteria that you meet and value your engineering partner before you join or you know that it's not the right one and the organization is willing to make a change. So that can happen too. You can go in and understand that something has to change, but that is a very, very important thing of what you're doing and what you're assessing when you go in. And then I think what's really important is that you're aligned. You understand your roles and responsibilities and where you're going to divide and conquer and where you're going to be aligned.

(00:39:29):
You don't want any of this ... People in the organization, they asked Mom, they asked dad and they got different opinions and playing one against the other, that doesn't work. So one, you have to know that you're not going to do that. So if somebody would ask me something that it was in Cal's domain, I'd be like, "Did you talk to Cal?" I would never try and go around him. So we were very clear on, you're going to drive this, I'm going to drive this. And if it was unclear, we'd talk and we would say, "Okay. Who's going to take this one?" And we would do all our reviews together. And so all of the OKR reviews, we had weekly exec reviews, we had the updates on our OKRs, so we did them all together, but I knew here's the things that he was going to ask the questions on and dig deep. And then when I was, he would take a back seat, but of course we could ask questions in each other things, but I knew that he was taking ownership and he knew what I was taking ownership of.

(00:40:24):
But I think the bottom line was respect. Is that you have to respect and trust that they actually will follow up on what they say they will. In Cal and Fuzzy were amazing at that. I would go to Fuzzy and be like, "Hey, we need more mobile engineers because this one product is not going to ship." And he's like, "I'm on it. Got it." And that was all I needed to do. And obviously if he couldn't do it, he'd come back to me and, "Hey, there's going to be a problem." But it was like just things got done. That's the best part of it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:56):
You talked about being aligned, which I love and I fully have seen that power of that of you and your engine manager, design manager being aligned on ... And you tell me if I'm wrong, but specifically on what goals you're trying to achieve, what success looks like, things like that. Are there any tactics you found to create that alignment? And also if there's anything else you want to add to the point I just made about what it is you're specifically aligned on, that'd be great.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:41:19):
One, you got to spend a lot of time together. There isn't a way around that. And you have to document things and make sure that you've talked it through. And if you don't agree with something and you're not sure it's a priority, you have to speak up and you can't just be like, "Okay, whatever.", and then go to somebody in your team and be like, "Oh God, that that CTO, why did he make this decision?" That just doesn't work. So I'm a very direct person. So if I don't think that something is the right priority or is working, I will be very clear. We had different forms, so I'll be very tactical here on the forms that Cal and I had together.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:56):
Perfect.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:42:00):
We used OKRs to drive our processes and we would have the teams present OKRs to us. When the team got too large, it got to be too much time to go through every team's OKR review so we had a Slack channel for each team, their OKRs, a planning channel for each one. And people would post a doc and then a Slack video of going through the major points. And we had a time limit of how long they were allowed to be. And they would say, "Here's our OKRs, here's the things that you would pay attention to." And then Cal and I would do a marathon and we would watch them all together. And-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:36):
In a room sitting there watching them together?

Tamar Yehoshua (00:42:38):
Correct. And then we would say, "Do we have any follow-up questions?" And we put in channel our follow-up questions to the team. And sometimes there'd be five to 10 teams that we would then have a follow-up meeting with. We would say that this is a really high priority project or there are a lot of questions that we have, and then we would do a meeting but we were always doing those meetings together. So that was the OKR reviews of getting the alignment. And by asking the questions, we could then ... By it just being us, we could dig into the team. And we each had a chief of staff, so it was the two of us plus our two chiefs of staff, and which they also did a divide and conquer and they worked really well together. They were both long time Slack employees. So for years they had ... One had been an engineering director and one had been a TPM. And then every Monday we had a Monday meeting where we reviewed the progress on the top OKRs and red, yellow, green and don't talk through the green ones, only talk through the red ones and what are the issues. And again, both there. And then we had a weekly meeting with the four of us where we would just go through any issues in the organization, what's going on, what's not.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:50):
And the four of us is you, the CTO, the chiefs of staff.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:43:54):
Yep. And sometimes we would invite people. Like there's an issue with QA, so we'd have the QA leader come in and present to us. But we tried to limit the number of meetings with teams. So it'd be like the Monday meeting was the big meeting that you had to be there and you had to be able to talk to your project and that was it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:13):
There's so much awesomeness here. I love the idea of this Async share your plan in a video instead of meetings with everyone in real time. And you could just do a lot of the stuff Async.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:44:22):
We iterated every quarter, just like you iterate on a product. So every quarter we would say did the OKR planning work or not, and then we would adjust. So we got to the point where at one point we added up all the hours of OKR reviews and all the people in them and it was some insane number, like 300 and something and we're like, "This has gotten out of hand." So then we're like, "We have to do something drastic." And that's when we moved them to Async. It was also right after Slack Clips launched.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:51):
Got it. That's the video feature. Very cool. Then I know you launched huddles, right? Slack Huddles? Did you use that as a part of this or eventually you just get people into a little huddle asynchronously and talk-

Tamar Yehoshua (00:45:01):
Sometimes. Absolutely. We would be in the reviews and we would huddle with somebody to ask a quick question. We use Huddled all the time. I still do. I love Huddles.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:09):
I love it. One crazy thing about Slack is people in Slack don't actually use email internally. It's like all in Slack. It's like the actual vision of Slack working within Slack.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:45:18):
No email unless you're dealing with somebody external. And no, it's mostly Slack Connect anyway.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:24):
Anyway. Wow, that's amazing. Okay. I have one more question around product stuff and then I want to talk about AI. So I was reading your newsletter on Substack, which we'll link to and you share this really interesting insight that I've experienced myself that I'll quote you here. One of the mistakes that I see a lot of product managers make is they over index on people who are going to be unhappy with the products they're launching. And basically your advice is not to worry so much about making users unhappy, which I think is counterintuitive to some people. Can you just talk about this lesson and I'd love to hear what product you launched that made people unhappy that you realized, oh, maybe we don't need to worry about this as much.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:46:04):
I saw it more when you unlaunch things, you take things away there's always some set of users that are using a feature that nobody else does, and then you take it away and they're super unhappy, but there are more people you're going to make happy. So a product manager gets caught in this trap of the vocal minority and the number of people using your product ... Depends on what phase. Are you a Google? Are you Slack? Are you a Glean? But the number of people using your product today is usually unless you're a Google far smaller than the number of people who are going to be using your product tomorrow. So design it for the bigger number of people who are going to be using it tomorrow. If you have to redo the UI and the Who Moved My Cheese, people will be unhappy, but all the new people are going to be like, "This is so much easier." Then do it and deal with the people who are unhappy.

(00:47:02):
But the trick is you have to be respectful and you have to be transparent and you have to explain. You have to go to people and say, "This is why we made this change." And you have to be authentic. You can't be dismissive and you can't have marketing speak. You have to really say, "Here's for real why." And you have to listen to your audience. You don't want to alienate your early users because most people ... If you made a good decision on why you moved this or why we stopped using Slack calls and moved to Huddles and you have to do it over time and give people choice and then give them enough time to move. So you have to do it in the right way. But if people feel heard, it makes a difference.

(00:47:50):
I have an example that's not a product example, but I think is a really good one. It's a leadership example. So when I was at Google, there was always a controversy about something, but there was a controversy about ... It was Blogger or something. I can't even remember what it was. It was like we made a change. We were like 50,000 people at the time. There was an engineer in my team, an IT engineer that was super unhappy about the change. And I knew Rachel Whetstone, she was in charge of all of PR and global policy at Google. So huge job. And I emailed Rachel and I'm like, "Hey, do you have an FAQ or something that can help me? Because I don't know why you made this change and that I can help explain to the engineer in my team."

(00:48:33):
She did not respond to my email. She picked up the phone and she called him. I had no idea she did this. She just called this IT engineer and she listened to him and she heard why he was upset and she explained her reasoning. He was so blown away that she called him that he completely changed his opinion and then he told everyone else in the org. And so it had this effect. And I learned a lot from watching her do that. She never even told me she did it later. She just did it. You just act. You're authentic. You listen to people and you're transparent.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:12):
It's so funny. This reminds me of a parenting book I'm reading right now that a former guest recommended called Listen. And the core thesis of the book is when your kids are acting up or they're getting off track, so much of what they need is a sense that you're connected to them, a connection which is rooted in you listening to them. And so all-

Tamar Yehoshua (00:49:34):
My favorite parenting book ... I don't know if this is the same one or a different one, it's How to Talk so Your Kids Will Listen & How to Listen so Your Kids Will Talk. Maybe it's the new name of that book, but it's so good and it's so true in everything and also in products. So whether you're in a forum and explaining to customers, whether you're enterprise customers, you're explaining, you're hearing them out, people want to understand.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:58):
Amazing. There's so many applications of just the power of listening. Okay. Well, not quite a segue, but let's talk about AI. You're at the epicenter of AI now with Glean. How do you anticipate AI will change our jobs and product? What do you think people may be aren't recognizing it, realizing it? What have you seen?

Tamar Yehoshua (00:50:21):
I'm going to give you a little bit of my history with AI to get to that point. When AI was a completely different technology stack ... I have a master's in AI. So I started working in AI when ... It's evolved so much. And then of course at Google using it for auto complete and search. It's transformed so many times. But then with this last transformation of GenAI ... And that's what brought me to Glean of seeing this, meeting lots of AI companies and like, "Wow. This is really going to transform how we work." And it's just fascinating seeing these products. I was one of those people like, "Oh yeah, it's going to be so far away." Until I saw GPT3. And I think AI, we are underestimating how much it's going to change how we work. It's not going to be sudden from today to tomorrow because people haven't figured it out yet. They haven't figured out how exactly to leverage it. But the people who have are going to be so far ahead. They're going to be far ahead of everyone else because they're going to be working faster, they're going to be working better.

(00:51:33):
And in five to 10 years, I think the lines between product managers and engineers and designers are going to blur because AI will enable product managers to build prototypes, to build designs. Designers to build a pro like Figma already has their Figma AI. You can press a button and you can get your initial prototype working. You've got all the co-pilots. So they're not quite there. You still, like with Copilot or with Cursor, you need to be an experienced engineer to know when it's getting it wrong, but they're going to keep getting better. I think people have to be careful about not getting left behind, but their jobs aren't going to go away. They're just going to change. I'm of the believer that we're just going to have a lot more software. But I talked to engineers and to PMs saying, "Yeah, I tried that. It doesn't really work." And then go back to how I worked before. And that's a dangerous spot to be in I think.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:34):
For people that get anxiety hearing this where they're feeling they're going to be left behind and like, "Oh my God, I don't know enough time to do this or I don't know what I'm doing here." Do you have any advice for what's something someone can do to not fall behind?

Tamar Yehoshua (00:52:48):
Use the products. This is what good PMs should do period. Always be using new products. It's not a unique thing for AI. When mobile came out, PMs needed to be using mobile apps all the time to try them out, see what the UIs are, see what's working and what isn't. And the same goes even more for AI. Use ChatGPT. If your organization has Glean, use Glean. Use Claude. Try them all. Try them and see what they do. I was talking to a product manager I know who is more forward-thinking and loves playing with new products and he had this use case that blew me away. So he said ... And this was a couple of months ago, so before ... It was right when Gemini had expanded the context window. So his product had a Discord channel and he took the transcript from the Discord channel, which was huge. And he fed it into Gemini the entire channel and then used it to ask questions. Like what is the sentiment of my product? What is the most requested feature? What are the things people are unhappy with? This never would've occurred to me. It's like, that is so smart. And he's like, "It was like a goldmine." Do you know how long it would've taken him to read? And he just wouldn't have done it.

(00:54:06):
So think about for the argument, oh, I'm too busy. Well, if you use these products it's going to be a leverage on your time. So you get a lot of articles sent to you, summarize them, use AI to summarize the articles. We use Gong at Glean to record all our sales calls. We have a Glean app that will read all the Gong transcripts, put them in a spreadsheet in a certain format of who the AE is, etc. And then summarize all the top requested features from all the Gong calls. And it took a while to get it right. At first the summarization, the prompt wasn't good enough and would give us features that our salespeople would recommend and didn't distinguish that this was actually the customer. So you have to tweak it. It's not going to work out of the box. But then we got it to the point where it worked and these things really save time and you have to use your creative juices as a PM to figure out how it can help you and have patience to iterate and keep trying because the models that we have today can do a lot already.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:22):
Yeah. I love your example of the PM and what they did with the Discord channel. Is there anything else along those lines that either you've done to leverage some AI tool to be more productive or folks in your team have done to be more productive youth, either your product leaders or other folks?

Tamar Yehoshua (00:55:38):
So many examples. So one that I did really recently is I wrote a prompt in Glean to help me get the status of features. And we have a Launch Cal, and you can look at Launch Cal it'll say a date. But then is it really the date? What are the outstanding issues? So it will look at our Launch Cal and it will see if there are any open year tickets, what the Slack conversations are and the customers who are beta testing it, bring all these together to tell me, okay, launch date is this according to Launch Cal, but here are all the open issues and here are the open conversations that people are talking about. So then it can give me the confidence level of the future looking. So I can run the prompt, just put in the name of the feature. So I don't have to read all of these channels.

(00:56:28):
So this is a prompt that I built two weeks ago because we're advancing our prompting capabilities. And so I was testing it out and I was like, "Ooh, I could do this." So that's another example and engineers are using it for automating part of the incident management of I got an incident, how do I see were their previous incidents that were similar to it, where they're not. And so these are the type of things you can look at to help you. But the simplest, simplest is there's so much news. Let me just paste in all of these things and summarize them. As a product manager at Gleam, here are all the latest news. What do I have to care about? What's impacting me and potentially competitive to any of the products that I have?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:22):
And putting that into say Claude or ChatGPT you're saying.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:57:25):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:26):
Yeah. I think that beginning of the prompt is something a lot of people don't know is the power of just giving it a role like you are a product manager at Gleam. From that perspective, give me this summary versus just summarize this and that ends up being really powerful right.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:57:42):
A hundred percent. And you can compare what is Claude's PR saying that ... They just launched Claude Enterprise. How is Claude Enterprise different from OpenAI Enterprise? Again, you can do it yourself, but these micro improvements in your productivity help. For my newsletter, I interviewed Claire Vo who came out with ChatPRD. And so product managers are using is. We're just starting to evaluate it internally, so I haven't personally used it yet, but it's super cool and you can use ChatGPT to do a PRD. And ChatPRD, it's more templatized and more frameworks of how to do that. And again, these things are going to keep getting better.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:33):
Claire's been on the podcast, she's going to be speaking at the Lenny and Friends Summit coming up October 24th.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:58:37):
Oh, cool.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:38):
Yeah. A crazy stat she shared. She's making six figures off this product that she builds on the weekends ChatPRD.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:58:45):
So cool.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:45):
Incredible.

Tamar Yehoshua (00:58:46):
But it also shows what you can build with AI.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:49):
Right. It's just her. I think she just recently hired some engineers to help because she has three kids CTO at LaunchDarkly and just is building this on the side making a hundred thousand plus dollars. Incredible. I want to add a couple of things here. So one is for folks looking for ideas for how to use AI tooling for their PM job. There's a couple of posts I've written that I'll link to in the show notes just to put that out there of just a bunch of PM sharing, here's what I've done with these various tools. Another thought I'd love to get your take on. There's a lot of fear that the PM job be replaced by AI. And I've recently realized that it's the opposite. I think the PM role is the best positioned to thrive in the world of AI because if you just think about you have a tool that can just build a thing for you, just like you're staring at this blank thing that can build anything for you, which function would you think would have the best chance of asking it of what to build and how to articulate what to build best?

(00:59:47):
To me, it's clearly Product People. They're best at figuring out what to build, what matters most, where the impact's going to be what customers need. Not to say other functions don't also have the skills, but I feel like of all functions, PMs have the most of that specific skill. I'd love to get your take on that.

Tamar Yehoshua (01:00:01):
That. I think that AI, the one thing it's not good at is being creative. So if you're a PM who's doing the grout work, it's going to take your job away. But if you're a PM who actually is strategic and can pull the pieces together and be creative and think how you do something that it's going to differentiate. Because it's not going to give you that leak. It'll say, here's what customers are asking for, here are the problems today, but you have to figure out how to solve it. So in some ways it might weed out the good from the bad PMs. Because there are a significant number of PMs who are more just execution. And I think that part of the job hopefully will be lowered because I hope a lot more of the execution will be able to automate updating Jira and all these things that just take time and creating even little Launch Cals, which PMs have to do manually now. So hopefully a lot of that work goes away and then people can be more creative. And I think designers and PMs are going to blend because the best designers I've worked with are product thinkers and a lot of really good PMs can also design. It depends on what kind of product you're PMing for. So I agree with the caveat that it will become harder to be a great PM.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:20):
Wait, say more about that. It'll be harder to be a great PM because many PMs are doing things that are mostly project management and that's the stuff that-

Tamar Yehoshua (01:01:30):
Yeah. Let me rephrase. It's not going to be harder to be a great PM, but to be a PM, the not so good PMs jobs will go away. The great PMs will still have great jobs.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:40):
Yeah. I totally hear you. So in a sense there might be fewer. You might need fewer PMs, but I think that applies in theory to every function. Fewer engineers. Fewer designers.

Tamar Yehoshua (01:01:49):
I don't think you'll need fewer. I think you'll be able to do more things. Think about every company. Our head of sales came to me the other day, "You need to hire more engineers because we just have so many things we need to build." I'm like, "When have you ever worked in a company where you thought that you didn't need more engineers?" You always want people to build more stuff. So I don't think you're going to need fewer. I think you're just going to get so much more done.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:16):
A lot of people are building AI into their product. Glean is obviously an example which integrates LLMs, which innately are non-deterministic and hard to know if they're going to provide anything good. Sometimes something really dumb comes out. Do you have any advice on working with these very complicated systems that don't necessarily ... You can't control and building them into your products? Anything you've learned that might be helpful?

Tamar Yehoshua (01:02:41):
My first week at Glean was eye-opening in learning some of these things. But let me first just explain what Glean does for people who may not know. So Glean was started as enterprise search. Glean reads content of all your SaaS apps. So it reads the content from Microsoft, Google, Slack, Salesforce, Jira, like any SaaS tool that you use, it indexes it and enables you to search. So it started as just enterprise search and using AI. So it was an AI search using BERT models and using vector embeddings in 2019. Because the early engineers at Glean came from Google and Google created BERT to enhance search. And so it was obvious that they would be using ML techniques for search. Then GPT3 came along and added a natural language interface, a chat interface. You can ask the question in actual language and get an answer, and it basically is a knowledge graph of your organization. So you can ask any question. Think of ChatGPT for your enterprise. Ask any question about your enterprise.

(01:03:45):
So people understand search because they understand Google and you put in a query and then you refine it. But chat interfaces, people still don't really know how to use. If you look at the stats from ChatGPT, from what I understand, the retention is fairly low. People use it, they play with it, and then they don't get back to it because it's not in their workflow and they have a hard time figuring out what they can and can't do for it. When I got to Glean the first week I met with the assistant quality team and one of the biggest issues they have is people trying to use Glean for things that there's no way it could know. Like what should my top priority be next week when we don't even know what your priorities are. But then there's golden cases that are just amazing.

(01:04:44):
The example of refining queries and searched years for people to understand how to do. And it took a lot of features of auto complete and refinements at the bottom of the page. So we need to build in those things, guardrails to help with the change. To help suggest, oh, Lenny, here's what you could do. Here's a prompt to find out the status of your feature that Tamar built. So how do you give people guardrails so that they understand what is going to work and what isn't going to work? Because this whole, I don't know what I can ask. And then on top of that, the non-deterministic. An enterprise CIO will go use ChatGPT on the weekends, but they come to work and they expect their software to be deterministic. So how do you help educate users about that?

(01:05:34):
And then the other thing I'll say about using LLMs is the industry is transforming so rapidly that you need to make sure that your product gets better as the LLMs get better. And that too many people are building things to make up and compensate for the LLMs that all that work is going to go away. So it's okay to do it to understand that it's going to go away, but that can't be your differentiator. You have to understand that your differentiator is something that will continue to be there as the LLMs get better and smarter.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:13):
And as part of that, because the LLMs get so much smarter, everyone else will become awesome. And to keep up, you need something that is actually outside of the LLM that continues to differentiate you and is better than what other people are doing.

Tamar Yehoshua (01:06:24):
Well, yeah. That your whole product gets better as the LLMs get better.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:27):
That makes sense.

Tamar Yehoshua (01:06:30):
It's a frame of a of mind of how you approach the value add you're having.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:37):
Awesome. Tamar, to close out our conversation, is there anything else that we did not cover that you think is important to share or you think might be helpful to leave listeners with before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Tamar Yehoshua (01:06:51):
I in my decades of working in tech, have never been working in an environment that's moving so quickly and it's really exciting. It's super energizing and it's also scary. But you have to change how you're working. You have to change how you're working so that you can keep up because it's going to be an interesting decade ahead with all these new tools that are coming out. And staying ahead will be hard, but it's also, there's so much I think richness and opportunity here. So I advise people to get in the thick of it and try it out because you'll be surprised at how many products we can build.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:37):
I love that. I can't help but drill in one level deeper. Is there anything you found to help you stay ahead and help you stay aware of what's happening? Are there newsletters you find useful? Chat, podcasts that just help you keep up to date on where things are going? Is it like a person you look to like, "Hey, what's new?"

Tamar Yehoshua (01:07:56):
There are definitely AI newsletters that I look at. There's AI podcasts that I listen to. I now have a commute, so in some ways that's good because I get to keep up on the AI podcasts. So I just try and listen. I'm trying to build some prompts for myself to make it easier to say ... Take in ... I haven't perfected this, but the ChatGPT voice mode where you can load it. Somebody who I just hired it at Glean was saying he does this. He loads up stuff before his commute and then he'll be like summarize these articles and then he can ask questions to it. So I need to up my game there. But I definitely have a list of Ben's Bites and The Neuron. Those are good summaries and I like Gil and Sarah Guo's podcast. I listen to Cognitive Revolution. There's too many of them right now, but I pick and choose.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:51):
Awesome. Okay. We'll link to those ones you just mentioned in the show notes. We'll have Gil and Sarah Guo's podcast, it's called No Priors. I was actually just listening to it on the way here. Sarah is going to also be at Lenny's and Friends Summit. She's going to be moderating a panel between Kevin Weil and Mikey Krieger who are the CPOs of Anthropic and Open AI. So there we go. Another quick plug for lennyandfriendssummit.com. I think it's lennyssummit.com.

Tamar Yehoshua (01:09:15):
Awesome.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:17):
With that Tamar we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Tamar Yehoshua (01:09:21):
I am ready.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:23):
Okay, let's do this. First question, what are two or three books that you have recommended most to other people?

Tamar Yehoshua (01:09:29):
So one book was recommended to me by Shashir, the CEO of Cota. When I started at Slack, he recommended the book Switch: How to Change Things When Change Is Hard by Chip and Dan Heath. And it's such a good book. And it's about how do you set a path for people to follow. It's the whole elephant and the rider. So setting the path but yet motivating people to go down the path. And I read it. We had an all hands about ... I don't even remember the topic. It was something that we were like all up in arms about that we had to do. And I had just read the book and after the all hands I went up to store it and I'm like, "You did that all wrong. You need to read this book. That is not how to get people motivated." And he read the book and he's like, "You're right." So it just changes how you think in organizations to affect change. So that's on the organizational leadership. And one book I really liked was a Team of Rivals. It's a book about Lincoln and putting together his cabinet during the Civil War. One, I just learned a lot about the Civil War that I didn't really know. And it's about, again, a book about leadership and it is fascinating.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:52):
I don't think anyone's recommended either of these. So love them. Next question, do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show you really enjoyed?

Tamar Yehoshua (01:11:00):
I don't know if you like British murder mysteries.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:06):
I don't know either.

Tamar Yehoshua (01:11:07):
It's a niche thing, but there's a guy named Anthony Horowitz and the latest series he did was called Magpie Murders. And it's just an intricate story so I enjoyed it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:20):
Very niche but amazing. Do you have a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really like?

Tamar Yehoshua (01:11:26):
Well, I'm going to give two. One is tech and one is non-tech. So non-tech I really like dark chocolate.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:35):
Actually just like a dark chocolate bar.

Tamar Yehoshua (01:11:38):
A really good dark chocolate that's simple. Like no frills, none of this. Just dark chocolate. And I discovered this chocolate called Bisou chocolate. It's a guy in Oakland who makes it himself. Super niche. He was selling at the farmer's market. And it's just like if you want like a simple play, no nuts, no anything just-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:02):
No sea salt.

Tamar Yehoshua (01:12:03):
Great pride in the beans he resources them from.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:05):
Wow. It's called Bisou with a B?

Tamar Yehoshua (01:12:08):
Yeah. Bisou as in Kiss in French. And then on the tech side, the honest answer is Glean. I was listening to your podcast with Nikita who said that people over 22 don't use new products except at work. And that stuck with me. The new products I usually use are at work and I use Glean 10, 15 times a day. I use it so much and it changed the way I onboarded. It changed the way I work. Even the simplest questions, you don't bother people, you don't interrupt people on Slack. You're like, "What's the latest status with this deal? What's the last time we talked to them?" I meet somebody at a conference and I can quickly say, "Have we ever talked to this company before?" And I can just get an answer. Or without asking an engineer, "Where's the latest design doc?" It has really transformed how I work. So I know it's cheating in that it's the product I work on, but it's the actual honest answer.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:10):
And for folks that haven't heard of Glean, it's one of the most successful B2B AI companies out there. It's like a very large successful business and company that if you haven't checked it out, you should definitely check it out.

Tamar Yehoshua (01:13:24):
As our investors say, it's one of the AI companies that's actually making money.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:29):
Very few of those. Awesome. Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to, repeat yourself, share with friends or family and work or in life?

Tamar Yehoshua (01:13:41):
I have one that my father told me when I was being really indecisive about what college to go to. He was really bored of the conversation and he said, "There are no right decisions. You make a decision right." And it is so true. Because you never know what's going to happen in life. You just have to commit to whatever you're doing and have no regrets about it. You can't be like, "Oh," 10 years later, "what if I had taken that job over there?" It's like you make your success based on how you approach the decisions that you've made.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:18):
So if you feel regret about something, this is a good one to pull out of just I will make this the best I can make it, and that's all the best I can do.

Tamar Yehoshua (01:14:27):
You can move forward.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:29):
Move forward. I love that. Last question, I know you're a parent. I'm a new parent. I have a 14-month old at this point. Is there a piece of parenting advice that you learned early on that you think might be helpful to me or folks that are new parents or something you've just learned yourself that you think might be helpful?

Tamar Yehoshua (01:14:46):
14 months. I think the best parenting book I read besides the How to Talk So Your Kids Will Listen & How to Listen so Your Kid Will Talk is, I think it's called Healthy Sleep Habits, Happy Baby. We are much happier when we sleep well. We perform better at work when we sleep well. Children need to sleep. So making sure that they sleep well. And sometimes that's like, I did the whole sleep training, cry until you fall asleep and my kids still speak to me. So it was okay. That is the basic things. Make sure that their basic needs are met and then as they grow up, share your life with them. So a piece of advice I was given was analogous to Talk so your Kids Will Listen is when they had come home from school. You can't just say, "How was your day?" Say, "You know what? I did a podcast with this person and it was super interesting because they talked about this or that." Or, "I'm massively screwed up and I should have asked them this or that." And they'll be like, "Oh my God, I was at school today and this is what happened." If you share your life with them, they will share their life with you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:02):
Such good advice. I really appreciate it. Tamar, thank you so much for being here. You're awesome. We got through so much great stuff. Everything I was hoping we get through. Two final questions. Where can folks find you if they want to read up on more stuff that you share and just follow you online and how can listeners be useful to you?

Tamar Yehoshua (01:16:19):
Find me on LinkedIn and I have a subject called Practical Intelligence where I've been interviewing practitioners who are working with AI. It was my way of learning. I started when I was a VC. Trying to continue doing it. And how can I be helpful if you are a customer of Glean, I'd love to know what you think, what works and what does more.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:40):
What's the best way to share that with you? Is it like messaging on LinkedIn, subscribe to Substack?

Tamar Yehoshua (01:16:45):
Message on LinkedIn, or comment on your-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:49):
On [inaudible 01:16:50]. Yeah.

Tamar Yehoshua (01:16:51):
Yeah. Those would probably be the two ways.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:53):
Awesome. Tamar, thank you so much for being here.

Tamar Yehoshua (01:16:56):
Thank you for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:57):
Bye, everyone.

(01:17:01):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

