Andy Raskin (00:00:00):
The way I learned how to pitch in business school, and I think the way most people did is what I call the arrogant doctor. So you have a problem, a pain, I have a solution, a treatment, and I'm going to tell you why it's better than all the other treatments. And the structure that I read about in these movies was different. Every movie starts with some kind of shift in the world, and I call this shift the shift from the old game to a new game. The archetypal example of this, I think in the business world, is what Benioff did with Salesforce. So he comes in and he says, "Hey, software is over and there's this new world called the cloud, a new game, new rules. That's the new way to win. And we're going to help you if you're in there." This structure really is about defining a movement, and that's very different from, "Hey, I'm going to solve your problem."

Lenny (00:00:54):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard won experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Andy Raskin. Andy helps CEOs and company leaders align their teams around something he calls a strategic narrative, which as you'll learn all about in this episode, is essentially a simple story that helps people understand why they need your product. And with that helps you align your sales, marketing, and product teams along with your fundraising and even your hiring efforts.

Lenny (00:01:25):
Andy has worked closely with some of the most successful founders and companies out there, including companies like Gong, Dropbox, Uber, Salesforce, Square, IBM, and many others. In our conversation, Andy explains why most people are pitching their product completely wrong, why focusing on the problem you're solving for people is no longer an effective pitch and how the strategic narrative helps you frame your solution in a much more effective way. Andy also shares a ton of examples of the framework in action, why focusing on categories and category creation is so limiting, signs your narrative needs to work and so much more. Enjoy this episode with Andy Raskin after a short word from our sponsors.

Lenny (00:02:07):
This episode is brought to you by Coda. You've heard me talk about how Coda is the doc that brings it all together, and how it can help your team run smoother and be more efficient. I know this firsthand because Coda does that for me. I use Coda every day to wrangle my newsletter content calendar, my interview notes for podcasts, and to coordinate my sponsors. More recently, I actually wrote a whole post on how Coda's product team operates, and within that post, they shared a dozen templates that they use internally to run their product team, including managing a roadmap, their OKR process, getting internal feedback, and essentially their whole product development process is done within Coda.

Lenny (00:02:45):
If your team's work is spread out across different documents and spreadsheets and a stack of workflow tools, that's why you need Coda. Coda puts data in one centralized location regardless of format, eliminating roadblocks that can slow your team down. Coda allows your team to operate on the same information and collaborate in one place. Take advantage of this special limited time offer just for startups. Sign up today at Coda.io/Lenny and get $1,000 starter credit on your first statement. That's C-O-D-A.io/Lenny to sign up and get a startup credit of $1,000. Coda.io/Lenny.

Lenny (00:03:24):
Are you hiring or on the flip side, are you looking for a new opportunity? Well, either way, check out Lennysjobs.com/talent. If you're a hiring manager, you can sign up and get access to hundreds of hand curated people who are open to new opportunities. Thousands of people apply to join this collective, and I personally review and accept just about 10% of them. You won't find a better place to hire product managers and growth leaders.

Lenny (00:03:49):
Join almost 100 other companies who are actively hiring through this collective. And if you're looking around for a newer opportunity, actively or passively, join the collective. It's free. You can be anonymous and you can even hide yourself from specific companies. You can also leave anytime and you'll only hear from companies that you want to hear from. Check out Lennysjobs.com/talent.

Lenny (00:04:16):
Andy, welcome to the podcast.

Andy Raskin (00:04:18):
Oh, thanks Lenny. So great to talk with you.

Lenny (00:04:21):
You are quite known as someone that helps CEOs optimize their pitch, their story, their strategy, which we're going to get deep into. But before we do that, can you just give us a little glimpse into how you found your way into this line of work?

Andy Raskin (00:04:35):
I started as a coder. I was a computer science major, undergrad, a friend and I had an idea for an app. So this was like during the dot com years. So Windows app, and we coded a little prototype and we started, we put it out there, we started getting some users and we thought, "Oh, okay, maybe we can get some investments." So of the two of us, I spoke English fluently. So we decided, okay, I'll write the investor pitch. So I wrote the pitch, we sent it out and the reaction was really bad. One VC wrote back and said, "Listen, I rate every plan I get on a scale of 1 to 10, and yours is a 1," and the next to the one he wrote in parentheses, "Worst," in case we thought maybe that was the top of his rating scale.

Lenny (00:05:20):
Brutal.

Andy Raskin (00:05:22):
Yeah, brutal. But then lower down, so this was back when they would like you'd print, send the hard copy of the plan and they might mail it back with comments written in. And he had written in, "Not a compelling story." A few weeks later, I'm walking by this Barnes & Noble and there's a sign in the window that says, "For anyone who wants to tell a compelling story," okay, that's me. And there's an arrow that points to these books and they turned out to be screenwriting books. I didn't know anything about this, so I started reading these books and it strikes me a movie is a pitch. What is Star Wars a pitch for? It's a pitch for be good, care about people, trust The Force in their terms. But I don't have couple hours. I'm pitching a business. It's very different. I'm not writing a three X screenplay.

Andy Raskin (00:06:11):
So what applies, what doesn't apply? I mean these are questions I think I'm still asking, but I did my best to take some of the learnings of how the movie was structured. It was very different from how my pitch was structured and kind of restructure it. And we did that and we sent the pitch out and we start getting more interest. It was really clear. And then we had a term sheet I think a few months later and I'm like, "What is this story thing?" That we didn't change the product, it was basically the same business just sort of how we talked about it. That was really interesting to me.

Andy Raskin (00:06:49):
I mean, over the next 10, 15 years, I thought about, "Hey, maybe I could do consulting with this." CEOs who heard about this were asking me about it. But I still was like, "No. No CEO's going to budget a line item for the story. That's not a thing." So I just didn't do it for a really long time until eventually I was proven wrong about that.

Lenny (00:07:13):
And how many years ago was this at this point?

Andy Raskin (00:07:15):
So this was dot com. This was like '98 when I was pitching that company.

Lenny (00:07:20):
Amazing. I think there's a couple interesting tidbits about this. One is that interesting opportunities arise when you're doing something you're excited about. So you had the startup, it didn't work out, but you had a problem that you solved for yourself and that led to another, a bigger opportunity for your career.

Andy Raskin (00:07:34):
Yeah, totally.

Lenny (00:07:35):
So that's interesting. And then also just some of the best opportunities arise from solving your own problem, not planning to start something with it, but just like, "I have a problem." Turns out [inaudible 00:07:44]-

Andy Raskin (00:07:44):
Yeah, I think that's same with you. Right, Lenny? You started writing about stuff and boom, that became the thing.

Lenny (00:07:49):
Absolutely. It was not quite boom, but eventually it became boom.

Andy Raskin (00:07:53):
Feels like boom from outside.

Lenny (00:07:55):
Yeah, that's how it goes. It always overnight for everyone else that isn't here.

Andy Raskin (00:08:01):
Right, exactly.

Lenny (00:08:03):
Yeah. Okay, so let's get into it. So you help CEOs at this point come up with what you call a strategic narrative and you help them not only come up with this strategic narrative, but you help their teams align around this strategic narrative. So let's just start with what is a strategic narrative?

Andy Raskin (00:08:19):
Yeah, you'd think, I've been doing this for 10 years, I'd have a very snappy definition of it there, and I don't know if I'm really happy with ... like I've ever found one that totally gets at it yet. The one thing I say is it's this one story that the CEO uses to drive success in marketing, sales, but also product. That it becomes like a north star, strategic north star for product roadmap, for fundraising, for recruiting, really everything.

Andy Raskin (00:08:54):
What I think is really interesting as a kind of qualifier is that this story has a certain structure. Like I said, when I found those screenwriting books, I sort of shifted the structure. And the traditional structure, the way I learned how to pitch in business school, I think the way most people did is what I call the arrogant doctor. So you have a problem, a pain, I have a solution, a treatment, and I'm going to tell you why it's better than all the other treatment.

Andy Raskin (00:09:24):
Not to say it's not better, but just this is the structure of it, and it kind of sets you up for bragging. Let me tell you why it's so great. And the structure that I read about in these movies was different. In the movies, every movie starts with some kind of shift in the world, in the character's world. And I call this shift the shift from the old game to the new game. And the archetypal example of this, I think in the business world is what Benioff did with Salesforce. So he comes in and he says, "Hey, software is over," meaning software in the sense that we're going to own it and maintain it, "And there's this new world called the cloud, a new game, like the new rules, everything has changed and that's the new way to win. And we're going to help you if you're in there." This structure really is about defining a movement and that's very different from, "Hey, I'm going to solve your problem."

Lenny (00:10:34):
I think the Salesforce example is an awesome example of your approach. If they were thinking about it in the old way, what would Salesforce have done? How would they have pitched it if not for, "Everyone's moving to the cloud, your dumb for using desktop software,"?

Andy Raskin (00:10:48):
Well, I think they would've just come out and said like, "Oh hey ..." I mean CRM by the way, was already a category. I mean, already Siebel was the huge giant of that space. There were already even companies doing it online, doing it through the web. And so they would've come and said, "Oh, we're easier to install, faster to get up and running than Siebel," or, "We have this much functionality compared to," I think it was, was it NetSuite? Or, I don't know. It was some early Salesforce-like thing that was out there. They would've done these sort of comparison things.

Andy Raskin (00:11:25):
And Benioff, I mean he is a pretty proud guy. I think he did still say like, "Hey, we're the number one CRM," but wasn't what they led with. They led with this story about this fundamental paradigm shift and, are you in or are you not in? And what they did was instead of just saying, "Hey, we're better than," they said, "Hey, all those others, those Siebel's, they're part of that old game. You want to play that software game? Be my guest, go buy Siebel," and of course we know how it played out.

Lenny (00:12:02):
So the crux of the approach is instead of, "Problem, solution, you should go do this," it's, "The world is changing, here's where it's going and we're going to help you get there." I want go in a little more depth of the framework. But before that, what are some other examples to give people a sense of like, oh, I see, I understand what this might be.

Andy Raskin (00:12:19):
Yeah, so another great example and no coincidence, so is Zuora. So Zuora is the company I wrote about in this post called The Greatest Sales Deck I've Ever Seen, the CEO of Zuora, Tien Tzuo, was employee number 11 at Salesforce. So he learns this from Benioff. And he's pitching, "Hey, in the old world, businesses operated on transactions. You sold things to people outright. In this new world," he calls it the subscription economy, where people want the benefits of those things without necessarily having to pay for them. And of course gives all these examples of all the winners in this, look at all the winning companies. They're all basically going to this new model.

Andy Raskin (00:13:05):
And so he's pitching someone like Ford and you can imagine they're going to Ford and pitching a subscription for car service, which is quite different from just a lease. And they're starting out with this. This is the big shift. Another one, team I worked with early on, and I think they'd agree their story came out of this work was Gong. So Gong everyone probably knows by now, they take the video recordings of all your sales calls and they stick AI onto it and come out with all these insights. And that story is, hey, goodbye opinions. Used to be a world where sales is run on opinions. Hello reality, that now all the winners are adopting this new mindset where we really have to see what's really going on.

Lenny (00:13:56):
In the Gong example, let's say, what would they have done if they were going, "Here's the problem, here's the solution, here's what we're going to do for you,"?

Andy Raskin (00:14:03):
Yeah, I mean that's kind of what they were doing when they started out. And I'm not saying that didn't work totally. I mean already by the time they started doing this, they were starting to become a big company. I remember Bendov said to me, "Listen, Andy," they were around series B, I think this is around 2018. It's like, "We're going to be a huge company. The question is how huge. And I think that this narrative along the lines of Zuora or Salesforce, if we get this right, this is going to be a multiplier on our growth."

Andy Raskin (00:14:38):
So I don't remember exactly the pitch beforehand, but it was very much like, "Hey, we're going to record your calls. We're going to get insights from them. They're better than the insights you could get from Salesforce." There wasn't this kind of unifying kind of movement ideology that put it all in context. And what was really interesting was one thing, I don't think they'd be upset if I shared, and maybe it's known. Initially, they were seen as a tool for sales operations, for someone who's going to record the calls and what this narrative did for them. And I think it was already starting to happen, but what it really coalesced was this is a tool for sales leadership.

Lenny (00:15:23):
You talked about Zuora in the post you wrote, and I imagine many people listening are like, "Oh, shit. This is the guy that wrote that post that everyone's always sharing with me about how to make a deck." And I wanted to ask, how impactful was that one piece of writing for you in your career, just like as a tangent?

Andy Raskin (00:15:39):
I had written some other posts on Medium in particular. Medium has changed quite a bit, but back then I found that I could write stuff there and get really a lot of people who were interested in what I was interested would sort of come in and create some noise about it. So I was already doing this kind of work for a couple of years, but that post immediately got something like 2 million views around the world and I started getting inquiries from teams all over the world.

Andy Raskin (00:16:12):
And it was I think what really allowed me to say no, okay, I could do this work. That CEO's would budget a line item for this. Because I think if you really understand that post, it's not really about a sales deck, it's really about this story that Tien, the CEO is telling everywhere and that is showing up in the sales deck and structuring it that way.

Lenny (00:16:40):
I think it's just another example that comes up a bunch on this podcast is just the power of writing and the power of content. Yeah, and you're shaking your head.

Andy Raskin (00:16:48):
Totally. I mean, I had a little mini career as a journalist, as a freelance writer and I really loved that. I actually, I took a class in New York called How to Write a Magazine Article, because I was sort of mid-career, I was curious. And the class wound up being more about how to sell a magazine article. And I found I really loved that, pitching articles, but one thing that was always a downer for me was there's always this editor sort of deciding what's going to be out there.

Andy Raskin (00:17:23):
And when you work with a great editor, it's great, they make yourself better and they're priceless. But still there's this intermediary. What started to happen, I think around when I started writing around 2013, '14, you start to see these platforms, like Medium, even LinkedIn where you can just write and have this audience and I think no way I could do this, the work I do if that development hadn't happened first.

Lenny (00:17:53):
I'm taking us off track, but I want to go a little deeper with this. I find that there's kind of two paths to writing online. One is your path where you write one piece that just blows up like crazy. The other path is more my path where I just write consistently for a long time, and both work and most people try to go your path and they never succeed. It's really hard to make something gets 2 million views, but you can go that path.

Andy Raskin (00:18:14):
This is like you said earlier, hey, it seems like boom, but really it didn't. So that was probably the 30th or 40th piece and they were gradually getting more and more traction. There was one I wrote before that about, it's kind of dissecting Elon Musk's pitch for the Powerwall, the battery that they sell. And that one got maybe few hundred thousand views and also was a big jump. And then the next one got some poultry number. So what I find is like, yeah, there's this a while where you're writing and it feels like you're talking to nobody and then gradually it grows and you'll have these peaks, but then over time is where the magic is.

Lenny (00:19:03):
Okay, I'm really glad you pointed that out, that it rarely is just you write one thing and it's boom.

Andy Raskin (00:19:08):
I'll also say, sorry, because I worked in a magazine, I haven't done a newsletter because that idea of having a deadline all the time and constantly having to, we used to call the magazine Feed the Beast, I feel so free not to have that. So for now at least I haven't done that.

Lenny (00:19:27):
I know that well, so let me take us back on track and let's talk about just the high level framework here. So you talked about, it starts with this idea of tell people worlds changing, join this movement. What's the simple way to think about this, the pieces of this strategic narrative framework?

Andy Raskin (00:19:42):
A lot of times people will contact me, say, "Hey, I tried it, didn't work." Well, one very common thing, at least earlier was they would basically just take the Zuora deck, they'd get ahold of it and just put their logo on it. And so that's not going to work. One thing is we're not just saying, "Hey, the world is changing." And then sometimes I'll see, "The world is changing," and there'll be, "Used to be," and there's a long list of things and then, "Now it is," a long list of bullet points.

Andy Raskin (00:20:11):
What's really, I think key is naming it, naming that old game. The examples you saw, software, cloud, transactions, subscription opinions, reality. This very, very concise naming is really key. And it's hard because in making it compact you're losing completeness. So you can imagine you're in a meeting, someone says like, "Hey, how about we do transactions to subscriptions?" And someone says, "Well I don't know, there's a lot of things I don't really subscribe to. Subscription economy, really?" So we're always kind of overstating it in a way, but it's not a problem. I don't think people say like, "Oh that's wrong, subscription economy, because I still go to the grocery store and buy things." So anyway, that's the first piece.

Andy Raskin (00:20:59):
The second piece is what I call naming the stakes. And there's a few ways to do this, but one that's really great if we can do it is to name the winners to show that winners are already playing this new game. So for instance with Zuora they're saying, "Hey, look, look at all the new winners," this is like 2015 so, "Airbnb, Box," all these companies, they're already doing this subscription thing.

Andy Raskin (00:21:28):
And by the way, overall they show this scary stat about the longevity of Fortune 500 companies. It's getting smaller, and so it's a little disingenuous, but basically they make this case that, "Hey, companies are dying, the ones that are winning are doing this." And so to the extent we want to make this life and death just like a movie. This is again, I'll make the parallel to Star Wars. So Luke, he spends the first 15 minutes of the movie belly aching. He wants to be a pilot, he wants to go out and have adventures in space. So Obiwan comes, he says, "Hey, we got this mission, this princess we got to go," and all this stuff, "Let's go. I'll teach you to be a pilot. We'll go have adventures in space." What does Luke say? He says, "Ooh, you know what, I can't really get involved. They got to go home. It's late." Who does this sound like? The reluctant buyer.

Andy Raskin (00:22:27):
So yeah, "I want to be innovative and all this. Ooh, you know what? I don't have budget this quarter." So how does George Lucas change Luke's mind? He basically kills the aunt and uncle, sorry, spoilers, it's been 40 years though. If you haven't seen it, you're probably not going to see it. Kills the aunt and uncle. Now it's pretty clear they're coming for Luke. Now the stakes are life and death. Probably he's going to be dead. But there is this other path that Obiwan holds out for him.

Andy Raskin (00:22:55):
And whenever I work with teams and I talk about this, so they're like, "Okay, I guess we got to then for kill the prospect's aunt and uncle," and basically yes, I mean figuratively. We got to show them that the future is not going to just be sort of okay. People talk about making it emotional and I've always wondered, what does that mean? Literally, what is the definition? This is for me the definition, is that the prospect doesn't see the future as sort of okay. They see it as split between a very negative outcome and a potentially very positive outcome.

Andy Raskin (00:23:29):
The third piece is what I call naming the object of the new game. I used to call it the promised land message, but I've changed it to this because I've found that it's sort of a little more fruitful. This subscription economy, transactions, it can get a little highfalutin and sort of big, but on the website when we just have to boil it down to a couple of words that's going to be clear right away, what can we say? And I find that what's the object of the new game really boils it down as kind of the rallying cry of the movement. So the example with Zuora, the object for a while was turn customers into subscribers. Very simple. It just sort of flows from it. Airbnb for a while had this one, live anywhere. If you think about-

Lenny (00:24:21):
Belong anywhere.

Andy Raskin (00:24:23):
Well actually it was-

Lenny (00:24:24):
Oh, live like a human.

Andy Raskin (00:24:25):
So you're right, it was, "Belong anywhere," and then it switched to, "Live there." I may have the chronology wrong, but it was the two of those things. You know better than I do. But either one, I mean think they're saying very similar things. Hey, there's this new world where you don't have to live in hotels, you can stay in people's houses. What's the object of that game is to belong anywhere, but live there. And I love it when it works that way where it's almost like an asymptotically unachievable thing. You are never literally going to live there. And if you think about it, this buyer mission statement, this rallying cry, I think of it really as the mission of the company. I mean, what is the mission of Airbnb other than to help people live there if they're going to be customer focused and all that?

Andy Raskin (00:25:17):
The fourth piece is, okay, well this object of the game, winning this game, it better be hard because if it's not, why would we even exist? Just with the movie, if Luke can just go destroy the Death Star then no movie. So there's got to be sort of obstacles in the way, things that are preventing them from. So saying, "Okay, you want to turn customers into subscribers." So whereas Zuora, where they go next is to say, "Okay, well how are you going to measure lifetime value?" Because now you have this always on thing. "How are you going to measure preferences and how they're changing over?" All these new kind of challenges that didn't exist before. And then these are like the monsters in Lord of the Rings or the Empire in Star Wars, these are the obstacles.

Andy Raskin (00:26:11):
I think about them because they sound like problems. This is what people would normally say, "Oh, these are the problems we solve." But by setting up this story thing first we've repackaged them as obstacles to a new goal state that we've already positioned as life and death. So they take on this much more emotional meaning. We understand why they matter. And then of course the last piece is now talking about, well, how are we going to overcome these obstacles? Narrative people, in the movie business they call these the magic gifts that the main character gets to go help them win. What are the ways? Now we can talk about that and success stories and all the rest of the stuff.

Lenny (00:26:58):
There's some obvious parallels to the hero's journey here. I imagine that it was a source of inspiration, and the Star Wars I think is the epitome of that journey. Can you talk about just how related those two are, how you think about that?

Andy Raskin (00:27:09):
Yeah, I mean so hero's journey is this book that comes from, I think it's Hero of A Thousand Faces is a book by Joseph Campbell, a sociologist. He looks at myths over different cultures and different times and he finds this kind of common structure that he calls the hero's journey. I mean it's some controversy about that, about his book. Is it a very male oriented sort of take on things and a bunch of things.

Andy Raskin (00:27:38):
But even that aside, I found when I would talk about hero's journey and stuff, it's just like, it didn't really tell me what to do. Yeah, okay, yeah I got to do this pitch. So in the hero's journey there's like refusal of the call. That's actually that thing where Luke says he doesn't want to go and where the buyer says, "Hey, I don't have budget." But I don't know, it was just too theoretical for me to really ... when I use it, people seem to sort of glass over. So I just don't really talk about that at all. But yeah, I mean that's behind a lot of this stuff for sure.

Lenny (00:28:17):
Yeah, that makes sense because I think if people hear about that all the time when they're like, become a better storyteller, tell your story in this hero's journey, and it's like, "I don't know what I'm doing."

Andy Raskin (00:28:25):
Also, I would say there's storytelling as a skill kind of thing, which is a great thing. Learn how to tell stories better, blah, blah, blah, blah. I'm not really interested in that in my work, what I'm interested in is the one story and the structure of that one story. And this one story, it doesn't really have ... like, the world is moved from transactions to subscriptions. There's not a main character in that story who's like having a problem and getting saved. It's almost as if what's happening is we're turning the person we talk to into the main character. By spelling out the shift, we're changing their world and we're saying, "Hey, you got to change and you want to come with us."

Lenny (00:29:13):
It's almost like you're putting them into the hero's journey, like, "Here's how you win."

Andy Raskin (00:29:16):
Exactly. I love that.

Lenny (00:29:18):
Let me just try to summarize what you shared, this five step framework. So you start with here's a new movement that's happening and you want to name it, you want to name the stakes and there's winners and losers and here's already happening and it's really important. Then you want to name the object of the new game, like turning customers into subscribers. Then show the obstacles, here's why it's challenging, and then talk about how you're going to overcome these obstacles.

Andy Raskin (00:29:41):
And by the way, the naming of the object of the new game, I find it often is really nice to do it as a question. So we hey, there's this shift from transactions to subscriptions and look, everyone's doing it. So we asked a simple question, what would it take to turn every customer into a subscriber? And this way we're kind of bringing the person we're pitching to almost like they're coming along with us as a co, I don't know, adventurer in crafting this story.

Lenny (00:30:17):
I love that. This episode is brought to you by Eco. Last month Eco users earned an average of $84 in cash back rewards. How? With Eco the future of personal finance. Eco is the update to a misaligned financial system providing an app that works just like your bank but removes almost all of the middlemen, helping even the best money optimizers optimize in less time automatically.

Lenny (00:30:40):
What if you earn rewards for paying your rent or got rewarded for ordering food and shopping online or even earn rewards for saving each month? And then imagine if you got rewarded again just for getting rewarded. With Eco, you can spend at some of your favorite merchants and automatically get 5% cash back plus Eco's APY rewards look more like $80, not 80 cents. And then there are Eco points, the world's first open reward system. You earn them whenever you do almost anything in the eco app. Eco is working to make these points the most rewarding points ever so it pays to be early.

Lenny (00:31:13):
Sound too good to be true? Go to Eco.com/Lenny, sign up for an onboarding and find out why it isn't. Lenny's podcast listeners who attend an Eco welcome session will get an exclusive 4% APY on deposits over $1,000. Learn more at Eco.com/Lenny, that's E-C-O.com/Lenny. Maybe just to reinforce this even more, what if we go through the five steps and just with one company as an example and just talk about what each of those were for them?

Andy Raskin (00:31:41):
Okay, great. So there's a company called 360Learning. So this company, I don't know if folks know, but this company is raised over $200 million. They're in the space of corporate training software. So big companies, they have to train their people on all kinds of stuff. So you want to go through that one?

Lenny (00:32:01):
Yeah, that sounds great.

Andy Raskin (00:32:03):
Okay, great. By the way, Nick Hernandez is the CEO and Nick's been on my podcast, so he's talked about this. So they for a long time were pitching themselves as collaborative learning. So they have features that let people sort of collaborate on courses and all kinds of stuff. And Nick is often pitching CEOs, of course his team is as well. And he told me that it was sort of falling a little bit flat. People, collaborative learning, whatever. How are you different from this learning platform, this learning platform?

Andy Raskin (00:32:42):
And so when we worked together this collaborative learning, it's almost like a category name or a descriptor or something. They were so embedded that I decided, I don't even want to take it out, but can we define it in terms of a story? So the story they came to was, hey, used to be that companies train their people through basically a mindset of top-down learning. There's going to be some learning guru at the company, they're going to get all the courses, they're going to put it all together and sort of send out this training material to everybody.

Andy Raskin (00:33:23):
What's happening now is winning companies are approaching this differently. They're adopting this approach we might call upskill from within, which is if you look at Google, there's this page where I think you can go, it's a public. You can connect with Google's AI experts. They literally turn their internal experts into champions that are educating, not even just the company but even external people. They've created this culture of our own people are going to be the educators. So that's the shift from top down to this upskill from within. And of course I just even started to do the second piece which was like, hey, look at the big companies who are doing this.

Andy Raskin (00:34:10):
And then I think they showed, "Hey, you're not doing this. Look, training is becoming very expensive. People don't care. So this is the downside. So we're creating these sort of stake ..." And also I think he has something about how training now, like companies, if you don't adapt, if you can't get these skills to your people, if you're a car company and you can't get these skills around electric cars, you're dead.

Andy Raskin (00:34:35):
Nick was in France and he saw this poster, a recruiting poster from McDonald's and it said, "Hey, if you work at McDonald's you're going to learn from everybody else on your team." And it was like, wow, there it is. So there's another example we used as a kind of winner example. And so then the question became, I can't remember exactly, it was something like, how do you upskill from within? What would it take for you to turn your experts into champions of learning in the company and turn them into stars, and all this?

Andy Raskin (00:35:06):
And then I'm going to forget here what all the obstacles were. But I think it was things like, well, how are you going to make it possible for anybody to create a course? People who might have expertise in electric engines but don't know how to create a course, how are you going to make sure that there's still the learning department, they're going to keep control and can ... all this. You can imagine all the different kind of questions. And then of course now 360Learning starts talking about all that stuff.

Andy Raskin (00:35:36):
What Nick has told me, I'm actually going to be on a webinar with Nick where someone asked me, "Could you bring in a CEO who could talk about this stuff? Not just you B blabbing on about strategic narrative." And so Nick is going to join it. And we had a dress rehearsal the other day and he was telling me it's just like when he starts with this now he doesn't even get the question anymore of well how are you different from this other learning platform? Which used to always be the thing. It's just a much more seamless, okay, yeah, talk to our learning people, get this going. So it's just sounds like it's been really effective for them.

Lenny (00:36:13):
That's actually was what I was going to ask next is what kind of impact have you seen with someone shifting their pitch story from this doc? What was the arrogant doctor approach to the strategic narrative?

Andy Raskin (00:36:23):
Yeah, I mean it's always this kind of thing I hear. I mean, of course it's very difficult to measure this. I mean, what was the value of the strategic narrative for Gong and its growth? Was it 3X versus 1X, 2X? Or I don't, who knows, right? But the things I hear from CEOs, a few things. One is that when they're pitching, they're not pitching features out of context, they're pitching now a movement which is a lot better place to be, I think. In a way you're not pitching product. Product is like a prop for making the story come true. Very important prop, but there's this higher level overlay that becomes the focus of the conversation, at first, and of course we're going to get into product and that helps sell. Once we have this story then everything in marketing can be all about this story.

Andy Raskin (00:37:21):
With Zuora, if you look at their website, well when they first started doing this, maybe 80% of the content is not, "Hey, let me tell you about how Zuora is so great," or, "Here's our new release," or whatever. It's, "Here's how music companies are embracing subscriptions. Here's how luxury goods companies are embracing subscriptions." It's all these kind of almost trend pieces that become unlimited fodder. And again, you're not touting your ... it's less salesy, right?

Andy Raskin (00:37:51):
Another thing I just hear always, I just interviewed a CEO this morning for my podcast and this is the first thing he actually said was, "It becomes the strategic north star for the product." So what he was telling me, and this was actually a little unusual, I asked him, "Why did you come to me at first?" And of course I'd asked him that before, but he said something this time that was a little different from what I'd heard before. He said, "We are constantly getting feature requests through sales, through customer success. And we had sort of no way, bar to decide well what do we take on, what don't we take on? And this clearly has become our bar."

Andy Raskin (00:38:38):
If you think about it for 360Learning, does it help us upskill from within? It's in. Does it not? Or it's prioritized. Does it not? Less prioritized. Amit Bendov told me this directly, he said we exactly the same thing. He said, "We get a lot of requests for features and a lot of them are basically about opinions, some way to record opinions."

Lenny (00:39:04):
And this is Gong.

Andy Raskin (00:39:04):
"We're not going to do those." In Gong, yeah. "We're not going to do those."

Lenny (00:39:08):
Are there any companies out there that maybe aren't clients that you see as like, wow, these guys are nailing it and they're doing a great job of this strategic narrative?

Andy Raskin (00:39:15):
Well, one that really comes to mind is, I mean it's been out there for a while, but Drift. Drift comes out with essentially like a chatbot for your website, which might be the 30th chatbot for your website. And they don't say, "Hey, here's why our chatbot is the best one." They start from a completely different place, which is, "Hey, used to be people would sort of wait around for you to get back to them. It was a world of later. They called it the world of forms. You put up a web form and you expect someone's going to fill it out and maybe wait a few days while you take your sweet time deciding if you're going to get back to them."

Andy Raskin (00:39:58):
And David Cancel and David Gerhardt started from right the beginning saying, "Now we're in a world of now, where buyers are ..." I think they showed this woman, I remember it was this woman sleeping with her phone. That's your prospect. They're always on and they're going to expect you to be engaging with them right away. And they called this conversational marketing, and they really went with that and created I think a whole movement and they broke away from all of the other chatbots.

Lenny (00:40:35):
Awesome example. So earlier you threw out this word category, and I've noticed you haven't talked about category and category creation too much, and I think that you're kind of not a fan of this idea of creating a category and focusing on category. I'd love to hear your perspective on how that all relates to the stuff you recommend.

Andy Raskin (00:40:55):
Lenny, are you trying to get me in trouble? Like that guy who guy on your podcast who attacked jobs to be done?

Lenny (00:41:02):
Apparently, let's do it. Let's see what kind of trouble we can get into.

Andy Raskin (00:41:06):
I would soften it a little bit and not just ... because I don't want the ire of the category design folks, but I really would soften and say, I wouldn't say I'm not a fan of creating category. Look, I think if you look at Play Bigger, which has become The Bible of that category creation thing, if you look behind that going to, what do they say the category is? They say it's a narrative. It's a story about how the world was to how it is. And so what I find though is that when people think about category creation, they tend to just focus on, okay, well, what is this category name going to be that we got? What are these three words or two words, whatever, that are going to magically make us seem like we're totally different from everybody else?

Andy Raskin (00:41:52):
And A, I think that's not really possible. These three words aren't going to do it. Take Gong, I mean already other companies were using this term revenue intelligence. With Gong, it suddenly becomes a thing because I think they have this opinions-to-reality story behind it. At one point, again, I asked Amit, he said, "Yeah," because I remember he really struggled, "What should we call it? What should we call it?"

Andy Raskin (00:42:20):
He came up with that one. But then when I asked him later, he is like, "Yeah, you know what? In hindsight we probably could have called it strawberry intelligence. It didn't matter. It was really the story that sort of mattered." I think he was exaggerating a little bit. And I think the category people would actually agree with this, I think they would agree with, hey, these three words are, it's sort of a shorthand for this movement of old game narrative.

Andy Raskin (00:42:48):
But I guess I feel like still by calling it category and category name, we're just focusing on those three words so much. And what happens often is CEOs will, they'll kind of come up with this little category, like what happened with Nick at the 360Learning with collaborative learning. We have this name, but we don't know how to tell the story around it. So my feeling is like, well, let's focus on the story. So that's why I talk about strategic narrative and movement creation versus category creation. If someone decides that your movement is a category, great. Bonus.

Lenny (00:43:32):
I see. So essentially your approach is category can play a part of this, but there's a bigger question you have of what's the story, what's the movement, what are the obstacles and categories and element of that potentially?

Andy Raskin (00:43:45):
I mean, I almost see them as orthogonal, like with HubSpot. HubSpot had this narrative around inbound. It used to be just outbound stuff, now we're going to have inbound. And that wasn't really a category. Back then they were probably known as marketing automation. Now they're probably known as CRM because they've broadened. But this movement is the thing that's sort of the constant and in some ways orthogonal to whatever category they're in.

Lenny (00:44:16):
Is the strategic narrative framework right for essentially any company or is there a sweet spot? And I've noticed most of the companies you've been talking about are B2B SaaS. So I don't know, maybe if there's a spectrum of perfect fit for strategic narrative framework and then not a fit at all. What's along that spectrum?

Andy Raskin (00:44:33):
Yeah, well you can see, I mean it takes a little time to tell this story and you were kind of framing it a little bit and we're telling it in lots of different channels. So I think it does really play well in this enterprise sales context because also we have a group buyer there. So it's not just one person who's doing some research. This whole group has to have a uniting story. So I think you're right that in noticing that the companies that this tends to resonate with tend to be B2B, enterprise sales, technology I think because often the product is very complicated. That arrogant doctor stuff comes from an age when the things people were selling were products on shelves that didn't change much, cans of soup at the supermarket or a car in a dealership. Even software back then, shrink-wrapped in a box, doesn't change.

Andy Raskin (00:45:44):
B2B software, this stuff is changing by the minute. And does it even make sense to make a claim to say, "Oh, we have these features and they have those features, therefore we're better," does that make any sense? That said, hey, I was looking for a sports watch, a Fitbit and I'm comparing specs and I'm doing all that stuff. And so that mode of buying is still happening, but I think, so yeah, when consumer products companies contact me, I usually say, "No." Occasionally they still say, "Okay, yeah, we'll build this, we still want to have this narrative." But yeah, I think it has the most value, most impactful right away for B2B enterprise technology companies.

Lenny (00:46:33):
Just a few more questions. One is just what's a sign that you should spend time in this area, that something is broken in your strategic narrative story pitch?

Andy Raskin (00:46:42):
Well, I can tell you what I hear from CEOs when they contact me. I always ask, what's happening? Because that idea I had, no CEO's going to budget a line item for this. I'm basically asking, why was I wrong? So a few things they tell me, one is that the company is maturing from a point a stage where they've been successful, but that success is ... one CEO put it this way, was brute force of the founders. So the founders are in every meeting, they're in every product discussion, every sales call, and that's shifting, the company's getting bigger.

Andy Raskin (00:47:21):
Usually I'm seeing this around series B where the company is getting ... so they can't be in every sales call, every market call and they're looking to transmit all the good stuff and some direction in a way that people are going to remember and all that. Everything from how we pitch to what the product should be and all that, and they see this as that.

Andy Raskin (00:47:47):
There's another point that I see people contacting me at, which is where they're growing. It's usually a bit later where they've scaled tremendously successfully. Now we're either acquiring or building out whole new product units. And that old story we told is just, it's just not big enough and we got to expand it to something bigger. This is the example of OneTrust, which the CEO I had on my podcast recently. Starts out with just, I think it's data privacy around the regulations that people have to be able to say, "Don't track me," things like that. And then they buy these other company and now we have this much bigger offering. So how do we tell the story? And then I guess the third one is some form of pivot where hey, we were telling an old story but whatever, the market changed or whatever and we want to go in a different direction.

Lenny (00:48:53):
Say a founders listening to this and they're like, "Okay, I realize I need to do this. I haven't spent enough time on this. Something's not working. This could be a huge unlock for us." What are the first couple steps they could take to start to figure this out? And I imagine at some point it's like, go talk to Andy. He'll help you through this. Is there stuff you can do on your own? How do you go about figuring this out?

Andy Raskin (00:49:11):
Well, a lot of folks have emailed me over the years like, well I told you before, there were some who emailed me like, "Hey, tried it, didn't work." But many more have emailed me, "Hey, I tried it, it did work. Thank you." And so yeah, just try to lay out that structure and try it mean even when I work with teams, I adapt what people might call sort of lean approach. I want to get that thing out there into sales calls. We're not rolling it out to the whole sales team right away, but getting it out into some sales calls and get a sense, "Hey, is this resonating? Are people given the nods?"

Andy Raskin (00:49:49):
Ideally by the way, one way I look to test it, is it working, is when we talk about this shift and the stakes and do they stick. Do they kind of say, "Yeah, let me tell you how that's playing out for us,"? Or, "Am I? Yes, I'm seeing that." Sometimes I'll literally, I'll train salespeople to ask them that question, like, "Am I crazy or are you seeing this?" And what do they say? And you can usually tell if they're in and it's qualitative. But I really like that kind of testing to see if it's working. And I think anybody can do that.

Lenny (00:50:32):
Is there a template or guide you have online for folks to follow other than maybe just listening to this podcast and reading? Is there a post that's like, "Here's the framework defined, and go follow these steps,"?

Andy Raskin (00:50:41):
I mean, I guess the closest is that The Greatest Sales Deck I've Ever Seen post, which is the Zuora deck. But even there, people have asked me for a framework and presentation companies say, "Can we have your template so we could make it available to people? We'll revenue share with you or something." And I am so against this template. Every team I work with, it's different. It's not the same number of slides. Sometimes we can lay out this shift in one slide, sometimes it just feels better or the team likes it better, whatever, if it's a few and we're sort of getting people into it. Sometimes there's no slides. So I am really hesitant to recommend any template. And what I'd say is these are principles for building it, not any prescribed formula.

Lenny (00:51:37):
If they do want to reach out to you while we're on this topic, what's the best way to contact you?

Andy Raskin (00:51:42):
Connect with me on LinkedIn. That's usually a good one. And I'm usually posting things on LinkedIn that I've learned from working with other teams.

Lenny (00:51:52):
Awesome. Last question before we get to a very exciting lightning round. Speaking of LinkedIn, you posted how in a working session with companies that the second session is always this low point they all go through and that everyone's starting to get discouraged and pained. And first of all, I love the expectation setting. You're like, "This is going to suck initially and it'll get better." Why is that the low point and what is it that they focus on in that second session?

Andy Raskin (00:52:17):
Well, apparently I'm not doing enough of an expectation setting, because what that post was about was this woman. So when I work with a CEO I always ask them to create what I call a strategic narrative team of up to four people. And usually those are leads of marketing, sales, whatever. In this case, the CFO was a really important person in this company. And so the CEO wanted her as part of this team. And she said to me at the end, she's like, "I love where we got to." I always ask, "What worked? What didn't work?" And she's like, "I love where we got to. That worked great. What didn't work was like, you told us that this second session was going to be bad, but I think you could have drilled home more like exactly how bad."

Andy Raskin (00:52:58):
And then I asked her, "Actually, could I have that quote with your face on a slide that I now present to future teams?" She said, "Yeah, you could do that." So the way I work it is I have a kickoff session where essentially I'm asking people on the team, what are these pieces? What is this old game, new game shift? How do we talk about when to set the stakes and everything I just took you through? And we have like five people in the room. There's going to be ... we're going to come out of this with notes and notes, boards and boards of ideas of this stuff.

Andy Raskin (00:53:34):
And so then two things happen. One is I ask the team to start interviewing customers about how they see this shift and sometimes the customers will literally give us the words and that can be helpful in sort of aligning if we have differences. But I also start working with the CEO one-on-one and we build a first version of this thing, and it's the second session where we present this first version to the team and think about what's happening.

Andy Raskin (00:54:02):
The team has just given us millions of gold ideas, truly they're all ... and in order to make something sort of clean and powerful, the CO and I have had to pretty much throw out all of them, save one or two. And there's going to be feelings about that, first of all. Second of all, if this were easy to just get all ... interview everybody, come up with it, they would've done it. So it's going to be wrong.

Andy Raskin (00:54:30):
But the good news is this is where the team gets to weigh in. I also ask, what's working, not working in this thing? And when we learn how it's not working, that gives us the juice to then me and the CEO go back to the drawing board. We plan on this in advance, we're going to go back to the drawing board and then bring up something good. So having a shit draft is a million times more valuable than having all these great ideas. But it's also really painful. It's painful not only for them, but for me. No matter how many times I say this, I expect they're going to love it in that first one too. And I'm really pissed off when they don't. But luckily now I've done enough times I know that's going to happen.

Lenny (00:55:20):
I was just watching a documentary about Annie Lamont who came up with the first draft concept for writers that I stick to.

Andy Raskin (00:55:27):
I'm a firm believer in that. Yeah.

Lenny (00:55:30):
As you're talking, one last thought that I had is, so you'd work with because and founders. I feel like this could be just as useful to product leaders, product managers working on a product that they're launching, just like what is the movement, where it's happening, here's why this product's important. Do you find that too?

Andy Raskin (00:55:45):
Absolutely. And very frequently, the product leader, chief product officer is part of this group. What I'd say though is that the reason ... so after I did this work for a few years, I looked back and I was like, which were the engagements I did where I can see it, and the narrative is really this true north star for everything?

Andy Raskin (00:56:10):
It was always the ones where the CEO was leading it, not just in name, but literally the person who called me who was working on the drafts with me and going through. And so initially I didn't insist that it would be the CEO doing that, but eventually I started to, and I think even for a product leader, you're going to want the support. You don't want to be just telling that story in product. You're going to want that supported from this Zuora person who gave me the initial deck, he said it, "It was like I had air cover and I was just going down and knocking down deals on the ground." You're going to want that air cover in marketing, sales, recruiting, everything. And how much better is it if it's really driven by the CEO and you have that?

Lenny (00:57:01):
Amazing. Is there anything else you wanted to touch on or you want to share before we get to our very exciting lighting round?

Andy Raskin (00:57:07):
No, except I love category design people and it's really just sort of terms that I like that are ... you know what? Forget it. Scratch that part.

Lenny (00:57:19):
I thought that was funny.

Andy Raskin (00:57:21):
Oh yeah. Okay. Yeah, we could leave it in. We could leave it in. You could even leave this in where I'm telling you to scratch it.

Lenny (00:57:26):
Sounds good. I was actually going to joke that I was going to cut this out and leave you hanging, but okay.

Andy Raskin (00:57:31):
No, you can do that. Yeah. Category design people. Love you. Don't hate me. Thank you.

Lenny (00:57:37):
Great. I love it. We're going to be okay, I think. Well, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got five questions for you. Are you ready?

Andy Raskin (00:57:46):
I'm ready. I saw like what you sent them, but I didn't really look at them, so I'm just going to tell you what I said. I'll go off that.

Lenny (00:57:52):
Perfect. Excellent. The best version of this. What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Andy Raskin (00:57:59):
One of the books that I read initially from that Barnes & Noble, it was Story by Robert McKee. I think a lot of people know about it who are sort of interested in story stuff, but it's kind of a Bible of people who are doing screenwriting and stuff. If anyone who's in Hollywood who thought about going to Hollywood, they know about this book. I love a book called Out of Sheer Rage. It's really not about what I do or anything, but the author is Geoff Dyer. Geoff, he's written a lot of books that are kind of essay memoir, and this is a book about him trying to write a book about DH Lawrence. So it's all about procrastinating and like, "Oh, I'm supposed to write this book. I'm about to go on a trip somewhere. Should I bring the collected works of DH Lawrence with me on the trip because that'll help me start the book, but maybe I shouldn't because it's not going to ... Then I could come back refreshed without having ..." Basically, it's all that. It's this sort of in the head. I just really enjoy that book.

Lenny (00:58:59):
What's a favorite recent movie or TV show that you really enjoyed?

Andy Raskin (00:59:03):
Station 11. Station 11. That was just so beautiful to me.

Lenny (00:59:09):
Trippy. That was a trippy movie. Did not expect to go where it went. I usually ask what's a favorite interview question you like to ask, and I don't know how often you're interviewing people, but does anything come to mind when I ask that?

Andy Raskin (00:59:21):
Well, I can tell you one thing I ask when I speak with CEOs is I like to ask, what role has this narrative played in your leadership? How does it work in your leadership? And it's always really interesting for me to hear that, 'cause I often hear things that I don't expect.

Lenny (00:59:39):
What's a favorite product you've recently discovered that you just really like?

Andy Raskin (00:59:43):
I recently got a Fitbit. I think I may have mentioned it earlier. I was looking for a product like that, and so far I'm really loving it.

Lenny (00:59:53):
Amazing. Have you tried other versions of Fitbits or that's the one that's working?

Andy Raskin (00:59:58):
I also ordered a Polar at the same time and wound up returning the Polar. Basically, it was just a little clunkier on my wrist, so I went with a Fitbit. Well, do you have one that you recommend instead?

Lenny (01:00:13):
I just have the Apple Watch and I've never tried a Fitbit and it gives me all this stuff that seems cool, but I've never gone further.

Andy Raskin (01:00:21):
I got the Fitbit like a week ago and I actually still am on the fence whether I bring it back to return it for the Apple Watch, so I'm enjoying it, but we'll see.

Lenny (01:00:28):
Okay. Final question. You're expert on presentations and I imagine you spend a lot of time in decks, and so just what's like one small change people can make to how they put together a deck or a presentation that will make their presentation a lot better?

Andy Raskin (01:00:41):
This is the one thing, make the title the takeaway of the slide so that the person looking at it has to do zero work to take away. So example, you'll sometimes see, "The problem," or, "The team." Replace, "The team," with, "Our team is veterans of whatever industry," or every single slide it's a takeaway, not a label. It'll make everything flow a lot better.

Lenny (01:01:17):
You did a killer job answering the lightning round questions without having a peek at what they were going to be. Andy, this was incredibly insightful. I'm going to go start working on my strategic narrative for my podcast and newsletter. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, learn more, maybe consider working with you? And then how can listeners be useful to you?

Andy Raskin (01:01:35):
So I mentioned LinkedIn as a way to connect with me. That's fine. My website is AndyRaskin.com. I also have a podcast where I talk with CEOs, so if you're interested in hearing more details about actual use of this, it's called The Bigger Narrative. My mom introduces every episode. I sent her the interviews in advance. I call her and interview about what she thinks people will get out of it, and that conversation becomes the intro to the podcast episode. And what was the last question?

Lenny (01:02:04):
How can listeners be useful to you?

Andy Raskin (01:02:06):
Useful to me. Just if you try any of this stuff, let me know. Like, "Hey, worked. Didn't work. Have this question." I would love to hear that stuff.

Lenny (01:02:17):
Amazing. Andy, thank you again for being here.

Andy Raskin (01:02:20):
Thanks so much for having me, Lenny. This is really fun.

Lenny (01:02:22):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at LennysPodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

David Placek (00:00:00):
Your brand name, nothing's going to be used more often or for longer than that name. Design will change, messaging will change, products will change, but that name is there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:09):
What's a name that you came up with that you had to fight super hard for, that the client just hated?

David Placek (00:00:14):
When we presented Sonos, it was rejected because it's not entertainment-like. We argued about that because I said, "This is outside looking in, but I don't see you as an entertainment company." Humans do like to be comfortable. Part of our job here is to help people to give the confidence going bigger and being uncomfortable.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:32):
There's a quote that I found of yours, "If your team is comfortable with the name, chances are you don't have the name yet."

David Placek (00:00:37):
We look for polarization. We look for tension in a team arguing about these things. Polarization is a sign of strength in the word. Most clients, they come to a naming project absolutely believing with full confidence that they're going to know it when they see it, and the truth is it almost never happens.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:57):
Most people listening to this are founders, a lot of PMs on product teams. Let's say they have a couple of weeks, got to come up with a name. What should they do?

(00:01:05):
Today, my guest is David Placek. David is the founder of Lexicon Branding, which pioneered the field of brand naming, and invented a few names that you may have heard of including Powerbook, Pentium, Blackberry, Swiffer, the Impossible Burger. Also, Vercel, Windsurf, CapCut, and Azure. In our conversation, David opens up about the very specific process that he and his team go through to find winning names, including a simple exercise that you can do with you and your team to help you find the right name in just a few weeks. We also talk about why a great name is worth spending your time on, why you won't know a great name when you see it, and why you need to feel uncomfortable about the name first. Also, why big team brainstorms don't ever lead to great names. The stories behind names like Pentium, and Sonos, and Vercel, and Windsurf. Also, such interesting insights about the feeling and energy of every letter of the alphabet and so much more.

(00:01:56):
This episode is designed for anyone trying to figure out a name for their product or company, and also just for anyone that's interested in hearing the stories of how some of the most iconic names came to be. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. And if you become a paid subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of a bunch of amazing products including Bolt, Linear, Superhuman, Notion, Perplexity, Granola and more. Check it out at lennysnewsletter.com and click bundle. With that, I bring you David Placek.

(00:02:27):
This episode is brought to you by WorkOS. If you're building a SaaS app, at some point, your customers will start asking for enterprise features like SAML authentication and skim provisioning. That's where WorkOS comes in, making it fast and painless to add enterprise features to your app. Their APIs are easy to understand so that you can ship quickly and get back to building other features. Today, hundreds of companies are already powered by WorkOS, including ones you probably know like Vercel, Webflow, and Loom. WorkOS also recently acquired Warrant, the fine-grain authorization service. Warrant's product is based on a groundbreaking authorization system called Zanzibar, which was originally designed for Google to power Google Docs and YouTube. This enables fast authorization checks at enormous scale while maintaining a flexible model that can be adapted to even the most complex use cases. If you're currently looking to build role-based access control or other enterprise features like single sign-on, skim, or user management, you should consider WorkOS. It's a drop-in replacement for Auth0 and supports up to 1 million monthly active users for free. Check it out at workos.com to learn more. That's workos.com.

(00:03:45):
Last year, 1.3% of the global GDP flowed through Stripe. That's over $1.4 trillion. And driving that huge number are the millions of businesses growing more rapidly with Stripe. For industry leaders like Forbes, Atlassian, OpenAI, and Toyota, Stripe isn't just financial software. It's a powerful partner that simplifies how they move money, making it as seamless and borderless as the internet itself. For example, Hertz boosted its online payment authorization rates by 4% after migrating to Stripe. And imagine seeing a 23% lift in revenue like Forbes did just six months after switching to Stripe for subscription management. Stripe has been leveraging AI for the last decade to make its product better at growing revenue for all businesses, from smarter checkouts to fraud prevention and beyond. Join the ranks of over half of the Fortune 100 companies that trust Stripe to drive change. Learn more at stripe.com.

(00:04:48):
David, thank you so much for being here, and welcome to the podcast.

David Placek (00:04:53):
Thank you. I'm excited about today and looking forward to the conversation.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:58):
Me, too. These are actually my favorite kinds of conversations because this topic is so outside of my wheelhouse, and I know I'm just going to learn a ton. Also, this is just something that every founder and product builder has to think about at some point, and they have no idea what they're doing. And then, their name becomes so core to their identity. It's hardly the word they say more than any other word. And I feel like I've never heard advice on how to do this well. So, I'm really excited for this conversation.

(00:05:25):
I'm going to just dive into a question. And the question is just what's a name that you came up with, and your team came up with, that you had to fight super hard for that the client just hated, and you ended up winning. And now, it's just such an obviously awesome name that everyone loves.

David Placek (00:05:40):
The story I like to tell is a story of Sonos. One, a great client team. I worked with all the founders. But at the time, they were stuck on being in a brand name that put them in the entertainment business. And so when we presented Sonos, which has many qualities to it, it was rejected because it doesn't have enough emotion to it. It's not entertainment-like. And we argued about that because I said, "This is outside looking in, but I don't see you as an entertainment company. You make speakers that allow for the flow of entertainment through these things. And Sonos is about sound." But it had a particular quality. It's called a palindrome, which really means that you can flip it and it means the same thing. In the case of Sonos, you could also turn it upside down and it was essentially the same.

(00:06:47):
And so that got them thinking about this, but they were still has... So I left that meeting in Santa Barbara, and I came back and they were still struggling with it. And I got on a plane, didn't even bill them for this, went back down to Santa Barbara and met with them again and said, "I really believe in this name and I think it's the right for you." And at a certain point, one of the founders, Bob MacFarlane, who's just a wonderful client. I could see him thinking, and he said, "You know? We're trying to name this for ourselves, and what we really should be doing is naming it for the marketplace and the customers. And I think Sonos now is the right name. And I felt really good about that." He later wrote me a note about how I help to do that, and we use it sometimes in credentials presentations because it's such a nice note.

(00:07:45):
But Sonos is something I'm so glad that I had this internal energy to, "I got to go down there and make a bid for this." I don't do that often, by the way, but I felt very strongly about Sonos.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:58):
I love Sonos. I love the name. I have many Sonos products. How often does this happen where the client is just, "No, this is not the name. We have this bigger vision, we have a whole other idea of it." And then you convince them.

David Placek (00:08:07):
Well, it happens all of the time. And it's a little bit bidirectional, right? Most clients, and I can understand this, they come to a naming project absolutely believing, with full confidence, that they're going to know it when they see it. And the truth is, it almost never happens. I think this year we'll hit 4,000 projects that we've completed.

(00:08:37):
And it's interesting, we'll tell people in a very polite way, "You're not going to know when you see it." But I know they don't believe me. And even when... You could see them thinking that, "You know what? He was right. I really have to think about this. I have to process it." And part of that, part of why clients don't like the bolder names, the more imaginative names that we present is they are looking for comfort. And that's the opposite that what you want to do. And part of our job here is to help people to give the confidence that going bolder, and bigger, and being uncomfortable. I use the expression, "There is no power in comfort, not in the marketplace."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:27):
Wow. There's so much here already. So this idea of you're not going to know it when you see it is something that people come in with thinking like, "Once I see it, it'll be obvious." Just why is that almost never the case? Is it because the name has to be something that is uncomfortable?

David Placek (00:09:43):
There's a lot of psychology to this, which ironically, I never even took a psychology class in college or graduate school. But the first element is humans do like to be comfortable. And one of the mechanisms of comfort is if something's been successful before, then I feel like I can approve it or select it. This is why movies like Harry Potter or even novels like Jack London's Call of the Wild get rejected so many times. I think Harry Potter was rejected 16 or 18 times, and Jack London's book even more than that. I mean, think about it. He's pitching a book and they say, "What are you talking about here? You're saying a dog becomes a wolf? I've never heard of anything like that." So, we really do have to help people think about, "It's not about the past. You're actually creating the future." And we really talk to people and emphasize the idea, "This isn't a name you're creating. We're creating an experience for you. We're going to work together."

(00:10:54):
And our conversations always start with, "Talk to us about how you behave now and how you want to behave in the future," as opposed to, "Tell me about your positioning, tell me about your values, tell me about your mission." That's really kind of old thinking. It's very traditional, and that did work 25 or 30 years ago. But this is a far more complex, interconnected world, a digital world now that stuff just doesn't create... It doesn't create names like Sonos or some of our other credentials that we probably will talk about today.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:34):
Yeah, we're going to talk about just the process you guys go through, so stay tuned for that. But before we get to that, is there's another story you can share that shows this idea of being bold?

David Placek (00:11:44):
I'll talk about Microsoft's Azure. So when Microsoft came to us, they were pretty much stuck. And Microsoft does... And in many ways, to their credit, a lot of things don't need to be named. They don't need trademarks. They don't need brand names. They need descriptors. And so they came to us to develop a name that started or ended with cloud. Made sense to them because it was a cloud service. And our reaction was, "If you do that, you're going to be in an ocean of other cloud this, cloud that. And you have an opportunity as Microsoft here to really emerge as a leader in this." And so, there was a discussion about, "Okay, we'll take a look at those, but we'd like to see some cloud names." Which is easy to do, by the way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:44):
Classic.

David Placek (00:12:42):
So, we did that. And along the way, we came up with this word azure, which is another word for blue. And so there was a link to clouds, blue sky clouds, things like that, but we really presented it based on its linguistic qualities. It's a noisy word, that Z in there. It starts with an A, and it ends in a nice smooth flow. So, we really strive to do create names that are balanced. And in a very busy competitive world, having a strong signal, which is generated by noise is a good thing.

(00:13:27):
The reaction wasn't good. One of the clients said, "That's just a dumb idea." Remarks like that. At this point, after these four decades, it just rolls off my back like water off a duck is what my grandmother would say. But I think along the way, as we talked about it, they began to warm up to this. And now of course it's, I don't know, a $100 billion brand or something like that. But that's an example of, "I haven't seen that before. I'm very comfortable with cloud. Cloud is what it is. We're describing it." But that's a statement. And I think that... Well, I don't think I know that's what I said in one of the presentations is, "You don't want to make a statement here. You want to start a story." And Azure is going to behave differently in the marketplace than Cloud Pro, which is I think one of the names that we presented to them on the other site at their request.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:34):
I'm glad they went with Azure. Let me actually ask this question. I know you're biased, but just how important is a great name? If you had a better name than a product that was better than you, does that make a big difference? Just anything you can share there to help people see this is the power of a great name.

David Placek (00:14:49):
Let's look just at the reality of this. Your brand name, whether it's a product name or a company name, nothing's going to be used more often or for longer than that name. Design will change, messaging will change, products will change, but that name is there. So, I like to talk about this idea of cumulative advantage. Over time, as people buy more and more of the product, they see it more often, that their bond between you and that brand, or them and the brand I should say, becomes stronger and stronger. So you want that name to stick in their mind to be distinctive, because distinctiveness is what creates that cumulative advantage.

(00:15:35):
The second thing is this notion of what I call asymmetric advantage. It makes perfect sense, and most clients agree with this when we say this is that even before you launch this brand, why not start with an advantage in the marketplace? And you won't get an advantage if you're descriptive. If you are Cloud Pro and there's 10 other cloud services, you're not going to stand out in the marketplace. You won't have the ability to create necessarily that cumulative advantage in the marketplace.

(00:16:09):
So, those are my two reasons why names are, I think, done right. And we do talk about our mission is not creating good names. A lot of people can do that. Our mission is to create the right name for clients, because the right name does deliver asymmetric advantage and cumulative advantage for you. And that, for us, has almost unlimited value.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:41):
This is a great answer. Essentially what you're saying is it's not going to necessarily make or break you, but it gives you an advantage. A great name gives you an advantage, especially if you're just getting started. You need every advantage you can get.

David Placek (00:16:54):
Exactly. And this is maybe a little bit off a tangent, but one of the best books on marketing I've ever read, which is not a book on marketing, and you may have read it along the way in college if you studied any Greek or classics. It's called the Melian Dialogues. And it's a dialogue... It'll take anybody listening to this maybe 25 minutes to read it. Between the Athenians and the government of Melos, the Athenians had decided that they needed that island. And they went and approached them very nice way, that, "We want to take over the island. Nothing will change. You'll be taxed a little bit, but we'll protect you." And the Athenians had thought every aspect about how to take that island before. So by the time they got there, they had created asymmetric advantage in terms of ships, and men, and all of this other stuff.

(00:17:57):
By the way, in the book, there's no mention of marketing or brand strategy or any of these things, but if you read it, you begin to see that it's marketing, really, is about a symmetric advantage. And so, why not start from the very beginning with an advantage? That's the value of a name.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:12):
Let's dive into the actual process you guys go through, and I want to read a quote that Guillermo Rauch shared when I asked him about what it was like working with you. He's the CEO and co-founder of Vercel, which you guys worked with. I definitely want to hear that story, by the way. So he said, "Before David, the ability to name something was like charisma. You either have it or you don't. It was so surreal to watch his team distill it down to a science."

(00:18:35):
So let me just ask you, what does that science look like? What are the steps to coming up with an amazing name for your product or company that you guys go through?

David Placek (00:18:42):
That's very nice of Guillermo. He is a very impressive innovator in this category and we greatly enjoyed working with him. Well, our process is real. I break it down in three steps. First, we have to identify, then we invent, and then we implement. It's just three things. It's not rocket science, but it's a combination of creativity and discipline. And obviously, talented people and experience in these things. So, let's just go through those things. In the first section of identify, it's really trying to find out from the client, let's talk about behavior. So, how are you behaving now and how do you want to behave in the future? That behavior is bidirectional. In other words, the marketplace behaves towards a Vercel, that's the name we created for Guillermo. And they behave towards the marketplace. And that's an important point because everything... Buildings are bidirectional. Look at a building, you behave differently towards a temple than you or a church versus a Holiday Inn in terms of how that architecture states. So, we focus on that. Behavior is closely aligned for us with experience. How do you want the experience of this brand?

(00:20:11):
Now, when we listen to those things, we begin to think about rhythm of the name. So something like Dasani has a lot of rhythm to it, right? It's kind of calming. And so, we'll begin to extract things from that discussion on experience. We will then, also, as part of this first phase, look at the competition. We call that developing a landscape. And we're looking for what are the words... What are the brand names, first, and then what language are they using in this space? Because we have to be distinctive. If a brand name isn't distinctive, you lose. Then, you're imitating. And that's a form of suicide. That's a famous quote from some... I think the president of P&G 50 years ago or something like that. So, that's that first phase which allows us to create what we call a creative framework. And we don't even use the word objectives here because that gets too logical.

(00:21:16):
Actually, framework for us is a metaphor for a window for us, and our teams, and our linguists to travel through. To open things up so that we're not coming back with a narrow list of names. We're coming back with names that have depth, and breadth, and have different experiences and personalities to them. And clients will sign off on that. And then, we get going. So now, we're moved to the invent stage.

(00:21:44):
And in the invent stage, we do really two things. You can look at this as two layers of our process. I think the second layer is probably what makes us quite unique in the marketplace. It's the result of millions of dollars of R&D on our part. So the first thing is, no surprise to anyone, we work with creative individuals. And we don't use... This will be contrary. We don't use large brainstorming sections. I did. When I first started the company, I used freelancers, I used large brainstorming groups. And along the way through some analysis, we really discovered that that was not really working for us. That actually, the names were coming from employees and from small groups. And so we've moved our process to, at least, two or three small teams of two people.

(00:22:41):
And each of those teams... So let's say on significant projects, we always use three teams. And each team gets a different briefing. One team knows everything about the project but the other teams don't. If we're working for Microsoft, the second team thinks they're working for Apple. I mean, they know it's disguised. We're not keeping this from anyone. And then the third team, we take it out of computers, and they might be naming a bicycle or a car or something like that. What we're trying to do is open up the coffers of creativity for this. And so when people are working on what they know is not the real assignment, they are now free to make all kinds of mistakes. And so, most of our names have come out of the second or third team because they're-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:29):
Wow.

David Placek (00:23:29):
Yeah. I think the process, at some point, I will hopefully write either a good article on this or maybe even a book. But this process would work for, I think, a lot of things. I know it would. All right now, what's that second layer that I talked about? Well, we have made significant investments in this area of linguistics and cognitive science, and it's in two ways. One, building proprietary knowledge. So we know through research that we funded, an extensive amount about an area in language called or linguistics called the sound symbolism. So, what are the sounds of the 26 letters of the alphabet and what do they do? How do they evoke things? Well, it turns out that each of those letters sends out a signal that creates a certain sort of vibration, if you will, or experience.

(00:24:31):
Now, there's been research on that over the years but there were some gaps, and we decided to fill this. And over the years, we've had a very good relationship with Stanford University, with their Department of Linguistics. We've hired linguists from MIT, from Berkeley. We have a linguistic internship here. I actually just ran this number, preparing for this discussion. We have employed, over four decades now, 253 linguists. Most of them PhDs, some of them contracts, some of them actual employees. That's a lot of intellectual knowledge. So we really have, what I call, a linguistic engine here. And then we now have an operating network of... I just checked on this figure yesterday. We have 108 linguists in 76 countries that help us. Some of them do creative work, others will do just the analysis of names for us. So now, we have that creative framework, we have creative teams working on this.

(00:25:39):
Now, we're tapping into databases that have over 18,000 small word units, technically called morphemes. So, we also can tap in from a sound standpoint. What are the sounds of reliability? What are the sounds of aliveness? And so with Sonos, by the way, we wanted things that are somewhat noisy. And so S is a noisy letter, like a Z or even a V. And so, you begin to set priorities about what letters we're going to use. And that work from that, we call it an engineering layer floats up into the creative teams. And so, it's a mixture of things at a certain point in time.

(00:26:27):
All right. Now, what happens to all that? At a certain point, usually 3 to 4 weeks into this, we might have 2 or 3,000 ideas. I say ideas because they're not all solutions, they're not all workable. They may be just beginning ideas, concepts. And we sift through those. And now one of the major challenges that we face, and certainly our clients face, is the need to clear a trademark for it to be not in conflict with a marketplace that is... We're almost reaching a tipping point in terms of difficulty of clearing names here. And so we have paralegals here, and we have a trademark attorney, and we'll analyze those names. That gets us to a much smaller set. And then, we'll do our linguistic work with our linguists, and we end up with a set of names to show our clients.

(00:27:22):
We'll do this twice with most assignments. Sometimes, we'll do just one time depending on timing and budget. But we really try to get two cycles here, partly because humans love to compare. If you're looking for a house, you don't just look at the first house and say, "Okay, let's sign us up." You look and you learn that we don't need a swimming pool, but we do need a view. It's the same with names. And so, we get feedback from our clients. And sometimes, that's a co-creative process where a client will come up with a word or a solution and we'll then run that through our screening mechanisms for them. And that's really the process. The final phase is implementing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:08):
Let's actually pause at that because I would, so much, I want to talk about with the second step, but we'll get to the step three. They're just blowing my mind, all the things you guys do here. This is incredible. There's so many things here that are so unlike what I expected.

(00:28:23):
First of all, the creative folks that are actually coming up with these names, what's the background of these people? Who are these people?

David Placek (00:28:31):
So, the fundamental quality is they're going to be curious and they're going to be hardworking. This is... And hopefully... And this is hard to screen for, but lower egos. This is unlike the advertising business which I came from, so I've six years at a large agency. Where a creative person or a copywriter can think about something and come in with 3 or 4 alternatives in terms of a headline or body copy. And that might be refined a little bit and maybe sent back to the drawing boards altogether, but it's a relatively simple process. And no disrespect intended there.

(00:29:19):
Here, I can't just sit down and say, "Okay, we're naming a new car here. And so, I'm going to generate 100 names and you generate 100 names, and something will fall out." Those names will not... There's not enough in that list to clear through our screens. Of legal screens, our linguistic screens. And remember, we start with a creative framework and a criteria that the names need to meet. So, we're looking for people who can churn out a lot of work. And when that's rejected, they just keep going. So, we look for tenacious people. Now, we have... And we'll probably get to this later, but we have software here that helps people generate names. Not really... Maybe five years down the road, it'll actually spit out solutions, but now it's helping us to generate ideas and directions and what I... Sound symbolism, ideas, word unit, prefixes, suffixes, things like that. So, it's relatively easy for anyone that works here to develop a list of 2 or 300 names over a 3 or 4-day period.

(00:30:41):
Where do we find these people? More who are writers from newspaper reporters because they have to work fast. Their stories get rejected. People who might have written a novel. We have hired people from agencies over the years. They work a little less effectively than others who have a speechwriter from... I wrote speeches in Washington. Those people have to work hard, crank out a lot of material, get rejected. Candidate says, "I don't like this, start over." Those are more resilient people. That's where they come from. It's not easy to find these people. It really isn't.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:25):
Let me just throw out here. I'm going to ask you after we go through this process, what people that don't have the resources and time to do this, what they should do to come up with a good name. I'm just going to let people know as they're listening because-

David Placek (00:31:26):
Sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:36):
... I imagine many people are wondering, but let's not go there yet.

David Placek (00:31:38):
Okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:39):
How long does this process usually take? What's the ideal length the company should expect when they want to come up with an amazing name?

David Placek (00:31:44):
For us, the ideal link is pretty short. It's eight weeks. For larger corporate projects where you have boards and a little more politicking to do, and a few more presentations, it's a three-month churn. And sometimes by the time they approve things and clear, it's a four-months process.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:05):
Okay, cool. So eight weeks mostly if you're a big company with a lot of red tape. You have to work through then longer.

(00:32:11):
Okay, this point you made about three different teams with different almost context is so interesting. So say, let's use Windsurf as an example, which is an amazing name, killing it, that you guys helped come up with. So is the idea there, okay, here's we're naming this AI IDE. One of the team has told, "No, you're building a bicycle. Here's all the same brief, but it's a bicycle. And then another team, you're building a..." I don't know, lap. I don't know, something non-technical essentially, right?

David Placek (00:32:42):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:43):
Like, a cup. Say more about that because that is amazing because. And you're finding that most of the best names come from the groups that aren't... Let's name an amazing AI IDE.

David Placek (00:32:54):
This is a good example. So in technology, there are some things that if someone hands you a new phone and you look at it and it's tangible and it's got a shape and color, things like that, easier to name. But the name of Windsurf, before it was Windsurf, was Codium. So, it's all about a type of code or a process for coding. That's intangible. And even though we do an awful lot of technology work, it is still hard for us to really get ahold of what that is. So our rule here is if there's something that is intangible like that, we have to make it tangible. And sometimes we do that not by giving a team, sometimes it's an individual, the assignment to create ideas for the brand itself, but to just dive into a particular context.

(00:33:49):
And in this case with Windsurf, this is about flow about giving people that are coding something much more of a flow process, a smoother process, a more dynamic process. So in that case, One team was just given the task of we want to look at a list of all the things that can communicate either in a real word like flow or metaphorically or in a sport about that kind of dynamics. That kind of movement. And there was Windsurf sitting on a list. I mean, sometimes, this is really just that simple. Of course, you have to have the right framework and you have to give the right directions to someone. And Windsurf, for us and particularly for me, it checks all the boxes. It's a wonderful image, it's an experience. Literally, a physical experience. It's a compound, right? Two words put together. We know from the research we've invested in that compounds like Powerbook or Facebook are multipliers of associations because there's wind and there's circles around that, and then there's surf images around that. So 1 + 1 = 3, right?

(00:35:16):
It's interesting that when we present compounds to clients, we often get the comment, "Well, it's a little bit long and it's a compound. I'd rather have a shorter single word." And then that's why we actually did research on just how effective our compounds so we could pass that information along. We passed that along to the team at that time. Codium, by the way, could not have been a more intelligent, nicer, more respectful team that we've worked with. I'm so glad for their success. But we explained to them about the multiplier effect of compounds. We showed them imagery that they could use. I mean, it's simple to execute on something like that. And so, that's how that came about. I'll stop there and see if you need more information or not.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:11):
Let me actually follow this through real quick. It's going to be kind of a tangent. You guys have been working with AI companies more and more recently, which is so interesting. What's different about naming AI products from traditional products, not AI, I guess?

David Placek (00:36:25):
First off, we are working mostly with engineers, and engineers who haven't delved into the world of creativity and necessarily marketing. And that's their strength. And what we have to do is we have to balance their strength with our strength. So there's a little bit of a challenge there, but I think we deal pretty well with that. Secondly, this is the fastest moving progressing category I have ever experienced. And I have that perspective, right? I went through the early days of the internet and the World Wide Web, and that was moving pretty fast. But the internet compared to this looks like a daycare school or something like that. We're challenged by just keeping up with developments. Third thing, and this is the creative challenge here, is that engineers come to us wanting more sophisticated names where they are likely to end up with another Codium or an Anduril or an Anthropic.

(00:37:42):
And when we saw this trend of that AI is going to take off, and it was an intuitive feeling on my part. I could have been wrong. I said, "Let's find out what's going on here." So both, not only who's developing the products, but how do people think about AI? And we did a series of research. I probably invested $20,000 or so. And we interviewed consumers in Europe, South Korea, just picked out one country in Asia, and in America, and developers in those three. And they really have different views. Developers are all totally positive on it. They see the future, they see a big future, not too concerned, some are, but most aren't. Consumers are skeptical, worried about it, worried about their jobs, see the hope in it, those types of things, but haven't got the handle on it.

(00:38:41):
So Codium is an example where we said, "We think what you're doing needs to be much more tangible, and something that people can grab onto, and much more natural as opposed to a Codium." And they listened to us. Very simple as that. And in this case, we were right. And by the way also, I have to say, there's some luck to this. Windsurf happened to be available and they sought right away, not exactly right away but it took about a week going back and forth to select it. So, let me stop there and see if that answers your question.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:23):
Absolutely. And it feels like most AI companies end up having a different name for their product than their company. I've noticed this funny trend cursor was any sphere bold with stack is StackBlitz, Windsurf is Codium. Basically, everyone.

(00:39:37):
When does it make sense to change your name? Windsurf just officially changed their entire company name to Windsurf from Codium. It was just a product. So, let me just ask you that. When does it make sense? It feels like a huge deal and a very challenging thing to do.

David Placek (00:39:48):
It is challenging. And the larger you are and the more customer base you have, it becomes a significant project. So the first thing is you have to make an argument that it's worth the change. That we're going to be better off by changing our name. So, there's a couple situations where you want to change your name. First one is let's focus first on startups. Startups get going early, they get into Y Combinator or something like that, they're raising money. And they just need a name. And although they know what they're doing, and that may change by 10 or 15 degrees, it's almost like, "We just got to have a name." And that is the absolute expression I hear from when a startup calls and says, "We want to change your name. We started off a year and a half ago. We just needed a name for the documents, and so we chose X." And it's not a very good name. So, that's example number one.

(00:40:53):
Number two is the company actually has pivoted. And so, the name that they have no longer really reflects who they are or who they're becoming, and which makes that name ineffective. And the third is that a company has merged and it is time now to create a new start and reflect to the marketplace that we're... We're new now, maybe bigger, but certainly we have more capabilities and we want you to know about it. And because of that, we're changing our to blank, which reflects those capabilities at some level.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:38):
I'm excited to have Andrew Luo joining us today. Andrew is CEO of OneSchema, one of our longtime podcast sponsors. Welcome, Andrew.

Andrew Luo (00:41:45):
Thanks for having me, Lenny. Great to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:47):
So, what is new with OneSchema? I know that you work with some of my favorite companies like Ramp and Vanta and Watershed. I heard you guys launched a new data intake product that automates the hours of manual work that teams spent importing, and mapping, and integrating CSV in Excel files.

Andrew Luo (00:42:03):
Yes. So, we just launched the 2.0 of OneSchema FileFeeds. We've rebuilt it from the ground up with AI. We saw so many customers coming to us with teams of data engineers that struggled with the manual work required to clean messy spreadsheets. FileFeeds 2.0 allows non-technical teams to automate the process of transforming CSV in Excel files with just a simple prompt. We support all of the trickiest file integrations, SFTP, S3, and even email.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:29):
I can tell you that if my team had to build integrations like this, how nice would it be to take this off our roadmap and instead use something like OneSchema.

Andrew Luo (00:42:37):
Absolutely, Lenny. We've heard so many horror stories of outages from even just a single bad record in transactions, employee files, purchase orders, you name it. Debugging these issues is often like finding a needle in a haystack. OneSchema stops any bad data from entering your system and automatically validates your files, generating error reports with the exact issues in all bad files.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:58):
I know that importing incorrect data can cause all kinds of pain for your customers and quickly lose their trust. Andrew, thank you so much for joining me. If you want to learn more, head on over to oneschema.co, That's oneschema.co.

(00:43:12):
I want to come back to this linguist piece, which I know is really unique to the way you guys operate, and it's so interesting. So you employed, you've said, over 250 linguists over the course of your business career. This linguist step, the way you described it is they're not coming up with names, they're more kind of like a filter for, "Here's all the names we've come up with. Here's the ones that are good linguistically." Is that right? Or is that team also suggesting names?

David Placek (00:43:35):
Yeah. Some of the people there, depending on the assignment, will actually help us create names, for sure. And so, we have linguists here. And in the network, we have linguists. And those linguists are contracts to us, not full-time employees. So, there's a little bit of both. But the preponderance of their work in our linguistic network is to evaluate names. Not only just does it mean something negative or positive, but are there cultural implications to it? Political implications? Or even things that a natural disaster that would've happened somewhere that no one here would know about. Even if we had, if.

(00:44:21):
This was in Italy, and there was a bridge or a flood that killed a lot of people. Someone that speaks Italian very well here, say at Berkeley University, but has lived here for 20 years, wouldn't know about that. And we don't want anything linguistically that would slow our clients down. And so, that's why we've invested in building this network. We have a woman that runs the network for it. So, it's not an insignificant facet of our business that we have to run and manage.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:52):
Is there a name you love that didn't pass the linguistic filter, that ended up being like, "Oh, shit. That's a really bad name in this culture"?

David Placek (00:45:00):
It happens frequently where we will find something that isn't really terrible but it's worrisome to us. It's interesting cultures like Australian or people in Australia, they have a lot of interesting expressions. And so, we do find things that this sounds like it's a certain kind of shrimp and things like that, and we eliminate those things. And then we find things that have sort of sexual connotations, we eliminate those.

(00:45:39):
I would say it happens every third or fourth project we'll find something that we will eliminate and never show the client.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:49):
And something you love and you're like, "Okay, I guess we can show that one"?

David Placek (00:45:52):
That's true. That happens. It does.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:55):
You also said this really interesting thing about how every letter of the alphabet has a vibrance in an experience. Can you give a few examples of that? I know you're not the person doing that work specifically, but just what are some letter feelings?

David Placek (00:46:11):
The work is from the linguist, but at this point, I'm pretty adept in it. So, let's look at... I'll start with the letter V because it is so illustrative of what this is about. V, from our research that we've done, is the most alive and vibrant sound in the English alphabet. And that's whether you were born in Rome or in Sausalito, California. So if you know that, if you know that as you go around the world, there are going to be some exceptions to it. It's going to have that vibrancy. Look at Corvette. They probably didn't know about V, but it's a perfect name for a car that's fast and has a big engine that roars. Think about Viagra, same idea. And there's been surprises to us. B, the sound of the letter B is one of the most reliable sounds in the English alphabet. That was one of our rationales, by the way, for Blackberry. Because that's another example of a client who thought we were... I mean, the founder actually said, "I thought the people at Lexicon were crazy," when they presented Blackberry.

(00:47:29):
And we said, "Well, let's stop and look at some of the assets here. First off, black color's technology. Yes, not everybody knows the word berry, but we have those two Bs." We talked about the nature of a compound. And all of a sudden, people at least lean forward to consider it as opposed to rejecting it too fast. So, those are just two examples. I mentioned Z in Azure, that's noisy letter. X is fast and crisp as a sound. And of course, there's semantic value to all of these letters, too. X is about innovation from aircraft to computers. And so, you have to look at the semantics of it and the sound symbol of it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:15):
This is so fascinating. I could listen to this stuff all day. Just thinking about Vercel with the V, that very aligns with what they're trying to do. Just very strong, opinionated way of working. And Guillermo, he feels like a V person.

David Placek (00:48:29):
He is. And there's an example of a group that had a lot of confidence, and what their product is is very innovative. And so, we had permission there to create something new because Vercel is a coin solution., right? But notice that we put some very simple, easy to process things together there. Or ver, in this case. So we have in vino veritas, truth in wine, things like that. You have verde, green. So, very familiar. And then their cel, like accelerate, something which is really what they do. They accelerate a client's performance. So, that was a relatively easy name for us to present and we were excited about for them to grasp.

(00:49:26):
By the way, that's known as processing fluency, which is when you think about how the brain processes information. We're told by a number of cognitive science that our brains are a little bit on the lazy side. We don't like complex things. And so, we really strive to make all of our solutions relatively easy for the brain to process. So it wants, it leans in towards them as opposed to, "I'm too busy. I'm walking past that." Names that are complicated, it's a liability. And we really avoid that. But Vercel, perfect fluency.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:13):
Okay, let's go back, actually, to the three steps. So we covered two, and it took us on a long tangent to dive into a lot of the stuff you shared with the second step, which you call invent. So, it's essentially the three steps are... Was it create? What would you call it? The step?

David Placek (00:50:26):
Yeah, it's identify. Invent.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:27):
Identify.

David Placek (00:50:29):
And I use the word invent with intention because it's more than creative. And then the final thing is implement. Now for us, we're not a design firm. We're really focused on brand names and the nomenclature that supports the name. But for us, implement is helping the client team, if they choose, for us to help them with the presentations as it goes up the chain. To help them write a longer rationale for why these names, if they're presenting three names to the president of their company or the CMO, why these names make a lot of sense, and to help them develop what we call prototypes. So we'll put the name on a baseball cap, on a T-shirt. We'll put the name in a mock-up ad in the Wall Street Journal. Something's very positive. Because of Procter & Gamble's new blank product. P&G shares, they gain 10% this year. So that executives can see that the lift that that name can have. That's our implementation phase for them.

(00:51:44):
And we also do consumer research or customer research at that stage, and we do that probably about 50% of the time on our projects where we're going out and we're really talking to their customers, and putting the names in a series of drills. Drills that make them not the marketing person for the day, but we're really making these customers feel that this is a new brand. And then, we're asking about expectations. We're seeing how these names fire their imagination. And that's the most important thing in research, not is the name popular, are they comfortable with it, does it fit to concept. If you're asking people is this fit to concept, you are inevitably always going to get a descriptive name.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:31):
You make such a good point about how you need to arm the people working with you with ammo to win over other folks internally. Because if the person working with you is on board and the name is bold and not an obvious winner, I could see it being important to be like, "Here's what you should all show them to help them see the story, and the mock-ups, and all of that."

David Placek (00:52:53):
Yes. And what's really important is to help their management see this in the context of the marketplace and their customers. This is a very human thing, but people want their boss to be happy. They want to be okay with their boss. And so they're thinking about, "I don't know if my boss would like this." He's more conservative or she's more conservative. We try in a very diplomatic way to say, "This has nothing, really, in the end to do with your boss. It has to do with the marketplace."

(00:53:27):
Well, that's easy for me to say because I'm not working at a P&G or an Intel, but we really try to give that advice for it because it is about being successful in the marketplace. And so first of all, we try to separate the clients that we work with. We really want to work with clients that play to win, that want to win, not just want to not lose in a marketplace. And so, we try to encourage our direct clients to lead the process to really say, if a manager or a CMO or a president says, "Look, we're the team that's going to execute on this and we believe in this. We can make this work," they usually rally around it. They usually do. But if you're just taking names up to a manager and saying, "What do you think?" There's a different outcome offered.

(00:54:28):
So, we like to be in that implementation phase because we have so much experience. And usually, credibility with people.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:37):
And you said that you come up with 3 to 4,000 names. That's the top of the funnel?

David Placek (00:54:41):
Yeah. And just to clarify that, it's ideas, directions. It's not-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:50):
Complete ready-to-ship names.

David Placek (00:54:51):
Yeah, not ready-to-ship names at all.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:53):
Got it.

David Placek (00:54:54):
This is a very inefficient process and a little chaotic. So in that list of 3,000 names is probably 250 potential diamonds that have to be fractured and examined.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:10):
I really want to see just a documentary of this process at some point. This is the closer we're going to get for now, but this is so interesting.

(00:55:17):
I want to ask about how you would approach this if you're just a startup that doesn't have the time or resource to do this. But before I do that, is there anything else around the process that you guys go through with clients that you think is important to share or they think might surprise people?

David Placek (00:55:30):
I think we've covered it. I do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:31):
Okay, great. Awesome. Okay, so most people listening to this, there's a lot of founders, a lot of PMs on product teams. They're working on a new feature, they're about to launch a product, they got accepted into YC and they're about to launch a product. Then they have, I don't know, let's say they have a couple of weeks. We've got to come up with a name. What should they do?

David Placek (00:55:50):
So the first thing I do is to say, okay, let's forget about developing the name for right now. And I will have them, and I think this is a good exercise for anybody. We do it here internally when we think about our business. So I say, just... Because most of this now, because of COVID, is on video. And I will say, "Just draw a shape of a diamond on a piece of paper in front of you." And I said, "On the top of that diamond, put the word win. How do you define winning is really it?" I said, "Now on that other next corner of the diamond, what do you have to win? Write that down. On the bottom, what do you need to win? And then on that final angle on the left-hand side, what do you have to say to win?" Then I said, "Now, let's go all the way to that final thing of what do you have to say to win."

(00:56:49):
And that's where you just get people thinking about, "Well, what we really have here is... And we're better than this." And then I'll just say, "Okay. Now, what you want to take that this really should be about experience and behavior. How do you want to behave in the marketplace? How do you want the marketplace to behave towards you? And what kind of experience are you creating?" And then they'll start talking a little bit. I'll say, "Now, you just need to probe on that. You need to keep going. You need to look at metaphors because this is about experience." And I'll just give them some of our examples that we've talked about, "Blackberry, it says to the marketplace, they're not like the other guys." Think of something like Google versus Infoseek, right? Google is an experience. Google says, "I don't know what these guys are going to do, but it's not this practical mundane Infoseek." And that's what attracts people.

(00:57:54):
And so I'll do a little coaching like that, and then that usually kind of sets them free. And they're now thinking about it not as a word, which has maybe limited value, but as creating an experience which has the potential for unlimited value.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:12):
Okay. So, let me try to reflect this back for folks. So the advice is draw triangle. So, you're coming up with a name. Draw triangle. At the top, win. At the bottom-left, was it how do you win?

David Placek (00:58:25):
Yeah. So, the diamond is two triangles.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:27):
Oh, diamond. Okay, I see. I have triangle in my mind.

David Placek (00:58:28):
I got you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:30):
Okay, got it. Diamond. Great.

David Placek (00:58:31):
And so on that next angle there on the right side is, what do you have to win already? Right? Because they wouldn't be either in a Y Combinator or getting some seed money if they didn't have something to win. And often, people, startups don't appreciate how much they actually do have to win because they're so busy and so stressed on what they're doing. And then, what do they need to win? And then finally, what do you need to say? And then back up to defining what is winning to us? Which, by the way, we start with that question usually on an assignment that we've been awarded. And if we're in a room with five people, all five people have a different definition of what... Their definition of that company winning. And that's good to sort that out because we can move down different avenues from a creative standpoint.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:31):
Let's just make sure people have these phrases because this is awesome. And I imagine many people are going to be taking notes and like, "Cool. I'm going to do this." I hope so say the four points of the diamond again just so folks can write it all down.

David Placek (00:59:42):
At the top of the diamond is just the word win, and underneath that is how do we define winning for us as a company. And that can start off being simple, like we want to be the dominant player here. But you really have to work at that. What does that really mean, right? The second on that right-hand tip there of the diamond is what do we have to win? What are we doing now that makes us a winner? Then we go down to the bottom of the diamond, and it's what do we need to win? There could be technical things there. People talk about talent and resources. Often there, they'll say, "We need a good name." We always correct that. It's not the good name, it's the right name.

(01:00:28):
And then finally is what do we need to say? And that's where I say, that's where you want to spend some time in really thinking about all the things you need to say, that you can say or you would even like to say, which maybe right now you can't say. But you want to a name that actually is going to have the flexibility as to when you can say that, it still works. And that gets them into behavior and experience. And that usually launches a really a good discussion with founders internally.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:03):
When you say you have to win though, what you're thinking about there is what is it that you have that will help you win? And then what is it you need to have this win?

David Placek (01:01:10):
Yes, that's right. And all companies are in that same situation. They have a bunch of stuff, but they need... A P&G might say, "We need a good distributor."

(01:01:19):
"Okay. All right, we'll put that on the list."

(01:01:24):
And then you might say, "Well, we need in..." When it gets to what do we have to say, we have to say the right things so that a distributor is interested in us. And then you go down an avenue there. Well, what is that? And if you work at it, this is not a one-hour exercise, it may be an exercise repeated over the next 4 or 5 days.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:49):
Okay. So, you have this diamond. And then the idea is just sit and put names down in a Google Doc, let's say.

David Placek (01:01:55):
Yeah. And then you start. But there is this... And maybe, it's naivete. I guess, that's probably the best word for this is that, because I do hear this all of the time. "Hey, we've worked at this, we got a list of 200 names, but we don't think there's something there."

(01:02:19):
And I'll say, "Well, 200 names is not enough. Get to 1,000, 1,500 names and directions. Don't evaluate them. Just generate names, and directions, and ideas, and then have a meeting. And don't evaluate but speculate." What could we do with this name? What's the potential here? There's a lot of overevaluation in our industry. It makes sense. We survive as humans because we figure out what's wrong with this picture. If I want to cross the street, is it safe to cross the street? What's going on? Those kinds of things. You have to counter that. You have to say, "Let's just suspend judgment for a while. And let's do an exercise here where we take these 10 names that we think might work and what are we going to do with it." Because it's how you execute.

(01:03:21):
Going back to windsurf, as we showed them pictures of people windsurfing and waves and things, if they said, "Ah, that just doesn't work for us at all. I'm very uncomfortable with." Well, then it's not their name. But they leaned into it, "Okay, I can see this. It's easy for us to execute. It's dynamic, it's different." So, that's why we build these prototypes for people. And that's what... I think the best advice I can give to whether it's a startup or someone starting a new cookie company, is it's not just a list of 200 names. It's 10 or 15 lists of 200 names. And it's thinking about what do we have to say here? What behavior? How do we want people to feel in the marketplace about us? I imagine with Google, people felt relief that it wasn't a descriptive name. That there was something new out there in the marketplace.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:20):
Yeah. Infoseek, that's such a descriptive name now that I think about it.

David Placek (01:04:23):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:24):
Okay, so one more question along these lines. So say, you have a list of let's say 2,000 or 1,000 names. There's this tension between choosing something... Like, as a person that is doing them themselves. Your advice is choose something bold, not something descriptive. You won't know it when you see it. Very hard to do, obviously, when you're doing it by yourself. And you just advise for not losing sight of that piece. Just throwing out things that feel too scary, finding a name that's actually bold as you suggest.

David Placek (01:04:55):
First off, we disappear... Human psychology, humans only pay attention to what is new or what is different, I should say. So if you're looking at shoes and they're all black, black, black, black, and then the next pair of shoes is red, that's the first thing you focus on. And so, that usually gives people permission. They'll say, "Okay, I get that." So, look for what is really different between the names that you have on your list, but also what's different from what's out in the marketplace. Then you get a client like Microsoft saying, "Azure is different. There's going to be a lot of cloud stuff and..." There's a relevant point there, Azure is blue. And so, there's a slight logical connection that I think gave them more permission to move forward with it, frankly. But listen, this is not an easy task. I mean, that's why we're in this business, and why I felt we should be specialized because if you start doing design and/or advertising or other things, you can't have the intellectual engine.

(01:06:16):
You can't acquire the intellectual engine that we have. So I know it's difficult, but it can be done, and you just have to give yourself some time. But stop evaluating. Suspend judgment and speculate. That's my number one advice to people trying to do this on their own. Now, how can you get help? You can talk to your employees, but it's not so much, "What do you think of this name?" It's, "What do you think this name could do for us?" That's a much better question. If you go out and talk to friends who don't work for your company, there's a fun drill that I suggest. I said, "Listen, go out to them and say..." They'll know what you're doing. And say, "You know what? We just have a new competitor and their name is blank. What do you think about that?"

(01:07:10):
What happens there is you're not asking them to give you an opinion to evaluate a name. You're asking them then what does that name do for you? The information you're getting is that name, they're telling you what that name does for them, how it helps them to imagine, which is a fundamental role of any name. Slight tangent, but I'm going to go to our kind of research. We do mostly quantitative research now, but for years, we did qualitative work. And we still do. But what we found in, we were always looking for the...

(01:07:49):
I'll set it this way. We were always looking for this answer from consumers. If a consumer said, "I don't really know much about that new product, but I know that they're not like the other guys." That's when we knew we had a good name because they were... Now what happened there? I mean, the technical term that we use is that name will create a predisposition to consider this product because they're not like the other guys, as opposed to, "I already have something like that. I'm busy. I don't need another one of those things. I need something new and different, and hopefully better."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:30):
That's awesome. That's a good reminder. There's a quote that I found of yours that's exactly along these lines, "If your team is comfortable with the name, chances are you don't have the name yet."

David Placek (01:08:38):
Yes. And by the way, the opposite of that is we look for polarization. We look for tension in a team about arguing about these things, because we think that polarization is a sign of strength in the word. And interesting story, the person who taught me that, honestly, was Andy Grove over the Pentium name, because... And I learned a lot from him. I always say this, I just was very fortunate to work with him on Pentium, and Xeon, and a few other things. But when we went to an executive committee to present Pentium... And by the way, internally, one of the names that... And makes sense here, descriptive, bunch of engineers, ProChip. "Hey, it's professional, it's premium, and it's chipped. So, it should be Prochip." So Andy had me give a presentation about the strengths of this thing, and he said, "Now, let me tell you why I think this is the right name."

(01:09:56):
He said, "Because I see the polarization here in it amongst people. There's this ProChip over here, there's the Pentium thing." He said, "That tells me there's energy for Pentium here." And he said, "That's why I think we should go with it." And I've never forgotten that. And so, we do look for that. And when we tell that story, people say, "You're right. There is... I mean, we are arguing about this, and there is an intensity with the name." And that's what you want. You don't want to go out in the marketplace, into this very competitive marketplace, regardless of the category, with something that doesn't have a level of boldness or intensity.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:33):
That was an amazing story. Just again, so kind of a tip here is if half of your team or, I don't know, some percent of your team hates it, some percent of your team loves it, that's a good sign.

David Placek (01:10:43):
Yeah, it is. It is. Look for that polarization. That's what we look for.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:47):
I also love this tip of asking people if, "Hey, our competitor just launched. They're called Windsurf." How your team reacts? If they're just like, "Oh, wow, that's a great name. I'm interested in that product." That's what you want to look for?

David Placek (01:10:59):
Yes, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:02):
How important is the .com for the name you come up with? I imagine it's really hard to get these days. Just what do you think about domain name when you think about naming?

David Placek (01:11:10):
I am so glad you asked this question because at this point, it doesn't really matter at all. The .com or URL address has become an area code. And whether you're in 415 or 615, it doesn't really matter to people. And now with AI, SEO is going to be less important. And so, I just think the principle in play here is you got to get the right name first. And then if you can get the .com, sure, go ahead. But if you can't, there's ways around that. You can put a prefix in front of it or a little word in front of it or after it, or you go to .ai or something like that. But the principle in play is let's get the right name first.

(01:12:02):
For those who really... And there are people who really get hung up on the .com, they tend to older by, the way. And have, in their mind, sort of the hotness of the internet and having a .com, which did make a difference 25 years ago. But it's 25 years now or 30, right? The good news is because they're less valuable, you can typically buy a URL if you negotiate the right way and have time for 15, 20, 25, $30,000. And we say, "Hey, if you can do that, have fun. I'd put the $30,000 into market."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:42):
Awesome. That's reassuring. I imagine many founders are just like, "God dammit, there's no names available anymore." Let me zoom out and just ask you this question as a, maybe, a closing thought to our conversation.

(01:12:56):
Say you were just in an elevator ride with someone, and I'm sure this happens to you of just like, "Hey, David, I got to come up with that name. What's your biggest tip for coming up with a great name?" What would your answer be?

David Placek (01:13:06):
I'd go back to forget about the word, think about behavior and experience. And then the second thing from just a creative help, I'm a big believer in synchronicity. And we try to force synchronicity here, and I'll give you a couple examples of that. But this idea of connecting dots, two unrelated ideas together. And so I'll say, "Look, if someone says we make sailboats and I'm trying to..." I'm here in Sausalito. I guess, that's why I thought about that. And I am trying to create a new name for my company that builds sailboats.

(01:13:49):
I would say forget about sailboats. I would go and pick out some magazines about hunting or flying magazines. And I would just look through those, get a notepad out, and put out words that you like. Things, expressions that you like. And then that synchronicity, I said, "I would bet you $5 that out of those two magazines, you will get a word that you never would've thought of, but somehow it would relate to sailing."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:25):
That connects very much to your story of how you have these different teams, and the teams that end up coming up with a winning name are the ones thinking about a very different version of that product.

David Placek (01:14:35):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:36):
So interesting. Okay. David, this was everything I was hoping it'd be. I feel like we're going to help so many people. Is there anything that we haven't covered or that you want to leave listeners with as a final nugget or piece of advice or story before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

David Placek (01:14:55):
I'm going to emphasize one point, I think, which is that I really would like the listeners to really begin to think about how valuable a brand name can be. That you're not just looking for a word, you're looking for this experience. And if you get it right, not just a good name but the right name, the value is almost unlimited. And so give yourself some time, give yourself a budget, give yourself the right resources to do that. Second thing is we try to really be helpful here, and so I am always happy to talk to people about where they are in a process and if we can help, or just give them a little bit of advice. And we schedule, we call them office hours here. We're judicious about it, but we are open to that. It's just playing a long-term game, so I'd like to leave that with the viewers also.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:51):
We're about to book out your office hours. I love that offer. I think a lot of people are going to take advantage of that. That is super cool.

(01:15:58):
David, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got five questions for you. Are you ready?

David Placek (01:16:03):
Yes, I'm ready.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:05):
There we go. What are 2 or 3 books that you find yourself recommending most to other people?

David Placek (01:16:09):
There's a book called Resilience, which was written by a former Navy SEAL that... And it's not about combat, it's just a tiny bit about being a SEAL. But it is about overcoming things and it's about tenacity. And I think everybody in the world, we all have challenges and things. And I do recommend that to people.

(01:16:31):
Second book is Andrew Roberts latest book on Winston Churchill. Winston Churchill is, really, one of my heroes. He was one of the most unusual, provocative statesmen/politicians of the 20th century. And here's another person that talked about tenacity, and ups and downs, and stick with it. And so, I do like to recommend that. Some people just tipped their head and said, "Ah, I don't know." It seems like maybe a boring book, but those are two books that I [inaudible 01:17:02].

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:02):
Who would ever say that Churchill's story is boring? That's absurd.

David Placek (01:17:07):
I think so. I agree. I agree It's absurd, yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:11):
He's so fascinating. There's a recent documentary, I think, that really showed me the character. Incredible.

(01:17:18):
Okay. What's a recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

David Placek (01:17:20):
For me, it's the Yellowstone series. We're very fortunate as a family, we have some property in Montana. And-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:29):
Oh, wow. You're living the life.

David Placek (01:17:31):
Yeah, very... Listen, I can't tell you how fortunate I am. And I bought this property 28 years ago, so it was a lot cheaper then.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:31):
Wow.

David Placek (01:17:40):
In a snowstorm, and it just felt right. But I think particularly the 1883, the precursor to Yellowstone.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:48):
I was going to ask if you saw that because that was incredible.

David Placek (01:17:50):
Yes. And then the after one, 1923, which is the post-war. 1883 really gives people a sense of what it took by those early Americans to build a life in a place like... A beautiful place but a hard, tough place like Montana. And it's just phenomenal. The person producing and writing those things is incredibly talented. Taylor Sheridan, I think, is his name.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:19):
I love that in the story, Montana was the easy route almost from the journey they want on.

David Placek (01:18:24):
That's right. It's very, very true, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:26):
Oh, man. Yeah, you almost don't even need to watch Yellowstone. Just starting with 1883 totally works.

David Placek (01:18:32):
Yeah. In fact, I recommend people. I say there's three. But if you really want the truth about the American West, it's 1883.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:40):
Yeah. I suggested that on this podcast a bunch, actually. So, I love that. That's where you went.

(01:18:45):
Next question, do you have a favorite product that you have recently discovered that you really love? Maybe one you named, maybe not.

David Placek (01:18:51):
I didn't name it, although it's got a very good name to it. Our whole family, I have two daughters and my wife, we're all fly fishermen, and last summer I really... I bought this for myself, but I gave it to my wife. It was one of those things that was present for her, but I knew I was going to use it more. And it's a Hardy. It's an old British fly rod, but it's a beautiful rod. It's just perfect for the big rivers of Montana. So, that's my favorite purchase.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:20):
That's the first fly-fishing rod of the podcast. Excellent choice.

(01:19:24):
Next question, do you have a favorite life motto that you often find yourself coming back to, sharing with friends or family?

David Placek (01:19:31):
I do. And it's a little longer, so I wrote it. I have it written here somewhere, but it's the quote from T.E. Lawrence, Lawrence of Arabia, here. And if I can find it, I should be. I think it's a wonderful quote, so I think hopefully your viewers will like this. Here's what he said. He said that, "All men dream, but not equally. Those who dream by night in the dusty recesses of their minds wake in the day to find that it was vanity, but the dreamers of the day are dangerous men for they may act on their dreams with open eyes to make them possible."

(01:20:14):
I read that years ago and it just hit me pretty hard, so yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:21):
That is an amazing quote. It makes me think about the quote about the man in the arena.

David Placek (01:20:25):
Yes. Yeah, it's same idea. It's just a little different. And I also think Lawrence of Arabia is a fascinating person, what he did. So, inspiring in some ways.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:38):
An amazing movie.

(01:20:40):
Okay, final question. Let me just try this. Is there a name that you didn't name that you're just like, "Wow, that was an amazing name. I wish I had come up with that name"?

David Placek (01:20:49):
I'll tell you there is one name, and it's DreamWorks. I think it's a wonderful name, and it's somewhat ironic that the entertainment industry in general has pretty mundane names. You have all of these talented people. And yet when you look at the names of production studios, movie houses, Comcast, things like that, it's very mundane. But here's DreamWorks, just like Sonos, check all the boxes. Compound dream. You expect something great from DreamWorks. They've created an experience, the experience of dreaming in a movie. I think it's a wonderful name. I wish I'd done it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:39):
That's such a cool answer. David, thank you so much for doing this. This was incredible. I learned a ton as I imagined. I feel like a lot of people are going to have a much easier time thinking about approaching this topic.

David Placek (01:21:50):
Well, I certainly hope so. I do. It's been very, very enjoyable, very thoughtful, and I have nothing but or respect for the way you do this and the talent that you have. So, very fortunate that we've come together. And we live in the same place, so maybe we can get together for a cup of coffee or something.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:10):
We do. Northern California for the win. Thank you so much for being here.

David Placek (01:22:14):
You're very welcome.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:16):
Bye everyone.

David Placek (01:22:17):
Take care.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:19):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Evan LaPointe (00:00:00):
The brain is like a college campus that has different departments in it. Most people rely on their history department way too much. If you instead send things to the more experimental, open-minded science department, the more creative art department, you get dramatically better answers.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:13):
I know you have a bunch of awesome advice on becoming more influential.

Evan LaPointe (00:00:16):
It's almost like you're playing Elden Ring or some video game. The starting point is to choose your character. Hey, I'm the devil's advocate approach, or I'm the break it and see if it still stands after I hit it really hard with a sledgehammer kind of guy, your personality kind of has a natural fit.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:30):
How do we create better relationships within our teams?

Evan LaPointe (00:00:33):
It's critical to ask what kind of experience am I? Not how good am I at my job, how much do I know, how critical am I to this process, but am I a miserable experience? If the answer is yes, don't worry too much about the other pieces yet. You got to fix that first.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:48):
I'm really excited for this episode. I think it's going to be unlike any other conversation I've had on this podcast.

Evan LaPointe (00:00:52):
Then here's the surprise ending.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:58):
Today, my guest is Evan LaPointe. Evan is the founder of CORE Sciences, which teaches companies and individuals how our brains actually work, and through that lens, how to more effectively work with other people on teams, how to build better products, how to grow your business, and how to make smarter and faster decisions. Evan is a four-time founder, including founding a company called Satellite, which is the fourth largest analytics product on the internet today, which was acquired by Adobe where he later ran product strategy and innovation for Adobe's digital business.

(00:01:31):
In our conversation, Evan shares a simple way to understand how our brains work, and through that framework, how we can get better at vision work, influence, running meetings, having more focus and building better and more productive relationships with our colleagues. This conversation is a beautiful mix of science, theory, and also, a ton of very actionable and concrete things you can do to be more effective in your work. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Evan LaPointe. Evan, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Evan LaPointe (00:02:16):
Thanks very much for having me. I'm excited to share some stuff with people.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:19):
I am really excited for this episode because one, I think it's going to be unlike any other conversation I've had on this podcast. Two, I think it's going to really stretch our brains as we learn about how the brain works. Three, I think it's really going to make an impact on how people work and how they relate to other people and work with other people. I thought it'd be great to start by laying a little bit of foundation for people to get a sense of just what they need to understand about how the brain works before we get into how we can actually apply some of the stuff. Could you just share some of the stuff that is really important for us to know about how the brain works?

Evan LaPointe (00:02:53):
The brain is like a big galaxy. There's a National Geographic quote that we throw up in all of our programs that when we train teams, for example, that says the brain is more complex than any known structure in the universe. It's easy to read a sentence like that and just run straight away from the problem. I think that's important for people to not run away from this problem but more run toward it. It's our job to translate the complexity of the brain into really simple, straightforward systems that you can remember. The three or four main systems to stack on top of each other like layers, start with the fact that the brain has systems. I think of it like the brain is like a college campus that has different departments in it, and your brain has a science department responsible for open-minded experimentation.

(00:03:39):
It has an art department in it responsible for creative boundless thinking. It has a history department designed for looking stuff up that you already know. If you think about sending your thoughts to the right department on the campus or just different departments, you're going to get super different responses back from your brain. Where we're stuck largely is most people rely on their history department way too much. That's because the brain is actually built to conserve energy, and that's the lowest energy form of generating an answer to a question that the brain can pull off. If you instead send things to the more experimental, open-minded science department, the more creative art department, the humanities department of your compassion, et cetera, you get totally different answers. Certainly, if you ever build products as a company or offer services, those departments are going to give you dramatically better answers than the reference material just in your history department.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:35):
This episode is brought to you by Webflow. We're all friends here, so let's be real for a second. We all know that your website shouldn't be a static asset, it should be a dynamic part of your strategy that drives conversions, that's business 101. Here's a number for you, 54% of leaders say web updates take too long. That's over half of you listening right now. That's where Webflow comes in. Their visual-first platform allows you to build, launch, and optimize webpages fast. That means you can set ambitious business goals and your site can rise to the challenge. Learn how teams like Dropbox, IDEO and Orange Theory. Trust Webflow to achieve their most ambitious goals today at webflow.com.

(00:05:21):
This episode is brought to you by Explo, a game-changer for customer-facing analytics and data reporting. Are your users craving more dashboards, reports and analytics within your product? Are you tired of trying to build it yourself? As a product leader, you probably have these requests in your roadmap, but the struggle to prioritize them is real. Building analytics from scratch can be time-consuming, expensive and a really challenging process, enter Explo. Explo is a fully white-labeled embedded analytics solution designed entirely with your user in mind. Getting started is easy. Explo to any relational database or warehouse, and with its low- code functionality, you can build and style dashboards in minutes. Once you're ready, simply embed the dashboard or report into your application with a tiny code snippet. The best part, your end users can use Explo's AI features for their own report and dashboard generation, eliminating customer data requests for your support team. Build and embed a fully white-labeled analytics experience in days. Try it for free at explo.co/lenny. That's E-X-P-L-O, dot, C-O, slash, Lenny.

Evan LaPointe (00:06:34):
That's the first thing is that the brain has these departments and systems in it and it also has pathways. The pathways thing is really important to understand because there's a likelihood that thought will go down certain pathways in each of our brains. Some of that has to do with personality, which predisposes us to have a higher-anxiety or a lower-anxiety response or a higher-creativity or lower-creativity response. You can also be more intentional with these pathways, and that's a big component of self-awareness is to know what are my preferences and then am I actually letting those preferences take over in the situation or might be more intentional steering down the pathways to activate these best regions and systems of the brain. The simplest way to keep track of the systems is there's three, there's three really big ones.

(00:07:25):
There probably are more than three that you can learn about, but the ones we want to have everybody learn about are your safety system, your reward system, and your purpose system. Out of those three, two of them sound really real and one of them sounds like fantasy, to most people. The safety system is pretty obvious to most people. When we're scared, afraid, uncertain, we have doubt, we're resentful, angry, apathetic, etc. This system of our brain is trying to restore our standing in the universe, like I need to get out of this stress, out of this danger, out of this anger, etc. you have an objective that, that part of your brain, that system sets, and you go chase that objective, like I want to get safe. If you're in a meeting, a practical everyday situation, and you're exposed to a statement that makes you feel unsafe, your objective now actually isn't to contribute to the meeting productively anymore.

(00:08:19):
Your brain's objective is to get back to safety. The same thing of rewards that if somebody says you'll get something, if you do this, which is the opposite of safety, that if you don't do this, something bad will happen, then yeah, your brain gets into this pursuit, desire state, which seems great and can be great in a lot of cases, but also, can be pretty narrow. When you hear people say, "That's not my job." That's actually the reward system speaking, saying, "I get rewarded for the things in this list and this thing that you're talking about is not on my reward list and I therefore am not interested in it." I have an easier time pushing away from it because the reward system of the brain is more transactional in a conceptual way. Then you get to this vague and ridiculous sounding purpose system.

(00:09:08):
Until you realize what purpose is, and we've all felt it, if you understand the impact of the thing that you're doing and you understand and care about the people that are impacted by your actions, those are the conditions for purpose, and that can be really big. Like curing cancer, I understand the impact on the people, that's huge. It can also be like I'm writing an email, I understand the impact of this email and the people affected by it. You can feel purpose at this tiny little grain of sand level of your life, not just at the whole beach and shoreline level, and we teach people that, that's super important. That's the foundational layer. Then on top of that, there are a few layers that have to do with your focus because the brain can dramatically shift focus from open mindedness to deep, deep focus.

(00:09:55):
Then there's the final layer of ability, which is less science- y, less neuroscience, and more just practical that your ability is regulated by how much reality you know, like do you have the context for the decision or you just know you're supposed to make the decision? People with context have higher ability than people without. The same thing with imagination and logic that if you push those boundaries in your mind further, your ability increases almost disproportionately to how much you've pushed, so these layers just stack on. I think it's approachable, it's simple. It's like, we can all understand, is my safety reward or purpose system active right now? What is my level of focus? What level of connection with reality, reason and imagination do I have right now? Then there's your output as a human or as a team, and all these things are like levers we can pull, which is super fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:49):
Amazing. Just to summarize here, so we have these three systems, safety, reward, purpose, then our level of focus, and then there's the ability, are we able to actually do the job? Those are the puzzle pieces.

Evan LaPointe (00:11:02):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:03):
Where I want to take this is when we work with other people, working with other people is very hard, and some of the struggles people have at work in building product, in running a company and building teams, hiring, all these things, is they often get really frustrated by the way other people operate. Some people want to just start building a thing, some people want to really think about it. Some people are very customer qualitative, anecdote focused, some people are very metrics focused. Some people are very collaborative, want to work in groups, some people are very, I want to work alone. Just first of all, we just talked about here's how the brain works and then there's this idea of people work very differently. Can you just talk a bit about just this idea of why people behave so differently in an effort to help us learn to work better with people that are just like, "Oh, that's so strange. This person wants to just their billing.

Evan LaPointe (00:12:02):
Maybe one of the worst pieces of propaganda that people walk around with in their minds is the phrase we're more similar than we are different. My theory on why we walk around with that phrase or why we're told that phrase, if we zoom in on the situations where we hear that is that we have this theory, it's easier to get along with people that are like us. If we fantasize that this person is like me, then I might get along with them better. When in fact, we should probably be building the muscle that we have the capacity to get along with people that are extremely different than we are. That fourth piece that we talk about in our coursework when we train managers, for example, is personality. We talk about your brain systems, your brain focus, your brain's ability, which sort of paints the picture that humans might be similar to each other and we can activate these things kind of unilaterally.

(00:12:54):
Then we have to drop this bomb at the end, which is, and here's why that doesn't work consistently across different types of people. I know you took our profile, our big five-based profile, and that's just one tool out of many that can help a person understand where on these various spectrum of personality traits and motivations they sit. We often use the metaphor in our training of culinary school that we're more culinary school for human performance instead of cooking class. That helps people conceptualize that I'm used to going to cooking classes in my training, here's how to do a one-on-one, here's how to offer feedback, here's a framework for generating product ideas through to prioritization and backlog. We're like, "Well, what's going on beneath the surface? What are the underlying principles and forces at work that all the stuff that comes to life on the surface really originates from?"

(00:13:50):
In this culinary school metaphor, one of the things that's really important for a chef is to actually understand what are my preferences? What do I like to eat? Because if I don't know what I like, then I assume everybody else likes what I like, then I'm not going to be a very dynamic chef. I'm going to be like, "Everybody likes lots of salt and acidity in their dishes." Then you're going to go to Germany and open a restaurant and be like, "That is absolutely not what we're looking for in this cuisine." Self-awareness is a really important step, not just of culinary school, but for everybody. You sit somewhere on a spectrum, your brain has these pathways and these traffic cops directing traffic in your mind. You have to start with square one with yourself and understand, am I prone to try to say things politely, and so that they're received well? Or am I prone to be super blunt and direct and maybe even mean and harsh? Am I prone to sit back in conversations and let things happen, or am I prone to take over?

(00:14:48):
Am I prone to go to intellectual abstract thinking and try to deconstruct ideas or am I prone to stay very pragmatic? If you don't know who you are and you think that the universe resembles you, then you're going to get super lost in that broader spectrum. I think the big five, I mean there's a bunch of models. You have Myers-Briggs, disk, etc. They're just all imperfect ways of measuring personality, but also, useful despite the fact that they're imperfect and especially useful if you take a growth mentality instead of a justification mentality to reading them. If you say, "okay, I'm low in politeness, I'm super direct." Your justification mentality of that would be like, "Yeah, damn right. I'm awesome that everybody knows what I really mean and how I really feel.' Versus the growth thing, which is like, well, maybe there are situations where I can try a little harder than 0% to phrase things in a way that if we work backwards from the outcome, we want to choose our actions right now, would these actions so direct actually increase or reduce the probability of that outcome?

(00:15:54):
That's when we become more dynamic chefs, more dynamic people. Personality is a broad spectrum and self-awareness is the starting point for the whole thing. The big five model gives you a really good list of attributes to scan yourself through, and then you should be making a game plan for how to do that. Then you can turn your attention to the network of humans you're a part of and say, "Okay, well in what ways, because I'm me, am I so different than these other minds?" How can we create a mesh mentality where thought shifts among the group to fit most naturally? In product work, especially, whether you're a founder, entrepreneur, thinking about product at that level and your team at that level, or you're in the thick of product work pushing your mind and other people's minds to get this right, then you're going to benefit a lot from understanding these traits and these differences.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:48):
I think the big unlock here for a lot of people is that the reason you are struggling, getting something done, working with someone, being successful at your company, with your manager, with a partner in your team, is they have a very different way of their brain operating, and so they think in a very different way, they react in different ways. You may think the entire world thinks the way you do, but they don't, and these tests help you see that. To make this super concrete for people, are there a couple of examples or wins you often find that you can share of just ways to use this to become better in your job, say this week? Whether with meetings or convincing someone of something, anything along these lines?

Evan LaPointe (00:17:28):
I think one more layer would be helpful to this, especially if you're a leader or a manager, which is the business world isn't just hand-to-hand combat between a bunch of individuals on the blank matrix loading screen. You're actually in a habitat as a company and your team is like a habitat. I think of companies and teams, almost like little terrariums that we're inside of, and is this terrarium set up with sand and a heat lamp and we're a bunch of frogs, like we're going to turn into frog bacon, simply because we're in this habitat? A lot of it is you want to actually create a habitat or an environment that's predisposed to high-functioning thinking and high-functioning interaction between people.

(00:18:15):
Because if the habitat is working against all of you to begin with, then all the hand-to-hand combat that's going to show up is actually largely a function of you just being in this heat lamp, dry, devoid of life, devoid of productive ways to grapple. That's where a lot of teams and companies sit today, especially more established teams. They've either lost their way in the habitat and haven't really set the scene for good, kind of thinking and interaction, or they just never had that to begin with. Some of this stuff, like when you've talked to a couple of other people in the past, your conversation, the Canva conversation, the Figma conversation both come to mind as like it is super obvious the energy that has gone into the habitat to predispose people to high function.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:09):
You're referring to in my interviews with the folks from Figma and Canva.

Evan LaPointe (00:19:13):
Exactly right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:14):
I see. Oh, say more about that mean.

Evan LaPointe (00:19:17):
You think about the, even in the Canva context of coaches instead of managers. I love this, let me back up for just a second. There's a great quote, I think Dan Pink has summarized the problem better than anybody when he said, "There's a mismatch between what science knows and what business does." In that gap, it says, "Well, what is it that business is doing that science knows better?" You can almost look at this as an equation of science knows minus what your business does equals dysfunction. That is a pretty crystal-clear thing. If you take this managers versus coaches, they're taking intuitively, I think. I don't know if they're neuroscientists, but intuitively, I think a lot of great founders understand humans don't work a certain way, and this whole paradigm of managers seems to be failing a lot. This whole paradigm, like mantra, fail faster. Seems to be failing a lot, and mission statements seem to fail a lot.

(00:20:22):
You look at this, science knows business does as a lens to examine yourself through and stuff that fails very often is worth a look. When you look at, okay, do we really want managers, because that seems to fail a lot? Or is there a paradigm that works better for human beings that activates more human potential and hit the nail on the head? If you do the math of Canva, what science knows versus what Canva does, whether they know they're doing it scientifically right or not, the math equals zero. There's no difference between what science knows and what business does in that case. Also, the Figma conversation, I loved the phrase from that conversation, imagination is a hypothesis generation engine, I think is what the word was.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:13):
Oh, the Dylan. Yeah, the chat with Dylan.

Evan LaPointe (00:21:14):
I loved that idea. Because when we talk about imagination as a part of ability, we talk about imagination's capacity to generate alternatives for you, that's its purpose. It's not just to doodle in the margins in the middle of boring meetings. That's part of it, it's a side benefit. When you look at imagination's purpose, if you have a great imagination, you always have a lot of choices in life. Mickey Mouse was a choice. It was like a new alternative way to send messages through a talking mouse. Like, that's okay, that's interesting. The other part of the hypothesis generation engine that we focus a lot on is it's not just the ability to generate choices and hypotheses, but it's also the ability to load them into your Oculus headset and walk around a world in which that choice already has been executed. That's akin to vision in a sense that do you have a really good ability to load that one branch of this imaginative tree, this one hypothesis into a simulation and then explore what the world looks like with this in place?

(00:22:23):
If you look at this coaching thing, it's going on at Canva instead of managing, you load that in the simulator and you're like, "Boy, this looks pretty nice. This is higher-performance thing." With advocacy instead of regulation, we have growth. There's a whole bunch of aspects that are inherent in that approach where science, and if you ask a neuroscientist, would that work better? They'd be like, "Oh, hell, yeah. That would work way better." Because it activates this in the brain, it reduces cortisol, it does all these things that science knows work much better. There's a whole list of stuff from very deep to very tactical of things we can do differently that reduce the gap between what you're doing and what science knows and the dysfunction just shrinks and shrinks and shrinks as you do those things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:16):
Are there things that you've found people can change in the way they work based on the way the brain operates, whether it's run better meetings, be better influence? What are some things people can try to do this week that will make them more successful at their work or working with colleagues?

Evan LaPointe (00:23:32):
In the list of what science knows and what business does, everything is in there. Culture is in there, meetings are in there, goals are in there, deadlines are in there, team dynamics, all this stuff is in there. We'll probably just pick a few things out of that very long list. Meetings are a good one. Meetings, I forget what the statistic is, but it's some insane 12-figure amount of, no, not 12, nine-figure, no, 12-figure, hundreds of billions' amount of waste is caught in meetings. We spend gazillions of dollars on waste of time and meetings. For us, like in our programs, the average delta is between 10 and 20%. People save anywhere from a full half of a day to a full day per week of work as a result of just cleaning up the way they're using meetings. Some of that is just the design of meetings, like treat meetings like a product and treat them workflows that should be organized and used intentionally, but a lot of it is inside the meeting, like what's the tactic?

(00:24:38):
Here's something super tactical, which is, meetings, generally speaking, are a combination of priming and decision making, if you look at meetings through the lens of the phases that they are. A lot of meetings skip the priming step altogether. They launched directly into decision making. It would be safe to skip the priming step if we began the meeting under the assumption that everybody here is on the same page, has the same information, and generally speaking, intends for the same outcome. I think that's a ludicrous assumption for most meetings, and yet most people are actually shocked to find out that we're not on the same page even though we literally never have been, and as long as you're on day two plus of working together. It's a crazy thing that we don't do priming, and priming can be simple. It can even be done in the invite. One of the things that's crazy about Outlook and Google is you can put a very terrible useless meeting into Outlook and it will never look at it and be like, this is probably useless.

(00:25:46):
Just like you can go into Trello and put the dumbest project in the company's history into Trello, it will ingest anything you put into it without any discernment as to its value. Now, imagine we're going to have to do this ourselves for now until a better calendar comes out, but imagine if Outlook or Google Calendar or Cron, which now is part of Notion, would just be like, "Uh, uh, uh. What is the point of this meeting?" You could say, "Okay, this is here. This meeting is about the generation of options or creative problem solving or very tactical problem solving or efficiency seeking, or what is the category of conversation we are about to have? What are some of the basic principles that should apply? Are we honoring sacred cows or are we eating sacred cows in this meeting? What is the mode mentality, the priming? How can we all say this is the mindset and the ultimate purpose that applies to the meeting?"

(00:26:52):
You can write that and you can read that in under three minutes. It's not some arduous process. Amazon does it in an arduous process, they're known for that. That's wisdom to know, like we need priming. They're wise enough to realize the need for it. They make that a very robust execution. It doesn't have to be that robust. Skipping priming is pretty bad. Other meetings get the priming and the decision-making backwards. We start to open the meeting. You've heard of diamond-shaped thinking, let's open the meeting with expansionary thought and let's end the second half of the meeting with convergence. Well, we start the meeting instead with convergence, realize that we can't reconcile the various party in the room, their needs for convergence.

(00:27:39):
Then you might hear in the middle of a meeting like, "Well, let's start over again and remember why we're all here." We do the priming in the second half of the meeting just in time for the meeting to end. That's a super obvious thing that people can do, but that people very rarely do in priming. I'm happy to generate a list so we don't have to talk through everything, but maybe make some little PDFs or something that people can download that say, "Here's what great priming looks like." Then when you move to the decision making, here's what great decision making looks like, and that way, you can have a little bit of a guide, and again, do your own math, what science knows what we're doing in this meeting. We're skipping a bunch of steps, that's growing the probability of dysfunction or things will going wrong, and let's shrink that probability instead of growing it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:28):
Amazing. That'd be sweet if you have that. We'll definitely link to that on the show notes. The advice here is make sure when you're starting a meeting, running a meeting, prime everyone around the problem we're trying to solve or we're trying to get out of this meeting, the context, versus just diving into decision making.

Evan LaPointe (00:28:44):
Very notably, the principles that apply. I think that's really, really important, not just what we're here to do, but how we can think about this best. You can even have a debate about the principles, and it's way better to have a debate about the principles than it is to have a debate about the tactics that are rooted in the fact that you have super misaligned principles. If somebody is trying to make the decision with speed in mind and another person is trying to make the decision with accuracy in mind, it is completely inevitable that they're about to have a cat fight in the meeting. It's not resolvable until they come back and revisit the fact that deeper down, we are approaching this in a completely different mentality with completely different objectives.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:31):
Awesome. If you end up having these PDFs of waste to prime successfully, that'd be great.

Evan LaPointe (00:29:36):
For sure. Will do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:38):
Okay, great. Other things that people can do to work with better. I know you have some advice on how to influence more effectively. I know you have some advice around strategy and vision, so maybe we go into those two directions.

Evan LaPointe (00:29:50):
Let's start with strategy and vision, because I think it's nice to be better at strategy and vision before you start influencing people. What you'll encounter in life, in your mind, is ideas are swirling. Whether you're generating those ideas or other people are, is your brain is going to sort those ideas into believed, believable, kind of conceivable and inconceivable. You can come up with your own words for that, but that's like a starting point, which is if somebody says something you've already experienced, it's something that is believed to your brain. If we said we should implement an OKR framework and you've experienced it in a prior workplace or you've read all about Google doing it, then you're going to be like, "Yeah, we should. It would clean up a lot of junk around here. Okay, great." Your brain is already in a yes.

(00:30:47):
If it's believable, maybe you're reading Harvard Business Review and you're reading about things that your business has never done, that you've never done, but there's all this evidence that it works and it makes sense to you mechanically, so you're like, "Okay, yeah, I find that believable." Now we're leaning toward yes, or we're still in the yes bucket. Now we get into these unbelievable, yet maybe conceivable. These are the things that seem to be far-fetched. Going back to the Canva conversation, the conversation with Uri that you had. Most of the things that are totally believed by these leaders are unbelievable to most other leaders. We don't need managers? I don't believe it. Now we've shifted the mind from inbuilt kind of tailwind to inbuilt headwind. This is why minds struggle with strategy and with vision, is that every mind based on personality we talked about earlier, that line of demarcation between believed, we all have different lived experience, so the more experience you have, the more believed you have.

(00:32:03):
Then the believable and then the unbelievable, but yet conceivable, these lines shift a lot from person to person. An idea that totally makes sense to Uri, he's probably been in a thousand meetings where other people are like, "That'll never work." Even though obviously, science knows, for example, it totally will. One of the great benefits of science in culinary school is let's not reinvent ideas that are already proven. We already know that certain things activate people's purposeful state and the full brain that seeks comprehension seats deeper problem solving, seeks human connection. Those are known things, and the same thing as the debate about the value of design sits in the strategy and vision. How do we know there's an ROI to a better design here? Well, if you could disprove that instead of proving it, because the last million people who asked this question proved it.

(00:32:54):
If you could disprove it, you'd probably win a Nobel prize for being the first human to disprove something that is like ironclad. Like, we're done. We're done with this debate. That, I think is what we have to recognize in ourselves. Big part of self-awareness is where our unbelievable threshold begins, where our believable threshold ends. Then the inconceivable is like, get out of my office level stuff. A lot of the vision thinking and dialogue that happens inside of businesses directly activates people's inconceivable response without any self-awareness that, that's a personal problem, not a objective problem. I think it's a really, really important thing for companies and individuals to invest in themselves to kind of say, "Do I have the capacity to recognize the situation that I find inconceivable, but that could be totally wrong?" Then we can avoid the months potentially of arguing that sit between us and experimentation.

Evan LaPointe (00:34:00):
... that sit between us and experimentation. So I think that's the starting point for that. And if we were to do paint by numbers on that, what dominoes do you want to knock down? Know your personality, what you're looking for in the Big-5 model which we lean into is openness. If you are low in openness, your brain essentially has abstract, creative, intellectual, complex thinking wired to the pain systems of the brain. That's how your wiring is. As soon as things get abstract, not only are you like, I don't like this, you have a much more visceral negative response to these types of ideas, and you are now going into your pain cave while somebody else in the room may have all that abstract, creative, exploratory thinking wired to their reward systems.

(00:34:55):
So that's something to really know, and vulnerability is the best approach to this because if you think about the domino two, once you know this stuff, then the question is how do we socialize this knowledge in a team? Let's say it's a C suite, a leadership team, a founder and co-founder and the rest of the leadership team. And we work a lot with YC companies on this here, because it's super important. As they hire people, every incremental hire is an increment of psychological diversity, and it changes everything about how these conversations go.

(00:35:27):
So knowing this, okay, what are our options to socialize this knowledge? Vulnerability is the best option. But Brené Brown will sell vulnerability for its own sake, not everybody buys selling vulnerability for its own sake, because it's a scary thing. But it gets a little less scary when we consider how much scarier our alternatives are. I can pretend to hide this, that's my other option, or I can not hide it, be a Tasmanian devil, and then be unapologetic. So those are your three options, and when you realize I can be vulnerable, I can attempt to hide it, or I can be unapologetic, those other two options are ruinous compared to vulnerability.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:13):
The thing you said about openness and not being good at big vision, brainstorming, super resonates with me, because that's exactly me. So I took your test, what is it called? What do you call this test, by the way?

Evan LaPointe (00:36:27):
CORE identity is what we call it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:28):
CORE identity test.

Evan LaPointe (00:36:29):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:30):
Okay, cool, and we'll link to it in the show notes.

Evan LaPointe (00:36:32):
Okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:32):
So I took, it's basically the Big-5, agreeableness, conscientiousness, extraversion, openness, and formerly known as neuroticism, now called need for stability. I'm looking at it right here. And I'm actually, and I knew this about myself, I'm pretty low on openness, which I don't like to see, but it very much aligns with exactly what you said, I'm not great at big vision thinking. Like when people propose, say a designer on my team proposes this whole redesign big vision rethink of the way we, I'm like, no. It's my pain cave, like you said, and that's exactly what this test reflects.

(00:37:10):
So I think it's a really powerful example of just understanding this is the way your brain is going to respond to things that are totally out there, inconceivable, or how would you call it? Somewhat conceivable but not necessarily believable, and that being aware that that's how your brain works is really powerful, being aware other people have a very different experience with that is very powerful. And your advice here is one, this combination of this habitat, create this habitat where you have all these versions of people's ways of thinking, where some people are in their happy cave when they're thinking big, and then along those lines, your point about vulnerably sharing, hey, this is me, I am low in openness, people need to understand this on my team, and let's work together to not let that hinder us. Is that right?

Evan LaPointe (00:38:04):
Yeah, absolutely. I mean, because if you think about these ideas as pegs in holes, we're going to take a creativity shaped peg and try to put it through a more pragmatic shaped hole, there's a translation problem there, and it's a huge burden. If the team actually needs to be innovative, it's a huge burden just in terms of time spent on that translation, to translate the visionary strategic ideas that are accurate but are inconceivable into ideas that feel believable for those who need that more grounded thing.

(00:38:45):
And of course the most common scenario here is ROI, which is the classic question to ask about any idea, what's the ROI? Well, if the idea is inherently generating nth order effects instead of first order effects, like what is the ROI of having fresh flowers in the lobby of a Four Seasons hotel? There's two possibilities for the Four Seasons, they either have an answer to that question which satisfies the pragmatic shaped hole, or they have said in their habitat, we don't ask those types of questions because they're a huge waste of time.

(00:39:28):
And if you're thinking about a competitive market, most of the people that you interview are in highly competitive markets, the team that spends less time translating satisfactory language before they move, which inevitably they'll move, and sometimes they'll move because the market forces them to. They spend so much time locked up in the ROI conversation or the justification, the translation conversation, that eventually customers start leaving, employees start leaving, and they're like, oh, okay, it's becoming more believable now. Well, because moved out of the realm of ideas into the physical world that we can see right in front of us.

(00:40:05):
And that team, because they got stuck in the translation phase instead of the experimentation phase, has a huge disadvantage in the market, and if you're competing head-to-head with one team, this is what I loved about the Figma conversation, that habitat inherently is built for speed because the habitat itself, words are tattooed to your brain that are like, we will not spend time in the translation phase, we will not spend much time. And we see this a lot in the interplay between finance departments, product departments, and things like that, where an overpowered CFO can start asking questions for which there are no answers, that just we're dragging the team into a different language that is much more literal than the more experiential language of the business, so you can see this play out all the time.

(00:40:59):
But I think vulnerability is great because if you are sitting in a meeting, you Lenny, and you say, this is not my thing, basically everything you're saying is inconceivable, now I'm being honest with you, nobody's going to hate you for being honest, they're actually going to be glad that you are honest about the gap instead of glad that you are super certain that you are the right human to index off of in the decision-making process.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:26):
And the thing you recommend being open about is this is my personality, this is my CORE identity, I don't know the language you'd use, but it's not I think all this is inconceivable, it's I think all this is inconceivable because this is the way I think.

Evan LaPointe (00:41:41):
Absolutely, yeah, unpack the detail, for sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:42):
Got it.

Evan LaPointe (00:41:43):
Yeah, I mean tell people, this takes my brain, all this abstract and creative future-centric thinking that's not rooted in the concrete is where my brain goes, alarms go off and I'm like, I need something concrete. So if you can give me something concrete, I'm more comfortable, but at this point I have to maybe move into a lot of trust, and trust may be my alternative to agreement, right?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:10):
Yeah. And there's also, I imagine, what I always do is I recognize, hey, I'm not amazing at this, let me push myself to be more open to these things and find partners that are really good at this and let them drive the ship more.

Evan LaPointe (00:42:26):
Yeah, and it's great, one of the things that's so cool about the YC teams that we work with is they're so sophisticated and so smart. So even though they might run into this roadblock, A, they're going to do exactly what you just said and they're going to push themselves. You may notice in your profile the dot that you scored is surrounded by rings that represent how hard it is for you to push yourself to think in different ways, to think beyond the home base way of your brain working.

(00:42:55):
Now at a certain point your brain breaks and you move into foreign territory, and there's a level of, I mean, if you are a very conservative person and somebody's like, "Let's go to Burning Man," that will break your brain. You don't go all the way to the other side of the spectrum necessarily.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:13):
For the record, I've been four times, even though I'm apparently low in openness.

Evan LaPointe (00:43:17):
Perfect, and there's lots of reasons to go.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:20):
Got married at Burning Man. Makes me feel better about my low percentile.

Evan LaPointe (00:43:25):
But you're pushing your brain. I mean, Burning Man's actually a great example because there are a bunch of different reasons you might go. And if you go for one reason, then you're exposed to the other reasons. And that may be interesting, and you may kind of venture closer to those other reasons. You may be like, I'm going to stay in my reason bubble within the greater context of this place.

(00:43:44):
So there's a whole bunch of... And business is no different, you can say, okay, I'm going to push myself, and I may get into these places that go beyond my brain's flexibility, where the elastic band reaches its limits, and then from there I'll trust people and I'll have people, what I was going to mention about the YC founders is so many of them are so smart that they're really able to efficiently translate what they see beyond where your band stretches into the language you feel comfortable with, quickly. Other teams do that really badly and they just accuse you of, "Why can't you see this?" And then you get even more stuck.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:26):
How much shift have you seen in people, say they take this test and they're like, as I am, 23rd percentile in openness, do you see people move meaningfully across this if they work on these sorts of things, or is this just like, here's who you are, you're not going to change significantly?

Evan LaPointe (00:44:41):
Personally I'm more concerned with the effect on teams than on people, because if you look at this through the... I've been a four time founder, and if I look at this through how is my company working? How are my teams working? I don't need all the individuals to get to perfect, I need, especially in cases where there's this translation issue where a team is working on something and some part of that team is saying, "Let's stop here and let's dwell here." If they can move enough that the team, the effect on the team is now freed up, that's what we really feel as a business.

(00:45:23):
So to answer your question directly, people can move a lot, especially through the first three rings of that range that we depict, really, really well. Self-awareness is actually kind of the key, and self-awareness and self-consciousness, the difference here is that self-awareness is simply being intentional with your brain, whereas self-consciousness is being worried about your brain. We don't want people to be worried about their brains and insecure, we just want you to say, this is a situation in which my brain can work this way, and this is a situation where I want to push myself.

(00:45:56):
So it's being intentional, and we talked a little bit before this episode about this instinct versus intellect duality in the mind, and essentially you're just using your intellect to either verify or improve your instinct. You're always going to have instinctive responses about risk and fear and uncertainty and doubt and need for data, and all these types of things, but then your intellect can come in and watch that part of your brain thinking and say, you're super worried about the risk of this, but it's actually pretty low stakes for us to jump in and try. So your need to stabilize that is a little misplaced, and your intellect, that's really what you're doing is saying, how much do people change? I don't really worry too much about how much they change, it's more about how much they can spot with their intellect something that's misfit to the situation, and then take what they're motivated to do, and what they choose to do, and separate them. It doesn't matter if we change your motivations, if your choice of behavior and your underlying motivation can be different from each other, that's awesome, those people are super. And we all know people like that, where you're like, I know this person is uncomfortable right now, but they're totally making it work, and I really appreciate that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:12):
Yeah, part of the reason I ask is, I was talking to you about this before we started recording, I want 99th percentile at all these, I just want to nail this. And I know that's not how it works, I know you have strengths, you have weaknesses, you can't be amazing at everything. But that's funny my mind goes there.

(00:47:28):
Just to close the loop on this advice around getting better at vision and strategy, if I were to reflect back what I'm hearing its be very self-aware about what you are not strong at, say openness. Is that specifically the one to focus on if you're trying to figure out how to get better vision and strategy?

Evan LaPointe (00:47:46):
So there's a whole bunch of stuff... Well, let me try to make the list simple. Openness is the biggest one because it is essentially your tolerance of vision and strategy, and the lower that is, the lower you will tolerate the abstract pieces of the puzzle, for sure. The outlandish and purely creative and rules-breaking components of strategy and vision, lack of precedence, those types of things. Now the other thing to look out for is as your conscientiousness rises, which is essentially your desire to be efficient, effective, busy, not waste time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:23):
I'm high on that one.

Evan LaPointe (00:48:25):
Yeah, structured and organized, that is another contributor in the negative, which is it's objectively great to be a conscientious person, there are so many benefits, until we have to waste time productively, or we have to break order in organization. And then that strength that four days a week, or 28 days a month is great for you, on those days where we go and have the offsite and say, what if we blew it all up, to your example of new design, new website, blow it all up, start over again, different direction, that's where the conscientiousness is going to be like, why are we doing this? Why are we having this conversation? What's the need? This is inefficient, I could be spending my time doing something else.

(00:49:09):
And sometimes that'll express itself even in meetings of, I was in a meeting one time after we were acquired, this was eight or nine years ago now, and when you're a founder and you get acquired, there's a new flavor of habitat that you find yourself in with very new rituals. And one of the rituals that I find myself around a lot was the ritual of saying, we can't talk about this for the rest of our lives. And we would be about six minutes into a meeting when somebody would drop the, "We can't talk about this for the rest of our lives" line, and I would look at my watch and be like, "I didn't realize that you were terminal, I mean, why are you even in this meeting if you're about to die?"

(00:49:53):
Because my take on this is we are super far away from the rest of our lives right now, why are you saying that we can't talk about something for six minutes when the diminishing return of added information in the priming of this meeting, to use that again, you knowing X quadruples your decision quality, and you are resisting knowing X. Now we're going to hit a point where you knowing Y, Z, etc, we've hit a diminishing return and now I'm improving your decision quality by 1% instead of by 4x. But we haven't established any sensitivity in this room to the diminishing return curve of incremental thought and incremental information. And this is like a new habitat, I'm like, in this habitat do people really hate thought? Do people really consider themselves to be the police that watch the mean streets of intellectualism for any activity? It's just kind of crazy. But yeah, that's kind of the practical side of this, is you got to watch out and you got to be careful, and that's why I habitat is such a big deal because that's a perfect example of a well-intentioned room with mostly people that are there for the right reasons and the right outcomes, but where this normalness of saying a phrase like that, or saying, "I disagree." Same meeting person goes, "I completely disagree," and I was like, "With everything?" "Absolutely everything." And I go, so let's look at the meta, the overhead camera of this meeting.

(00:51:33):
This was the initiation of combat, that's what the brain is seeing. All the brains in the room are like, oh, fight, right? And now what are our objectives? My objective now becomes win, their objective, because they've taken a huge risk of saying, I disagree with everything, becomes win, and because they are disagreeing with a lot of stuff that they don't understand, the inevitability is they're about to be annihilated in this room where they have both said, we can't talk about this forever, and now put all of their chips onto the table to say, "I completely disagree," instead of, "I have a question," or, "Can we pull that thread?" Or, "I don't see how these dots connect."

(00:52:15):
So that on a super tactical level, there's things we say that activate the amygdala, the combat mode of the brain, versus a different choice of phrase which is going to activate the prefrontal cortex which is like, "Hey Lenny, you're connecting these two dots, I'm not seeing how they're connected," logic, now let's activate the prefrontal cortex with this sentence instead of, "Lenny, that's dumb, I completely disagree," let's activate the amygdala instead.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:43):
I want to talk about this habitat point you're making which I think is really important, but just to close the loop on the strategy vision piece, so just to give people some very tactical advice is, basically understand your personality, maybe take this CORE identity test, or something like that, understand if you're low in openness and high-end conscientiousness, maybe you're not amazing at vision and it's going to be hard for you to think big and think of it-

Evan LaPointe (00:53:06):
Yeah, your brain is just going to feel agitated when you're around vision. But, I mean, you can still do it, right? You can still ask people to translate. The key tactic is, okay, it's not this you're predestined to suck, it's more if you're low and openness, especially if you're also high in conscientiousness, then recognize your native language for ideas is a mismatch for the native language of vision and really, really good strategy.

(00:53:35):
And then you can be open about that and you can ask for some translations, and you can ask for... I mean, trust doesn't have to be non-participation, you can actually say, it would help me trust if you could explain this gap. A great example would be a second order effect, why should we have awesome documentation? How are we going to make more money if we have awesome documentation? Great question, don't be hostile in the way you asked it, but just help me understand, what thread are we pulling? Well, we're pulling this thread of customer satisfaction, retention, recommendation, et cetera, Stripe is really good at this, especially from the early days, that great documentation justifies all sorts of second order effects that then will lead us to this first order effect you're asking about.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:20):
Awesome, okay, that's really great. And I was going to go one direction, but I want to talk about this real quick. Something that comes up a lot on this podcast is the power of leaning into strengths and not feeling like you have to be amazing at everything, and that in this example, I have a low openness, high conscientiousness, I can still be very successful in the role by, in my opinion, leaning into things I'm actually really strong at, say conscientiousness, and I'm also high in agreeableness. I don't like the sound of that. Thoughts on just, it's okay if you're not amazing at vision because your openness is low, but you can be better at other stuff and together you can be really successful no matter how your personality.

Evan LaPointe (00:55:03):
Absolutely right, yeah. I mean, the truth is we look at, taking that Canva example of coaches and managers, not only does that change the way an employee feels about the way this connection they have is invested in them, but it also changes inherently a lot of the meeting dynamics and teaming dynamics from hierarchical feeling things manager to more mesh based intellect. And within the mesh, you don't have to worry too much about the hierarchy anymore. You can say, this is the nature of my contribution.

(00:55:39):
So even in the vision and strategy piece, maybe your contributions to idea generation, there are going to be some, and they're probably going to be good. But those are not ideas to protect in the state that you brought them to the table, they're ideas to set on the table so that people can surround them and improve them. And then as other people contribute ideas that aren't as natural to you, kind of just realize we're not in the phase yet of judging and ranking and prioritizing these ideas, that's not where we are in the overall storyline. So let it happen, and then if you can improve those ideas, improve them.

(00:56:15):
And once ideas have that early stage, that kind of like what Jony Ive described as the infancy of an idea, when it's really weak and delicate and susceptible, if you can nurture that idea to adolescence where it has a little bit of ability to defend itself, then now you're in a situation where your conscientiousness can start to think about things like how would we resource this? What sequencing makes the most sense? What is the ROI of these things relative to each other? And consider the second and third order effects, and so on. And what would the project plans, and to your point of being both conscientious and agreeable, you are this master of coordination and alignment naturally.

(00:56:56):
So when that phase of the project begins and we have to get people bought in, high functioning together, getting on the same page, staying focused, getting the project done, all of the people that were good at the beginning with all the vision and strategy, they are just a complete disaster in that phase. That's just how things really work in the real world, and I think we're so, again, focused, like we talked about at the beginning, we alluded to the fact you have to unpack enough complexity. I love the Einstein quote, " Make things as simple as possible but no simpler," and we've made things way simpler than possible in business by saying this is the right way of doing the whole thing.

(00:57:41):
It's like, no, no, no, if you've ever lived a day in real life, building a real product, the dynamics shift a lot throughout the course of product life cycle, as an example, or really any life cycle as an example. And the peak humans as the dynamics shift are very different, peak humans. Lenny is awesome here, contributes here 10%, contributes here 98%. Evan contributes 98% here, please get Evan out of the room when it comes to these meetings, that's great. And yes, we should lean into our strengths, but not so much that we don't know our weaknesses, because another human strength on your team is the patch for the bug of your weakness. And we run buggy software in companies and we say, "Oh, I am leaning into my strengths, I don't need to worry about my weaknesses," well, then you become the person who needs everything translated into your language because when your weakness flares its head up, it slows everybody else down.

(00:58:41):
So it's really, just from an operations business fluidity perspective, a team that is highly unaware of its weaknesses is going to have a lot of slowness and a lot of problems as a result of that. They don't have to fix all their weaknesses, but be aware of them and know who is a patch to your weakness.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:58):
Evan, this is so interesting. I love that we're digging deep on this. Is there one tactical thing you could recommend for someone to become better at openness in, say, a brainstorming experience when they're doing vision, or when they're low at this, say me.

Evan LaPointe (00:59:13):
I think the best exercise for a conscientious person especially to feel more open is to become obsessed with reverse engineering. And it's to say, there's two forms of reverse engineering that I think are really helpful here. Number one would be reverse engineering against a desired outcome, to truly understand the inputs that generate that outcome. And if we think about that at a big level, like, okay, we want to win a market, what are the real inputs to deconstruct that outcome and understand what our strategy should look like to attack all of the most relevant inputs that generate that outcome? I think that's the specific form.

(00:59:55):
And then at a super tactical level, if you want to give feedback to somebody, and let's say, for me, I'm low in politeness, you're probably much higher in politeness than I am, and I struggled for years with feedback to generate the intended outcome. I delivered the feedback, but the delivery wasn't the intended outcome, and the way that I delivered it actually reduced the probability of the intended outcome because I was being too impolite, too direct in many cases, too harsh. And what does harshness do to the brain? Well, that's crystal clear. So what I was doing and what science knows were very different things, and that's why I failed in those cases.

(01:00:35):
But as soon as I started closing the gap and realized I need to try harder to think about the story arc of this feedback, that becomes clearest to me how to do it when I have the intended outcome in mind for the feedback, I really would like this person to start turning the corner on this particular way of thinking. If you and I worked together and it was about openness, we'd be like, what are some things that I could do right now to increment and set the stage for a big shift in openness as time goes on that you are bought into? And that's a very, if I'm impolite and be like, "Lenny, what's your problem? Why can't you do this? Everybody else can do this."

(01:01:13):
Your willingness to start turning that corner, I mean, it may be there, the safety system is activated, like, oh, bad things could happen if I don't do this, but I don't want your safety system to motivate this change.I mean, in most cases, that's an optics based change instead of a material change that will occur. And that's why a lot of people, accountability is a great example, asking for accountability is the best way to not get it, because asking for accountability activates people's safety systems, or especially saying, "I'm going to hold people accountable." Then everybody's like, oh, great, we should set up a whole movie set of facade houses that pretend everything's great with no substance behind them, and that's why so many companies end up that way. But yeah, I would say that's the tactical.

(01:01:58):
The second thing to understand about openness and reverse engineering is just situational awareness. Very few conscientious people spend, in my opinion, as a very open person, enough time immersing themselves in the reality that is every day situational awareness necessary to do their job. Simplest example of this is how many executives have ever talked to N greater than five customers? That is a... Because, well, I'm busy. I got a lot of stuff to do, I don't have time to go take a world tour, which is like we don't have the rest of our lives to talk about this. I'm not asking you to take a world tour, I'm asking you to stuff into your brain enough situational awareness that the decisions you make every day that affect all those people you're not talking to are considering those people that you're not talking to.

(01:02:49):
So less about an intended specific outcome in this case, and more about, do I really know the... I would think about this as if we think about aeronautical engineering, do I actually have an understanding of the conditions, the flight conditions, that I'm in every day in order to fly really well? And the answer to that for a lot of people is no. So reverse engineering is probably the whole category. I don't know if that makes enough tactical sense, I'm happy to be more descriptive, but that's the category I think is have you reversed engineered how to get outcomes and have you reversed engineered to predispose your mind to come up with really good ideas and good decisions, as opposed to come up with decisions that are super disconnected from reality.

(01:03:37):
Great example being PLG, I mean, if you haven't done enough situational awareness work, you have no idea if PLG is a remotely viable strategy for growing your business. If it's remotely relevant strategy for growing your business. And company after company after company has leadership team obsessed with this concept that in principle we should be able to let people just sign up and swipe a credit card and onboard and great. No, we have a hyper technical solution, that is never going to happen, or that's not the way they do budget, or there could be any number of ways that that's not going to work out, and those are just some concrete examples.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:18):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation AB testing and feature management platform built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams. Companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp, and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth and for understanding the performance of new features, and Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does.

(01:04:49):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most was our experimentation platform, where I could set up experiments easily, troubleshoot issues, and analyze performance all on my own. Eppo does all that and more, with advanced statistical methods that can help you shave weeks off experiment time, and accessible UI for diving deeper into performance and out of the box reporting that helps you avoid annoying prolonged analytic cycles. Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insights with your team, sparking new ideas for the AB testing flywheel. Eppo powers experimentation across every use case, including product, growth, machine learning, monetization, and email marketing. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com/Lenny, and 10x your experiment velocity. That's geteppo.com/Lenny.

(01:05:38):
It feels like there's a fractal of stuff we could talk about and endless threads of things that I want to dig into. Let me shift a little bit to influence, we mentioned this a little bit earlier. I know you have a bunch of awesome advice on how to build your skill at becoming more influential, that's something a lot of listeners of the podcast, or product managers, also founders, need the skill. Who doesn't need to become better influencers? What can we learn about how to become better influencers?

Evan LaPointe (01:06:05):
We'll probably unpack a second topic and open up an off ramp here right at the beginning, but there's two things, there's influence itself and then there's relationships, and we should probably talk a little bit about relationships. Trying to exert influence through a dysfunctional relationship is not going to go great. And most human beings, especially when they go to work, are pretty out of sorts when it comes to relationships.

(01:06:36):
And you even hear crazy mantra like we have to each other to work together, which are like, good luck with that. I mean, just watch a text message pop up on a phone of a person who doesn't like you and watch their response time to the text message, or their Slack message, or whatever. I mean, you're talking about you've built in a multi-day, at least multi-hour delay into responsiveness purely because the relationship isn't good, and then you compound that effect over whatever size your company is. That's massive operational inefficiency just because I don't want to respond to Evan right now. So that's the one piece.

(01:07:19):
Now assuming the relationship is in place, and we'll come back to that and talk about that because a whole very actionable framework to unpack, assuming the relationship is good, I think the starting point for influence is to choose your character and choose your mode. It's almost like you're playing Elden Ring or some video game, and you're going to be like, am I going to influence him this way as the hero or the exemplar of these things, or am I going to influence through back channels, what is my character? And everybody for your personality has a natural fit for the character you're going to select as this mode of influence, and then you're going to pick a speed of influence, which is slow, moderate, or fast.

Evan LaPointe (01:08:00):
Then you're going to pick a speed of influence, which is slow, moderate, or fast. The habitat can help a lot with this. If a founder is listening to this and you haven't created a habitat where fast influence is easy and the permission isn't there, then you're slowing the company down inadvertently by just not clarifying this with the team. So slow influence is the we'll let them find out the hard way influence. They're going off a cliff, we know they're going off a cliff. And a lot of times we find ourselves in what's called the Abilene paradox.

(01:08:39):
The Abilene paradox is where everybody in the room knows it's a bad idea, but we're all like "We're in." And the classic Abilene paradox kind of if you look up memes on Google, it'll be like the dad thinks that the kids might want to go camping. Mom doesn't want to go camping, the kids don't want to go camping. Dad also doesn't really want to go camping, but everybody's like, "Dad probably wants us to go camping, so let's give it a go." And they all go and don't enjoy it. And we see that play out all the time.

(01:09:09):
And a lot of people will just say, "I can't do anything. I don't have any influence in this case. We're just going to let him fail and they'll learn." Or this impolite person like me giving feedback the wrong way years in the past, I'm not going to sit Evan down and talk to him about this. He'll figure out on his own through failure that this doesn't work. And that can take months, that can take years, that can take a lifetime for people to learn the slow way. And it is a form of influence. You are being intentional to say, I think the world will create enough failure that adaptation will occur. That is a form of influence, just the slowest one.

(01:09:48):
And a lot of people listening probably realize, "Oh, that's what I'm doing. How can I go way faster than just letting things fail?" So that's where moderate influence comes in. And a great book to read for a moderate influence is the Challenger Sale. And in the Challenger Sale, what we're looking at is the concept of teaching people something. And then when they live with this new knowledge, they'll see things that they weren't seeing before. So for example, in the feedback example that we can keep using over and over again through this is, "Hey Evan, you might want to notice people's body language while you're saying these things and here's some signs to look out for that when you've done this and you get this, that's probably a sign that people are bought in and still with you. And when you see this, that's probably a sign that people are pushing back."

(01:10:37):
And you can ask this question in that moment and you'll probably hear answers like this. So you're like giving somebody a tool that their future is going to unpack. And the Challenger Sale kind of assumes a long enough sales cycle where you're not going to land the sale in the meeting, you're not trying to close them right there. You'll teach them some stuff and you'll, "Hey, if you see this stuff, that's a pretty clear sign that you need to take action. So why don't we call you in 30 days, and 30 days later we get on phone, "Hey, have you been seeing this?" And they'll go, "Everywhere I look, I can't not see it now."

(01:11:13):
And that's how you influence a person in a few days, a few weeks, maybe a few months at worst, way faster than letting them fail.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:22):
We actually had, I don't know if you know this, we had the author of that book on the podcast, Matt Dixon, I think his name. And the Challenger Sale, the idea there is challenge their perspective and view on what is actually real about the market and what they need.

Evan LaPointe (01:11:36):
Exactly. Yeah. I think yes, there's the challenge component to it, but I think the underappreciated piece of that methodology is that you're still letting that person see the world, but you've given them new information that is breaking some calcification in their brain challenge. It's not the moment of the challenge where all the magic happens. There's moments that occur later that continue kind of putting that calcium, lime and rust melting formula on this expectation or this kind of decision in their mind to the point where sometimes they'll turn around and be like, "Thank you for even telling me this."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:19):
So the advice here is if you're trying to influence someone, try to figure out what they don't know. Find information that you know they may not know because once they know that and they may be like, "Oh wow, I totally see what you're saying."

Evan LaPointe (01:12:33):
Yeah, exactly right. And let them know it and let them live with it. Don't cram it down their throat and make them accept it If they live with it just a little bit, even just a couple days, that might be enough to come back to a much softer conversation.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:47):
Does this connect to what you said earlier, which I love this idea of pick a character, like pick your influence style based on your personality, whether it's back channeling and that makes me think of a very specific person. He's coming on the podcast actually, he's this Jedi that just gets people aligned but very behind the scenes, very the meetings before the meetings. So that's one character or it's just telling a compelling story probably in a deck. Or there's other character I guess. Does this idea of sharing information, is that a type of character or is that just something that everyone should just do because a really effective strategy?

Evan LaPointe (01:13:27):
I like the idea of intentionality in just about everything. Are we letting trade winds push us into certain things or are we actually making choices? And I think that step of being intentional about your style and this kind of notion of a character is a wise step to take so that you can kind of have some guardrails as you go through this and some consistency. It helps other people understand the role you're playing in influence. If you are consistently coming from the same place, you're about that style, like I want to try to influence this organization by doing this way and you're going to see that from me over and over and over again.

(01:14:07):
You kind of have given yourself a little permission and also you can get some buy-in from people. If you do want be more the barbarian kind of approach, you can say, "Hey, I'm the devil's advocate approach, or I'm the break it and see if it still stands after I hit it really hard with a sledgehammer kind of guy." Is it okay if I do that over and over and over again? And now you've bought future you the permission to approach things in certain ways that would yield meaningfully different influence outcomes, like meaningfully different. I was able to do this and it accelerated something.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:40):
So the way I am hearing this is there are many ways to get what you want, think about your personality style and find the path that is most aligned with the way you operate.

Evan LaPointe (01:14:52):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:52):
Whether it's behind the scenes, whether it's a compelling story. Awesome. So this character is basically figure out what your... It kind of comes back to leverage your strengths, what are you good at? And use that channel to convince people of the thing you want them to be convinced of.

Evan LaPointe (01:15:08):
Yep, absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:11):
My mind goes to what are the list of ways, what are the character options in this list when I'm opening up the game and choosing? You went through a few, but just to give people like, oh, okay, I see I could try it this way. Is there a small list you could share of just like here's ways you could try approaching influence.

Evan LaPointe (01:15:27):
Probably the dimensions are most valuable to people. I would say one of the dimensions is compassion, which is do I want to influence by trying to help people, by trying to make sure that we get it right and that people get value. And then the permission I'm seeking there is can I ask questions about why are we not thinking about the user right now? Why are we not concerned with the value they're getting and challenge us in that way?

(01:15:59):
I think there are characters based on logic and even belief, which is I would like to be the one to insert more knowledge and insert more causality into conversations and challenge causality in conversations to make us think harder and challenge what we believe and break up the sacred cows of the stuff we walked in the meeting with so that we feel differently about things walking out of meetings.

(01:16:27):
So I think there's a bunch of different very useful dimensions. One could be very creativity based. If you follow this big five format, they're kind of spelled out for you. Enthusiasm, interesting dimension. I want to challenge us through the lens of what do people get excited about? What makes people feel good? Does this make people feel good? And are there tweaks we could make to the product or this marketing campaign or whatever.

(01:16:54):
Look at what Siki just did with Runway. I mean I love that guy so much and there's so many components of his character and obviously the characters he surrounded himself with that contribute to really next level stuff. And they're definitely challenging each other using these dimensions of compassion to be the character of caregiver or the character of protector. And so there's a bunch of different ways you could turn those dimensions into characters.

(01:17:28):
But I think when you see the value of each of those perspectives, especially in product, I'm a really big fan of product. If you have dysfunctionally high compassion, dysfunctionally high openness, you have internal rewards and motivations to explore regions of product that other minds aren't exploring as intuitively. And you don't have to have the whole deck to be amazing at product. But you have some unfair advantages if you are super prone to reverse engineering just by your nature. You are going to be more situationally aware and probably make a series of vastly better decisions than the team that has a lot less situational awareness than you do. It's a huge advantage.

(01:18:16):
But when it comes to the concept of influence. I mean figuring out these dimensions that define who you are and then using them to kind of say, "I want the permission to ask a series of questions and challenge our thinking through this very intuitive strength that I have." Can we all see the value in that or do I need to further sell myself? And then you'll find you can take on that character and play that role really well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:45):
I imagine the ultimate unlock is that combined with what is that person's personality style and what is the best way they receive information, which is a little harder. Because you can't force them to take some tests and you can't make them give you the results. But I know a lot of teams do these tests together as a team and share the results. And so it's I guess a reminder of just that's really powerful if you and your team, especially the execs at company.

Evan LaPointe (01:19:09):
Yeah, exactly. And when you move into this vulnerability out of your three choices state, we don't need a bunch of data for that to work really well. If you said, "Hey, I'm not super strong at this," and the rest of the room was like, well "Wait, this other person's super awesome at this, why don't not the two of you work together," then it's like under 30 seconds we've unlocked potential that wasn't there.

(01:19:34):
So you want to get business.... I kind of think of extending the video game metaphor. Not only are we choosing our characters or we are a certain character, but the business has a difficulty setting that we chose based on the habitat. And I've worked in and with way too many companies where we are playing the game in nightmare and every enemy takes a thousand shotgun shells to bring down instead of just switching the difficulty setting to easy, which is like the enemies somehow become our friends as we go through this journey.

(01:20:06):
I mean, it really can be that transformative, especially with a case like yours that you talked about. Okay, I am not as high in openness. I'm very high in conscientiousness. If I can admit this and ask different types of questions, everybody else in the room will be like the difficulty setting of this just went to zero and the speed of it just went to way higher than it used to be.

(01:20:32):
And we underestimate this kind of less concrete part of the business world. And I mean that's the genesis of this whole business that I was crazy enough to start after starting other companies in the past, which is like we are underestimating how much of our operational reality is a function of our human reality. And are we doing enough? Are we doing the right things to close the gap between what science knows and what business does? And do we even know what the science is? Have we educated ourselves to close the gap? And then it becomes super obvious, oh, this makes a lot of sense to be open and find the patch to my bug. And here we go.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:13):
This fractal of topics continues to grow. I'm trying to contain it. There's three things I want to try to talk about in the rest of our chat, that stuff we've touched on that I think will be really useful to people. One is relationships. You mentioned there's more to talk about there just how to build great relationships. Two is I want to come back to the habitat and building a habitat that is very conducive to innovation and speed and success and those sorts of things. And then I want to talk about focus. We talked a bit about just how important focus is and how differently our brains operate in different states of focus. So maybe we start with the relationship piece just because that connects to what we were just talking about of how do we strengthen relationships, create better relationships within our teams.

Evan LaPointe (01:21:53):
Yeah, so we were talking about relationships kind of as this off ramp or this kind of sidecar to influence. And real quickly the fast mode of influence and relationships goes really well together. So we talked about the slow and the moderate. The fast mode of influence is cognitive dissonance. It's essentially saying in the moment, I'm not going to wait for you to experience anything. It's saying in the moment, how does this formula compute? Explain to me, Evan, how you being too blunt in feedback is going to end up in a human being changing. Why do you believe that?

(01:22:29):
And especially it's that second phrase of why do you believe that drill below the behavior down into the belief. What do you believe that has you doing this? And then we can explore how preposterous the belief itself is, which then bubbles up to the surface level of this.

(01:22:47):
And if in the environment, the habitat's a huge component of this as our relationships, which is if you have great relationships where people trust each other enough to have this kind of cognitive dissonance conversation, and we have a habitat that is very clear that we are free to discuss cognitive dissonance and logical disconnects, that is really important to do. Then you activate fast influence mode basically. So that's a really important thing. And then as you transition to relationships, well what are... The question that everybody kind of glosses over in my opinion is what is a relationship? I don't know how you feel about answering that question, but it's a really hard-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:31):
I would just go to ChatGPT. What is a relationship?

Evan LaPointe (01:23:33):
Exactly, right. Yeah. At this point we have some help that we didn't use to have. But the other thing that goes along with what is a relationship is how good is my relationship with person X? Like, you and I both know Shreyas and how good is our relationship? I would say it's awesome. Why is it awesome? I don't know. It just feels great. So let's double click on a good definition and a good framework because once you actually know why a relationship feels great, that example or why a relationship feels super difficult, now we can start to build some strategies, some actual action plans for them.

(01:24:14):
So what we propose to people is if you take that third component of your brain ability, that is one piece of your relationships, especially your professional relationships. So if you know an engineer and you have an idea of something you want to build and they have the ability to build it, their ability and their utility to you is a function of your relationship and it will contribute to the positive or negative force that you feel in that relationship. Like, wow, this person has a lot of ability. My appreciation is higher, my faith in them is higher, my cooperation with them is higher.

(01:24:50):
If you question a person's ability or they've proven that ability is kind of unreliable, those things start to kind of vector downwards and we will pick on Shreyas through this as a good example? Because I think most of the people watching also know him. What is his ability? What is his utility? As high as I've ever seen. I mean every conversation he's intellectually conceptually additive to. You're better after you've talked to him every time. At least that's been my experience with him.

(01:25:20):
And we all know people like that, with various fields and various abilities. So that's one piece that's really important. And why as an individual, it's so important to invest in your ability because it is so integral to every relationship you have, particularly professional relationships and your ability, knowledge, your reasoning, your imagination, your skill set, these are all incrementable facets of you.

(01:25:50):
And that's really, really key. Now here's the plot twist. Your ability is actually not the most important part of a relationship, biologically speaking. There's two more that matter quite a bit more. And the surprise ending is that the third one matters the most, which is scary in some cases.

(01:26:11):
The second factor of relationships is trust. So trust in the brain. If we go very primitive back to the amygdala that we talked about earlier, trust is simply risk. Human level risk and trust can span from strongly negative to strongly positive in a relationship. And we felt that full range with different people in our lives. Strongly negative trust is the brain saying, this person is dangerous to me. They're very likely to try to undermine me. They're very likely to not deliver something. Personal harm will occur by essentially kind of interacting in this relationship.

(01:26:51):
And then on the other side of trust, we kind of try to create some levels to this to keep it clean. And the fractal continues to grow a little bit, but we'll try to keep this simple. But I like to think of trust one, two and three. Three distinct levels of trust. And trust one is, let's say we're having a cookout. Trust one is Lenny, could you please bring the chips, ideally sealed, but it's a delegation of a simple non-critical task knowing that it is likely to get done and get done decently well. But it's not like this huge level of trust. It's the people that we work with where this type of delegation, and especially if people delegate under the thesis of "I want to do the high value work, so let me put the low value work on other people." That's all the low value work that we put on other people, and it allows us to purify our focus on the high value work, and we don't need all the low value work to go beautifully well or be artistically brilliant.

(01:27:53):
So trust two is when we step up to almost like "I need to do this myself. Is there anybody who could do it as well as me?" That there's no risk to me having them do it instead of me doing it. And that's where you get true scalability of teams. So if you can trust people enough, your brain's assessment of risk of giving this task to someone else or giving this knowledge even to somebody else, that they'll treat it the way you would treat it, is a significantly higher positive trust that you can feel in a relationship.

(01:28:26):
And then finally, trust three is when we do hit these breakpoints in our brain where we say the way your mind works is beyond the way my mind works on this topic. So the classic example at the cookout would be if Wolfgang Puck was a neighbor, we're going to have Wolfgang Puck do all the most critical stuff and maybe even set up the music and the decor and whatever. Or another example would be like when Steven Spielberg has John Williams score a film, he's not hoping John will do it as well as Steven would do it. He's saying, "Just send me the bill. Try not to go too crazy." But he is not going to sit down with the invoice and be like, "Why did you need 13 horns instead of 11?" John just gets to do what John does because there's so much trust in this kind of beyond my event horizon kind of risk. It would be riskier for me to do it than for him to do it or her to do it, right?

(01:29:25):
So that's kind of the level, but that matters more to a human being because the safety system, if it activates, your utility is sunk. So if you're an awesome engineer but you damage people, it doesn't matter that you're an awesome engineer because in the social network, the mesh of your organization, you are a node that has a protective covering around it. Information is not flowing to you the way it would normally, and delegation is not flowing to you and access is not flowing to you the way it would normally. So you are a kind of protected, deactivated, sequestered node of the mesh at this point in time. And a lot of people really don't get that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:12):
Yeah, that's a really good way of visualizing.

Evan LaPointe (01:30:16):
And then here's the surprise ending. The last piece of every relationship that you have is appeal. Appeal is how your brain interprets the shared experiences you have with other people. Whether or not you look forward to being around that person, whether or not you like their style, the feel of what shared experiences really are. And if you think about, let's pick on Shreyas one last time. What is his ability and utility? Off the charts. To what extent can he be trusted? Trust three, off the charts. Will he ever damage somebody? I mean, not to my knowledge. He may have some really dark past that we don't know about, but as far as I've seen, not a lot of damage in his wake. And then thirdly, what kind of experience is he? He's an extraordinarily positive experience. So he naturally accumulates great relationship after great relationship after great relationship.

(01:31:15):
And again, if you're that great engineer with a ton of ability, now let's flip the middle dimension. And we trust you a lot, but you're a horrible experience. Are you coming to our offsite? Are you in this meeting? No, you're gone. We don't want you there. You're like a hurricane. So biologically speaking, the biggest bug in our programming as we transfer this to the business context is what makes the most sense in business is the most, if it's a meritocracy, the best people with the best knowledge that we can trust should be in the room and we will fight it with every fiber of our being if they're a terrible experience. And that's a bummer. And what's funny is you can flip it. We all either have friends or know people who have friends that you cannot trust, they have no ability to speak of, but they're a super awesome experience. What a great friend.

(01:32:16):
So how is it that we get this thing completely flipped? And I think that's the thing. As you parse that list, as anybody listening parses that list, it's critical to ask what kind of experience am I? That is where to start? Not how good am I at my job? How much do I know? How critical am I to this process? But am I a miserable experience? And if the answer is yes, don't worry too much about the other pieces yet, you got to fix that first.

(01:32:48):
And to this point of the profile, as you parse the profile, you'll find things like obviously not a pleasant experience, like being really impolite, obviously not a pleasant experience, being super overbearing and assertive, obviously not a pleasant experience, being hyper low in openness and enacting out of that and telling everybody they're overcomplicating everything all the time. Not a great experience for people who are actually well-intentioned trying to get it right. So there's concrete things that you can do with this knowledge in mind.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:16):
This last piece makes me think about why some of the most effective PMs are the PMs that bring a lot of energy and positivity to the team and just get people excited, which is such a soft skill, but such a powerful thing you can do for your team because people kind of look to you to lead them. I had a PM I was working with in every meeting, he is like, "This is going to be awesome." He just comes right in every meeting, "Oh, who's ready to make some decisions," and it really changes everything. And so this is amazing advice.

(01:33:46):
So basically if you want better relationships, which will make you a better influencer, start with what kind of experience am I, when people work with me, ask me for stuff, ask me questions, and you shared a bunch of specific things you can do.

(01:34:03):
Something I always tell people is just try to smile, just look happy. That makes a big difference.

Evan LaPointe (01:34:07):
Look happy.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:10):
Bring energy, look happy. Just try to be excited. Yeah, so if you want to build better relationships which have all these amazing trickle down effects, your advice is think about the experience you are to other people when they work with you, work on trust and ideally get to the place that third level of you are doing it better than them. But that's a high bar for all things. And then the last thing is, are you actually amazing? Work in your abilities, that's kind of the last piece.

Evan LaPointe (01:34:38):
Yeah, exactly. And it's not that none of these become unimportant because the other are kind of the gateways. I mean your relationships require all three, especially your professional relationships. So yeah, it's more just like if experience is the only thing undermining you when you're otherwise very trustworthy and very skilled and able, that's a shame. Just fix it.

(01:35:03):
And there's a whole bunch of ways to go about that. But I like to leave that to people to explore that creatively. Like well, "Oh gosh, okay, I can change this to this to this." On the trust thing, do you hurt people? I mean, that's it. Do people have a reason to believe that you are risky or dangerous? And unfortunately in a lot of habitats, the habitat itself either allows or even rewards people that are super untrustworthy to play the system in advance of the system. And as you talk to Jeffrey about the power conversation, the worse the habitat, the more his suggestions work.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:47):
I could see that.

Evan LaPointe (01:35:49):
And the reason that he's correct, he used the phrase, "This is how the world always has been, is how it is, and it's how it always will be." Well, it's how the normal dysfunctional world always has been, is and will be. And if you want people in your organization to rise on merit and for influence to work to generate better decision-making, make better products, have a better company, move faster, et cetera, you need to create a habitat where what Jeffrey's observed about the normal dysfunctional world largely doesn't work within your habitat. So if it's effective for people to harm each other in your habitat, you are performing at a much lower level than if harming each other was extremely ineffective. And that's up to you as a leader, as a manager, et cetera. And then of course, skill is what it is. It's your ability to convert your intents into outcomes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:36:48):
I'm glad you're talking about habitat, that's exactly where I wanted to go. So just two more things I want to spend our time on, habitat and focus, how to create more space for focus and get better focus. So you've touched on this many times at this point, this idea of a habitat. I think another way to think about this is the culture of your company. Is that right?

Evan LaPointe (01:37:06):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:06):
Okay, cool. So are there a few things you could recommend to people to create a habitat that is conducive of good stuff?

Evan LaPointe (01:37:15):
Let's start at the start here. So in the difference between what science knows and business does, let's kind of zero in on the fact that the way most companies approach culture has a very shaky track record. Like if mission, vision, values was an airline, you would not allow any family to fly on that airline. It does not arrive at most of its intended destinations. That is just a super important starting point because I'm going to kill a sacred cow here while we talk about this. And I don't want anybody to feel like I'm trying to be mean or anything. It's just it's worth looking at stuff that doesn't work and wondering if there's something that could work a lot better. So if we look at habitat and culture, it's really about what people believe. It's what people believe is acceptable, permissible, productive, and the biggest flaw in people's approach to culture. And interestingly enough, even at YC, they talk about this mission, vision, values, culture, stuff that comes later, let some stuff happen with the business that comes later. They're right to say that if that's the paradigm you're going to use because it's not going to work either way. So you might as well do it later.

(01:38:31):
But if you're going to do it the right way and investigate human beliefs, and we talked about priming for example, culture is just the macro priming of the entire business of what your central belief systems are and then the permission that forms from those belief systems. So if you've done that really well, you should do that right at the very beginning. In what way should we approach this company, building this, working together, et cetera? That would be really, really helpful to get right from day one. And the belief system that people have, there are two approaches to changing people's beliefs.

(01:39:10):
Mission, vision, values is what we call a performative approach. Meaning I'm going to come up with some expression of an inspiring mission, inspiring values and inspiring vision, and it's going to be performed well enough. It's going to be like if we were busking in the park, this is going to be a cool enough mission, vision, values that people throw some change into my guitar case and they buy into it, they gather around. And I think that's just completely the wrong approach because we're hoping to inspire people. We're hoping to be artistically talented enough to pull that off. The other approach is to be deductive, logically deductive, which is centrally speaking. There is hopefully a market out there that's glad our company exists, who is glad we exist, why are they glad we exist? And that's shifting our mission into something that we call your role, the role you play in the world around you.

(01:40:08):
Who is glad you exist? Why are they glad you exist? And that is a fact. That is not an inspiring idea. That is like, okay, we work with this company that does AI-based optical character recognition, document ingestion, et cetera. Why is the world glad that they exist? Well, because we get 95% of the documents scanned into structured data that normally people have to transfer by hand. That's pretty compelling. Why is the world glad Warby Parker exists? Because before you used to choose between looking dumb and it being cheap and looking cool and it being expensive, and now you can look cool and it's cheap. The world's really glad we exist.

(01:40:50):
Now that's true. I don't need you to be inspired to believe that that is true. And now everything that we're going to think about for the rest of our beliefs, we're going to deduce from that. So we're just going to use logic to build our culture, not inspiration. So this next thing we need to figure out is how can we understand the specific value that's created when we play this role in the world? We save people money, we save people time, we open up markets, we help people explore possibilities and potential they couldn't tap into otherwise, etc.

(01:41:21):
So what's the role of Core? People are glad we exist because we tap into potential they had no access to before. And at the team level, at the company level, that could be a really big deal. So we know that and we say, "Okay, well gosh, that implies so much." There's so much we got to do now what value does that produce? And then I could say, okay, once we understand the definition of value, which comes out of our role, now we can change the definition of done. So a lot of teams talk about bias to action. And hamsters have bias to action. They get up out of their straw and they turn that wheel as hard as they possibly can and they go absolutely nowhere. But if you understand the role you play-

Evan LaPointe (01:42:01):
But if you understand the role you play in the world, and you understand the value you produce in terms of time savings, cost savings, upside, whatever it is that you do, then you can say, "We should have a bias to impact, not a bias to action. We shouldn't just do stuff, we should have an effect that has the result of value creation. We should save people time." And now when you're a product team, looking at this, and you're saying, "Well, here's a cool new idea, Lenny, let's do this." You can now use that as a habitat level permission to be like, "Oh, how does that produce value for people? How does that make people go faster, save time, get smarter, do something they couldn't do otherwise?" And then you can still use that exact same vocabulary when you go sell it to them, "This is how it makes you faster, smarter, more efficient, save cost."

(01:42:50):
So it's like really logical deduction. And if people think that we should do something, build a product that doesn't create value. Now instead of being inspiring, we can be logical. We don't build things that produce no value, that is not a priority until we can turn it into something that does produce value. So you're turning culture into something highly usable, in getting away from performative culture into logical deductive culture. And I think that's really, really the key for most people is to say, "Let's understand why the world's glad we exist." That's why we have a team, that's why we have customers. And what does that imply about our standards for ourselves when we execute in value creation? Even down to the email. If I send some wonky email reply to somebody's question and it doesn't produce value for them, I'm not done. I need to finish the job until it produces value for them.

(01:43:43):
Quality standards are baked into this, that again is implied. Would I be happy that Warby Parker exists, if they shipped me something that's a two out of 10 in quality? No. So we can't make things that are two out of 10. And everybody has a belief. There are plenty of people that probably interview at Warby Parker that think, two out of 10 is perfectly fine, just get it to them. And no, we need an antibody to that belief. We have decision-making intelligence, which everybody believes we should go fast, break stuff, or we should be super slow, and get everything right and wherever in between. That's a fun one to talk about. And then finally, you have a teaming dynamic belief, which is essentially every single human's belief of what is acceptable treatment of other human beings. What state does that put the other human in?

(01:44:35):
And a lot of people, particularly like I'll pick on myself with the low politeness, will spend years thinking, "I'm giving honest feedback quickly. This is efficient." And you're like, "How is it efficient when it takes people six months instead of six minutes to act on your feedback because they just don't like you so much, and you have this appeal problem that keeps you out of all the rooms?" Actually your utility, which, your politeness is a utility transferred mechanism, but we don't want you in the room. So you're not a business benefit in this case. So that's kind of the starting point. That's ground zero of habitat is do not build an habitat on the roots of inspiration. It doesn't work. It can work, right? If you do it super inspiring stuff and you're super inspiring people, then you probably have the artistic ability to pull that off. But even then, you'd still be better off if you would do it through logical deduction instead of inspiration.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:45:36):
Say someone is like, "Okay, I'm going to improve my habitat, I'm going to improve my company culture. Or I'm just going to start setting up a good habitat." What's something they can do? What can they do today, this week, to just start to do that? Is it, sit down and think about what is the value we provide? Why do we exist? Is there something else you'd recommend?

Evan LaPointe (01:45:54):
So the brain craves an answer to the question, why am I doing this? And not only are there things we should start doing, but I like to deepen the commitment in people's minds to what we should start doing, by thinking of it as, we should start doing things that we've been negligent in doing, right? Not just, oh, this would be even better, but we are actually causing some habitat problems by being negligent in certain things. So the primary thing that people are negligent in is answering the question, why should I do this, to their team. And saying, you should do this because it's your job is a form of negligence, right? You're not actually answering that question in any useful way. Because I could also answer that in the safety way, which I sort of just did by saying, it's your job. I'm implying that there's a consequence. But I could be like, because if you don't, here's the specific bad things that will happen.

(01:46:52):
You could be giving them a why in terms of reward, because, oh, if you do this, you get this, or if we do this, we get this. But you could also be giving them a purposeful answer to why, which is not a form of negligence, which is to say, because our work actually matters. There are people out there waiting on us to ship this product to improve their situation, and they also want us to get it right at the same time. So bias to impact through that lens. We do need to ship this. It needs to happen, and it needs to be right, or at least right enough in its first version.

(01:47:28):
So if you have been negligent, and we all have at times, right? I'm not trying to judge, but I'm trying to convict, right? To build some conviction, to build some commitment. If you have been negligent in answering to all these minds that work with you, why we're even doing this. That's the starting point, is make sure everybody knows why. And that why is a shared why across the team. And not just the Simon Sinek big picture why? I mean, very specific why. That for my team, when we build training materials, when we look at it through that lens of, if we get this right, this is what happens to teams, and companies, and products and their customers.

(01:48:12):
There's a through line at the big deal and that's why we can't do it this way, or that's why we should get more obsessed with quality, and why we should get more interdependent as a team and stop doing things that are just our own ideas. But say, "Hey Lenny, I'm thinking about doing it this way. Is there anything you'd add before I hit go?" And then you'd be like, "Oh, I think it would be 10% better if you did it this way." And then now our product is 10% better. So that's kind of the square one is ask yourself, when's the last time our team had a conversation about why we're even doing any of this? What value it produces? Who is affected by our decisions? And if that hasn't happened in a while, that's not good.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:48:57):
Is another way to think about this, your mission, is that a term?

Evan LaPointe (01:49:02):
Yeah, I think it's an alternative to mission, I try... And I don't want to stomp all over mission, vision, values because I think they can work. But I think it's easier for people to conceptualize the importance of their work, if they understand, we are playing a role, not fulfilling a mission. And role implies obligation. There's no obligation in mission, unless you feel the inspiration so powerfully. And these differences are subtle, but neurologically, it's different. If I tell your brain, "Here are the people counting on you to get this right, Lenny." Your brain activates a region called the anterior insular cortex, which starts to think about other people in the context of the solution you're creating.

(01:49:45):
And if I say, "We are here to change people's lives through this," in a more general sense, your prefrontal cortex will still activate to solve the problem, but your anterior insular cortex will not, to more deeply consider the humans affected by the problem. So you're kind of adding to the toolkit of what the brain will bring to the table to generate solutions. And if you activate more good regions of the brain, you get better solutions. So I lean into this. Personally, I'm like, "You really don't need a mission statement. You need to understand the role you play, and people need to have some response, some physiological, like, 'I get it, to my actions impact people.'" And if they don't have a response, you should go find a human who does, for sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:50:35):
One last thread I want to follow, focus. You have some really cool advice on how to help. And this just comes from everybody wants to get better focus. Everyone wants their team to have more time for focus. Everyone wants their engineers to sit there and build things faster, their designers to get stuff done. And it all comes from getting really good at focus and creating space for focus on your team. What advice do you have for folks that want to personally learn to focus better, and to help their team have more time for focus, get stuff done essentially?

Evan LaPointe (01:51:10):
I mean, isn't this the question? Because this is where it all ends, right? First things first, let's look at the neuroscience that we have available to us. Which is, the study of focus either is or is tightly associated with the study of what's called brain waves. That's becoming a lot more popular. We're seeing it even in athletes, like professional golfers, or studying how their brain waves are focused on the golf shot and which mode to put the brain into to play golf at the highest level. Same thing applies to work. There's a bunch of different kind of bands of brain waves. Most of them actually are when you're asleep. So your REM cycles, your deep sleep cycles, your kind of drowsy cycles, those are brain waves. You can feel your brain turning off, you can feel your brain turning on when you dream. But when you're awake, there's really three primary modes that your brain is in.

(01:52:03):
The nerdy side of this, kind of the nerdy language is alpha, beta and gamma. Those are the distinct ranges of brain activity, and they basically represent how focused your brain is. So alpha is quite simply daydreaming. So your brain is very quiet and empty. Easy metaphor is if you're in your house at night and everything's quiet, you hear things that you don't hear during the daytime, and that's what alpha is like in the brain. Your brain is actually working subconsciously a lot. But when you're busy, which is beta, your brain is too noisy to hear any of those little creaks and pops in the house. But when you're in alpha, you hear stuff.

(01:52:41):
So the most common setting for alpha for most people is the shower. So it unlocks this mystery of like, why do I have all these ideas in the shower? Well, it's because your brain is in alpha. It hears these little creaks and pops inside of the attic, and it unpacks them. He goes, "Oh, that's an interesting idea," it comes out of nowhere. It can be driving, gardening, car washing, cycling, whatever. As long as there's not too much cognitive load, then you can be daydreaming. And I'll come back to this in a second because there's a big permission problem at the habitat level for some of these focus levels.

(01:53:14):
Beta is productivity mode. So if you've ever seen somebody with a poster on their back wall that says, "Get shit done," that's basically just a poster that says beta on it. I love beta. And answer emails, have meetings, write code. And there are some gamma code, deeper thinking scenarios where you're writing code, delivering presentations, making presentations. So much of our workday is beta, and it's just... I mean, some of us have an infinite amount of demand for beta work. There's just a never ending stream of stuff we could do and get done.

(01:53:55):
And then gamma is your brain's intense focus. So if you're learning something really complicated, you're learning thermodynamics in college or something like that, and you're just like, "Wow, this is not easy." And you have to really push your brain to grapple with these concepts, connect the dots, even remember certain things, that's gamma. And we feel that sometimes at work, that here's a problem, a complex issue that we could tackle in beta by slapping duct tape on it, or we could tackle in gamma by reverse engineering, and going deep. And that's where we start to connect the dots that we talked about earlier, that focus and reverse engineering are related. That in beta, you have no intention to learn anything new to get something done, to think more deeply to get something done, to reconsider an existing process, or structure, or framework in your mind to get something done, you're going to utilize those things to get something done.

(01:54:52):
Gamma is where we go, "I would normally do it this way. I can see why that's not the right way. I need to make something new. I need to break my framework and build a brand new one right now to do something." So we generally spend too much time in beta in work, and that's both a judgment call, because I certainly have my own opinion about beta. I call it the conscientiousness crisis, which is conscientiousness wants beta, openness wants gamma. I'm kind of thinking of tying these pieces together. And it's not that conscientiousness is inherently a crisis, but when you meet teams that haven't done any innovation, haven't rethought the market, have become insensitive to changes in the environment around them, have become insensitive to their own employee problems and are still just kind of like this locomotive that keeps on going, irrespective of what's going on around it. It's that heads-down form of conscientious beta, that feels like, "Now's not the time, let's stay focused, let's stay focused," et cetera.

(01:55:53):
So we don't want to get rid of beta, we got a lot of work to do. But let's put a rule of thumb out there for people to explore, because it's going to be subjective to every team and every company. But as a rule of thumb, if 25% of your year is spent in gamma and alpha, you're probably a lot better off than the teams who spend less than 25% of their year thinking deep, and being in this more daydreaming mode. So what I wanted to circle back on is, how could we possibly daydream productively? Well, that's preposterous. And this is where you can build in your mind... And I do have another PDF for this, if people want to see it.

(01:56:32):
But you can build in your mind a 3 x 3 grid where we have the safety system, reward, and purpose system in columns. We have alpha, beta and gamma in rows, and we basically have a list of nine channels that the brain can activate to generate different types of thinking. And most of the companies out there, most of the teams out there, are primarily, all their programming comes from safety beta and reward beta. How can I be busy to get rewards, ROI, customers, deals, whatever? Even promotions, more self-centered kind of rewards? And beta safety, which would be, how can I be busy? Optics, manage my reputation, avoid risk, that sort of stuff?

(01:57:19):
The crisis is basically realizing, spending too much time in those two out of our nine available boxes, is probably not generating anywhere near the ideal outcomes. And if we could instead shift to the purposeful column by answering that brain's craving for why, with an answer that explains, it's not about you, it's not about us, it's about other people are counting on us to get this stuff right, does that matter to you? Because for most people, they're like, "Yeah, that's actually really cool. I can have an impact on real stuff happening in other people's lives and in the world outside of me?" So that that activates, now all of a sudden we can say, okay, let's look at alpha across the top row.

(01:58:06):
Alpha safety is when you get in the shower, and all of your anxieties, worries, et cetera, come out of nowhere, out of the attic of your mind. What happens in alpha reward? It's when you have these breakthroughs of how to get a deal, how to win something. It's daydreaming, but your brain is primed to daydream in a certain way, whether it's about anxiety or anger, or whether it's about rewards you care about. If it's purpose, this is where from a vision perspective, a possibilities product perspective, you're going to have all sorts of crazy cool ideas pop into your mind if you've primed your brain to being purposeful and then you daydream.

(01:58:44):
And you can do this in the middle of a day. Certain companies, it's easier than others. But if you can push away from your desk, and just go sit in a park or something for 10 minutes, 20 minutes and calm your brain down, listen, something cool will probably happen in your brain. I can't guarantee that, but you have to experiment with it to find out how it works for you. And then the same thing for gamma, when you hear phrases like, "We can't talk about this for the rest of our lives," that is the gamma prevention team kicking the door down and saying, "We're here to get you back into beta. Everybody, put your hands behind your backs," sort of a thing.

(01:59:22):
And that's where the habitat and the focus kind of matters because you will not ever get a gamma idea from a beta mind. You will never get an alpha idea from a beta mind. So if your business needs some breakthrough, daydreaming, interesting ideas in order to create adjacencies to build new products, to seek new markets, to better fulfill the role you're playing within this market, then team has to have permission to enter that intellectual focused state, or that you're turning that channel off. You're taking that off of the programming available through your particular subscription.

(02:00:04):
And the same thing applies to gamma. The habitat basically needs to establish that gamma is a viable channel for a lot of work, and there's permission to go into it. You can certainly overdo it. That's why I say 25%, you don't need to spend half of your year, three-quarters of your year in gamma. It bonkers how smart you can be if you spend three or four hours in an afternoon in that deep-focused state, you'll just do stuff you'd never do. And if you can get the team to have off-sites that are gamma-focused, everybody's scatter and be alone, and do this stuff that are gamma and alpha-focused, that are productive and you bring ideas back. You're just simply going to generate thinking and outcomes that you wouldn't otherwise. And it may be that 10 percent's right for you. It may be that 30 percent's right for you, depending on how dynamic your market and customer base are. But just to challenge yourself with the question.

Lenny Rachitsky (02:00:58):
This stuff is so fascinating, I wish we had another hour just to dig deep into this. Because it feels like just this alone is going to really transform the way companies operate. So let's try to give people something tactical they can do to create more space for alpha and gamma waves. And essentially your advice is, a fourth of your time should be spent, if possible, in alpha and gamma time. Is that right?

Evan LaPointe (02:01:22):
Yeah, I think that probably is overabundance, in all honesty. But if you think about it through the lens of a quarter, if you're going to be on a set of cadences, and this is probably the tactical advice. It's like, look at your cadences and say, at the quarter level, that's probably the right level of fidelity for most people to look at their calendars in terms of what big stuff should we be doing? Because six months is usually too long to do anything big. Too much has happened in the world. Year is definitely too long to wait for a cadence to kind of kick in. So quarterly is really good. And what's nice is when we cluster our gamma time on this quarterly cadence, we can take a lot of the stuff that would be what we call calendar invaders, these random conversations that come up out of nowhere. And we can be like, "Well, we're getting ready to have an offsite, this quarter's offsite in two weeks. Can this idea wait until then to be processed?"

(02:02:16):
So you kind of get this nice little black hole effect, where a lot of distractions have a new home, because you've actually said, "We're going to distinctly do stuff." You're saying, "Yes, but not now," to a lot of distractions. But yeah, I think that's the ideal cadence. And that, for some teams, it needs to be maybe a half a day or a full day. You'll figure it out based on your own business. But what per quarter is a necessary amount of time for us to break beta and go into deep thinking analysis mode? How healthy is our operation? How smart are we being? Are we delivering value? What needs to be reevaluated from the market's experience, the customer's experience, the team's experience? Let's look at these different views of the business, and make some prioritized decisions about, we're going to make specific improvements this quarter for these areas.

(02:03:10):
And then even once a week, maybe just find half a day if you can, maybe, but maybe less than half a day, couple hours to be in gamma, once a week. And you'll kind of feel it out from there. But the reason the rule of thumb of 25 is out there is 25 is kind of the risk point. Because most people will be like, "We're not even spending 5%." Or the perfectionist team might be like, "We're 50." So if you're far away from that rule of thumb, that's a pretty good indicator it's a good time to audit yourself.

Lenny Rachitsky (02:03:42):
When you hear the term, deep work, is that generally referring to gamma time?

Evan LaPointe (02:03:47):
Yeah, people can use that term in a couple of ways. I think a lot of people call deep work, don't bother me beta, which could be one. And other teams might call gamma deep work, but that's probably more appropriate. I think, don't bother me beta is for some teams, they need to be told, "No, no, use this time not just to not be interrupted, but to think differently about problems. To think about is the architecture even right? Is the way we are thinking about this even right?" Not just get a lot of stuff done.

Lenny Rachitsky (02:04:18):
Yeah. So it's not just sitting in your email and write documents, it's actually try to think about bigger problems, things that are challenging your brain, not just like, "I'm just productive getting stuff done, getting stuff done." Awesome. Something that worked really well for me, similar to what you just recommended is having, I had two blocks of time during the week that were two hours or three hours long, where it's just, "Don't bother me, deep work time." So I had it I think Wednesday morning and Friday morning for two or three hours. And actually in the calendars, if you book something during this time, I'll slap you. And that worked really well. And nobody complained.

(02:04:54):
We covered a lot. Here's the things we've covered. I was just taking notes and all the advice that you've shared, how to help people run better meetings, how to get better at developing vision for their team, and company, and product, how to be a better influencer. How to build better relationships, how to create a better culture for your company, how to create more focus and more productive focus. That's a lot. I'm very proud of our conversation. Before we get to a very short lightning round, because we've gone pretty long, I want to keep it short.

Evan LaPointe (02:05:22):
Sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (02:05:22):
Is there anything else you want to share, leave listeners with that you think might be helpful before we close-

Evan LaPointe (02:05:28):
No, I don't think we need... I mean, there's certainly a lot more that we could talk about, but I think we don't want to melt any minds. So we want people to kind of walk away and be like, "I can do that, I can do that, I can do that." So definitely pick two or three wins. I kind of call them pots of ocean to boil instead of oceans to boil. So get a few pots of ocean to boil first, and focus on that for sure. And definitely make one of those pots, if it's a problem area for you, what kind of experience you are. I mean, that's central to everything. Everything else works better in the whole system once you've boiled that pot of the ocean, and then things get easier.

(02:06:05):
And then I guess the only last thing I would add is, think of everything we've talked today. It might help to put some language to it as floor risers and ceiling risers. Because your company has a horizon of performance that you're heading into, and there's a bottom end of that range and a top end of that range. So as you get better at meetings, not only are you increasing... You're raising the floor to get rid of bad meetings and waste, and you might be saving a ton of time or converting useless time into useful time, but you also might be raising the ceiling.

(02:06:35):
And I would be really specific with yourself and your team about, which outcome are you chasing? Is it both? Is it one or the other? And say, we're actually trying to raise the floor so that our performance never goes below a certain range. We get faster, smarter as a result, fewer mistakes. Or are we actually trying to uncap a ceiling that we're dealing with right now, especially around things like strategy and vision? If we feel that those conversations always end up feeling like inconceivable arguments, we have a ceiling on our business's performance. As a result of that, can we raise that ceiling and explore a higher horizon of performance for the business?

Lenny Rachitsky (02:07:12):
Amazing. Evan, with that, we've reached our very exciting and very quick lightning round. Are you ready?

Evan LaPointe (02:07:18):
Yes, let's do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (02:07:20):
All right, so let's start with what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Evan LaPointe (02:07:26):
Well, the obvious first one is Never Split the Difference. I recommend that book to everybody in the universe. I think if you haven't read it yet, you shouldn't get your driver's license. For those who don't know, it was written by Chris Voss, he was an FBI hostage negotiator. And it explores how to negotiate with people, and not just hostages, but your colleagues, your parents, your wife, like everybody. And there's some very surprising technique in there that is unexpected, not trying to get people to agree with you, but getting them to say no, more often. Instead of saying, "Hey, Lenny, are you willing to do this?" Say, "Hey, Lenny, are you opposed to doing this?" And it's just this reversal. And "I'm giving you the out," is the way he explains it. There's a whole bunch of other technique, but the more of that technique is in a team, the better. The better the team does. That's a no-brainer.

(02:08:16):
The second one I would say, since we've kind of covered this topic a little bit about habitat today. If you enjoy reading books that are sort of root canals, but you're better off because you read them, there's a book called Never... not Never Split the Difference, there's a book called The Person and the Situation. It was written by some researchers, some psychological researchers. And what it explores is the difference between how personality influences your behavior, and how the situation you're in, or like we talked about, the habitat you're in, influences your behavior. And if you're not yet convinced that either of those matters, like, "Oh, it doesn't. I'll do what I do regardless of the habitat, or I'll do what I do regardless of who I am," that book will melt the face off of that existing mental model conclusively. It's really valuable knowledge to understand the mechanics of how the situation influences a person, and how the personality influences the person.

(02:09:12):
And then I guess the last, maybe we'll put a fork in the road of a choose your own adventure. If you're a real student of the game, and you want go 10,000 leagues under the sea on this stuff, there's a series of books called the Cambridge Fundamentals of Neuroscience. You can find it on Amazon. A lot of them, you can just get on your Kindle for a lot cheaper than the library-decorating version of it, but that is bonkers. It talks about how your brain applies to intelligence, emotionality, relationships. It's incredible knowledge. If you instead want to keep it more in the part of the world you experience and can see and not the brain. Thaler wrote a book called Misbehaving. It was kind of the major book about behavioral economics.

(02:09:58):
And again, we spend a lot of time in companies talking about the way people should act, instead of the way people do act. And behavioral economics is essentially the version of economics that's about how people do act, not how people should act. So I think that's a great field of study. And then again, Robert Greene's whole library is super valuable, especially Human Nature, if you're into that. He's a little darker of an author, certainly kind of doesn't pull punches about human nature. So those are all great books to explore.

Lenny Rachitsky (02:10:28):
Do you have a favorite product you recently discovered that you really love?

Evan LaPointe (02:10:31):
I look more at the category level of products. I really like products that have great ergonomics. A lot of people underestimate the value of what it feels like to use the product. Are things in the right place at the right time? I just started this newsletter that's kind of like, how do you break all of what we do in a bite-sized pieces for people who are super interested in this stuff to get something weekly? And it exposed me to Beehiiv, which is a very well-designed newsletter platform, high ergonomics. I don't ever find anything hard to find. I can get things to work the way I want them to work.

(02:11:07):
So just, I like that example. And I remember even back to when I was obsessed with finding the perfect backpack to travel with, and then you find these brands where you're going through security, and you didn't even know it, but there's a pocket designed for your phone in exactly the place you would want the pocket for your phone to be. And you're just like, "That's so great. I love that this team designed this pocket just in the right spot." So that's really my focus is ergonomics in product.

Lenny Rachitsky (02:11:32):
Final question. I saw you tweeted that people are telling you that you look like JD Vance, which is hilarious. Do you think this will be a net benefit or a net hurdle?

Evan LaPointe (02:11:42):
It'll be an incredible benefit to Halloween, because it's totally clear what I'm going to do for Halloween. Yeah, I mean, I guess I'm going to have to see what people in the street... Fortunately I live in Park City, so I don't run across a lot of people in the street who want to yell at people. But if I lived in Chicago or something like that, I would've no doubt somebody would come up and throw something at me. But yeah, I'm neutral on the topic so far, minus the Halloween bonus.

Lenny Rachitsky (02:12:09):
We'll see. We'll see how your life changes. Evan, this has been amazing. There's so much richness to this conversation. And like I said, we've covered basically everything people want to get better at as product manager, you could say. Two final questions. Where can folks find the stuff that you do to dig deeper, to learn more, to learn more deeply from you? And two, how can listeners be useful to you?

Evan LaPointe (02:12:31):
Yeah, I mean, they can certainly find a lot of the stuff we do on our website, core-sciences.com. Find a link to that profile you talked about on there, which can be super fun to take and insightful. The newsletter, all the stuff that we do, you can kind of find out there. And then certainly Twitter. I mean, I've always been really prickly about people that get on Twitter to post only and not to interact. I'm kind of the opposite. I really love people's questions and pushback. And just yesterday, I probably spent way longer than I should have out of my portfolio management approach to time, just on a thread where I was talking to this really interesting woman about this debate almost, about the probability of people doing things based on their beliefs, which was... And then we had some kind of bystanders watching the whole thing happen, and I had a meeting with a good friend Rod afterwards, where we talked about how that all went.

(02:13:28):
So I love to talk to people and answer questions, and I'm sure people will have plenty of questions that they'd love to dive deeper into. So I'm on Twitter for sure. And then how you can help me. I mean, fortunately for me, I'm in the business of helping other people, whether those are individuals, teams, companies. So the most helpful thing to me is you helping yourself. So if you find our content valuable, if you want to have awesome managers or anything like that in this sort of science-based, kind of more efficient approach to getting there would be interesting, then reach out. We don't bite. We're pretty easy to work with. And that would be super fun to have a conversation about what your team needs.

Lenny Rachitsky (02:14:08):
Evan, thank you so much for being here.

Evan LaPointe (02:14:10):
Thanks for having me. This has been really cool. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (02:14:12):
Same for me. Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Jason Feifer (00:00:00):
The editor, the writer, I'll just say it as plainly as possible. They don't care about you. They don't care about you. They care about their reader or their listener or their viewer. That's who they care about. That's who they're serving, and if you can be of use to them in sharing the kinds of information that they are looking to serve their audience, then you can get what you want. But you can't treat them like a service provider because they're not. And so you have to approach them with an understanding of what they're trying to do for their audience and how you can fit into that because if you don't, they are not interested in you.

Lenny (00:00:47):
Today, my guest is Jason Feifer. Jason is editor in chief at Entrepreneur Magazine, previously an editor at Fast Company and a number of other magazines. He's also an author, podcast host, keynote speaker, and startup advisor. In our conversation, we get incredibly tactical about how to get press for your product. Jason shares how to pitch a journalist, how to find the right journalist to pitch, what publications to consider, why freelance writers are more likely to write about your story, why the mission of the publication is so important in how you pitch them, plus what channels to use to reach out to journalists, how to think about your goals and what success looks like from getting press, so much more.

(00:01:25):
I learned a ton from this conversation, and if you're looking to get press for your stuff, you'll find so much value here. With that, I bring you Jason Feifer after a short word from our sponsors. This episode is brought to you by Sidebar. Are you looking to land your next big career move or start your own thing? One of the most effective ways to create a big leap in your career, and something that worked really well for me a few years ago, is to create a personal board of directors, a trusted peer group where you can discuss challenges you're having, get career advice, and just kind of gut check how you're thinking about your work, your career, and your life. This has been a big trajectory changer for me, but it's hard to build this trusted group.

(00:02:05):
With Sidebar, senior leaders are matched with highly vetted, private, supportive peer groups to lean on for unbiased opinions, diverse perspectives, and raw feedback. Everyone has their own zone of genius, so together, we're better prepared to navigate professional pitfalls, leading to more responsibility, faster promotions, and bigger impact. Guided by world-class programming and facilitation, Sidebar enables you to get focused tactical feedback at every step of your journey. If you're a listener of this podcast, you're likely already driven and committed to growth. A Sidebar personal board of directors is the missing piece to catalyze that journey. Why spend a decade finding your people when you can meet them at Sidebar today?

(00:02:46):
Jump the growing wait list of thousands of leaders from top tech companies by visiting sidebar.com/lenny to learn more. That's sidebar.com/lenny. This episode is brought to you by Maui Nui Venison, a mission-based food company, bringing the healthiest red meat on the planet directly to your door. I actually joined Maui Nui Venison earlier this year after hearing their app on the Tim Ferriss Podcast, and I'm excited to be spreading the message further. Not only does this company provide the most nutrient-dense and protein-dense red meat available, their operation produces the only stress-free 100% wild harvested red meat on the market that is the only one of its kind in the world, actively managing Maui's invasive access, deer populations, helping to restore balanced, vulnerable ecosystems, food systems and communities in Hawaii.

(00:03:33):
Also, it is seriously delicious. Not at all [inaudible 00:03:37] and easy to cook. My wife and I made stew and steaks and all kinds of grilled goodies with the meat. We also feel great about it as a protein from an ethical standpoint. I highly recommend trying their all-natural Venison jerky sticks for an optimal protein snack, as well as a wide variety of fresh cuts, all available in their online butcher shop. There are limited memberships available, but you can sign up and get 20% off your first order at mauinuivenison. com/lenny. That's mauinuivenison.com/lenny. Jason, thank you so much for being here, and welcome to the podcast.

Jason Feifer (00:04:13):
Lenny. Thanks for having me.

Lenny (00:04:14):
It's absolutely my pleasure. We've actually collaborated on a couple of things recently, and as we were chatting about some stuff, I was asking for advice on how to help a startup I'm working with get press, and you shared a bunch of killer advice, and so I asked if you could just come on this podcast and share similar advice for how to help startups get press and here we are.

Jason Feifer (00:04:36):
Yeah, I'm really happy that you asked me to do that. This is something people ask me about a lot. I've been in media for decades. I've worked at a lot of different magazines. Obviously, I run Entrepreneur Magazine now, but I was a Fast Company. I was at Men's Health, so I've seen a lot of different sides of media, and it is a very misunderstood tool, particularly for people in business, and so I love demystifying it.

Lenny (00:05:00):
Amazing. I'm excited to learn all this too, and so thanks for doing this.

Jason Feifer (00:05:04):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:05:04):
First question is just, as someone in press, how much volume is there coming at you from startup founders and PR people trying to get you to write about them and also just reporters that you work with?

Jason Feifer (00:05:15):
Yeah, it's tremendous. It's ridiculous. I would say that by the time we are done recording this podcast, I'll have, I don't know. I mean, it could be anywhere from 30 to 50 pitches in my inbox. It comes all day. Now, to be clear, most of that is garbage in the real garbagey sense, right.

(00:05:36):
It's a lot of completely unrelevant press releases that were sent to me and a bazillion other people. But within, there are definitely some people who have spent the time to reach out very specifically to me, and everybody in media gets some kind of volume like that. To reach out to somebody in media is to be shouting over a lot of noise.

Lenny (00:06:01):
Wow. I imagine we'll get to this later, but I'm curious just what percentage of those are PR people and press release versus a founder or someone that is doing it themselves?

Jason Feifer (00:06:12):
The percentage of direct messages from founders that I'm getting is low. I would say probably 20, 25%. And then the 75% is PR in some capacity, either targeted PR where somebody's intentionally reaching out to me or mass blast press releases.

Lenny (00:06:30):
You know what's crazy is I've been getting a lot of these now. People think I'm some kind of journalist, and they're just like embargoed announcement product launch.

Jason Feifer (00:06:37):
It doesn't take much because you just end up on some list, and what's really interesting, and we'll talk about PR later, I know. But one of the great insights that you can get into the challenges of that industry is how completely automated a lot of it is where a lot of people in PR are not thinking specifically about how to tell the right story to the right potential media outlet. Instead, what they're doing is they're just playing a numbers game, and they're just blasting it out to everybody.

(00:07:13):
And that means that you could end up... I write this newsletter, right. I have... Entrepreneur Magazine is the thing that people obviously would pitch, but then I have this newsletter where I don't interview anybody. There's no opportunity to be featured in my newsletter, and I still get pitches to the newsletter because somebody saw it and dropped it in some spreadsheet, and it just... now I get it. And I think that's a real disservice to entrepreneurs who are paying for people to do that, and I really hate that.

Lenny (00:07:41):
Yeah. Okay, so we're going to get into the meat of just how to actually do this well, but a couple more questions just to set a little context. One is in terms of impact. What kind of impact have you seen from getting press for a startup in terms of growth for their product specifically?

Jason Feifer (00:07:57):
So it's a really wide range. I have had entrepreneurs tell me that a single story in Entrepreneur Magazine, like the print magazine or just online, will drive more, whatever more app downloads, more sales that month than any of their paid marketing efforts.

(00:08:16):
But then I have also heard entrepreneurs tell me that it didn't do anything for them or that it did one very specific thing for them, which is to say maybe some potential partner read it and reached out, and it started an interesting conversation. It's all over the gamut, and it's a really important thing for people to remember is that this is not something that I think that you should bank on as a strategy for growth. It's a great add-on. But if you think that press by itself is going to solve your problems, you're wrong because it might, but it's way too unpredictable.

Lenny (00:08:48):
Is there anything else along those lines of just when it's worth somebody investing time into getting press, either stage of startup, type of startup, any just general broad advice of you should not be spending time on trying to get press versus this is a really good opportunity for you.

Jason Feifer (00:09:02):
Think about press the same way that you think about raising money, which is to say you do it when you know what the money is for, and you should do it when you know what the press is for. A lot of people reach out to me at such an early stage that if we wrote about them, it wouldn't get them anything. They're not at a stage where they could use that press in any meaningful way, and so there's really no purpose in chasing it now. You should step back and think really as a starting point, "What do I need press for?" And if you have a good tactical answer to that, that could be because I need to drive awareness to a new product. That could be because I'm going out to raise money, and I need articles to show that the marketplace takes me seriously.

(00:09:55):
These are good reasons, but I get a lot of emails. It's funny because people are... like entrepreneurs, in particular, they're just so vulnerable, and it's kind of a wonderful way sometimes. And sometimes people will just email me, and they'll just say, "You know, I've worked really hard, and I just feel like I deserve this." I respect that, and I relate to it in some ways with my own trying to get attention for my own work. But, "I deserve this" that's not a good tactical decision for your business that doesn't do anything for you. And so I would put that to the side and only think of press as you don't go out and raise money if you don't know what the money is for. You shouldn't go out and try to get press if you don't know what the press is for.

Lenny (00:10:38):
I'm curious to hear other examples when it's not, when it's a bad idea because, as like I said, an outside observer, I would always love to get more attention for my product and more people to be aware of it, more people to check it out. Is there an example or anything that comes to mind of there's no need for you to do that in this moment or for this product?

Jason Feifer (00:10:55):
Oftentimes, it's not even about the moment, but it's about the publication. So I'll give you an example. I spoke at an event once, and afterwards, this guy comes up to me, and he has a small hot dog food truck business in Washington, DC. So he said he's got a couple trucks, and he's doing good business selling hot dogs, and he wants coverage in Entrepreneur Magazine. He's like, "Oh, how can I get a feature?" And the problem with that instinct that he has is that he's really directing his energy in the wrong place because if he is selling hot dogs in Washington, DC, then I understand what press is for him. Press is to drive hotdog sales. That's what he wants to do. Entrepreneur is not going to do that for him. Full stop. Why? Because Entrepreneur reaches a national to international audience.

(00:11:52):
So that means that 99.5% of the people who would read a story about this guy have no ability to go get his hotdogs, which means that that was wasted effort. So fine. Was it that hard to come up and talk to me at the conference? No. But scale that out. How many emails is he sending that are like that? How much energy is he putting into chasing things that ultimately don't have good direct value to him? What he needs to do is think, "Okay, my goal, get more people to buy hot dogs. Where am I? I'm in Washington, DC. How can I reach people who are interested in food in my market?" So stop chasing Entrepreneur and start chasing the local eater or the food section of the Washingtonian or something like that. That small shift can give you a lot more payoff for your effort.

Lenny (00:12:38):
This is a good segue to just let's just dive into how to actually go about getting press, and I know you-

Jason Feifer (00:12:38):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:12:42):
... kind of have this three-step structure for thinking about it. Maybe just start with what are the three steps, and then we'll dive into each one.

Jason Feifer (00:12:50):
Yeah, sure. So I mean, look, it is pretty simple, right. Step one is prep. You want to be thinking about how to tell your story. You want to be thinking about the kinds of stuff I just talked about. What is press for for you? Everything that you need to do to orient yourself towards what is this opportunity, and why am I chasing it, and how to make the most of it. Step two is figuring out who to pitch. Not all press is created equal. There are not reasons to just go chasing everybody arbitrarily. The hotdog example is a good one.

(00:13:19):
So finding the writers and editors who you're actually going to reach out to, who are going to most receptive to you. And also making sure that because you did the prep, you can figure out how to tell your story in a way that they're going to be interested in. We'll talk about that. And then step three is the actual pitch. What does it mean to reach out to these people, to engage the writers and editors? How do you find them? What do you send them? What are you telling them? That's it.

(00:13:42):
I mean, right. But what you need to understand is that you're entering a world that probably doesn't operate the way in which you think it does, and I see that all the time as the recipient of pitches. People don't understand who they're reaching out to and how I and my colleagues think. We should maybe even start with that because a really important thing to understand just again, to go to [inaudible 00:14:07]-

Lenny (00:14:07):
[inaudible 00:14:07] do it. Yeah.

Jason Feifer (00:14:08):
... yeah, the metaphor of the investors, you don't reach out to an investor if you don't understand what that investor does, what they're interested in, or what kinds of companies they invest in. You can't do that with media, either. So I get pitches every single day along the lines of, "How do I get coverage in Entrepreneur Magazine? How do I get a feature in Entrepreneur Magazine?" And to me, it always feels like they're ordering a hamburger from me. Like, "How do I get a hamburger from Entrepreneur Hamburgers, right?" They're treating me like a service provider. That my job is to provide press.

(00:14:44):
And I get it because, of course, if you're an entrepreneur, and you're looking for press, then the... [inaudible 00:14:51] writers and editors out there seem to be in the business of writing about people, and therefore, there's some service that they seem to provide, and you're trying to figure out how to get it. But that's not how the media thinks of themselves, right. The editor, the writer, I'll just say it as plainly as possible, they don't care about you. They don't care about you. They care about their reader, or their listener, or their viewer.

(00:15:18):
That's who they care about. That's who they're serving. And if you can be of use to them in sharing the kinds of information that they are looking to serve their audience, then you can get what you want, but you can't treat them like a service provider because they're not. And so you have to approach them with an understanding of what they're trying to do for their audience and how you can fit into that. Because if you don't, they are not interested in you.

Lenny (00:15:49):
I love that. And more... even specifically, what is it they're trying to do for their audience? I imagine it's just have something interesting that they want to read. Something they can learn. Something they're like, "Wow, I'm really excited to read this."

Jason Feifer (00:16:00):
Yeah. But it's going to be more specific based on the mission of each publication. So, for example, I've worked at two separate business titles. I was a senior editor at Fast Company for a number of years, and now I'm the editor-in-chief of Entrepreneur Magazine. The decision that is made about whether or not a story belongs in a publication, it was totally different based on these two publications. So I can't speak to Fast Company now because they've gone through a couple of leadership changes. I don't know what their mission is, but back when I worked there under Bob Safian, he was the editor-in-chief, that was really a magazine about where businesses going, and the stories that were in the magazine were all supposed to be in some way representative of the evolution of business.

(00:16:50):
And so when people would pitch what we'd really be looking for are, are there insights into... in what this person is doing that other people could read and say, "Aha, that helps me understand where this industry is going or that industry, or it helps me think about how I can shape my own company to match current trends," that kind of stuff. Entrepreneur, totally different mission. The way that I think of Entrepreneur is that it's not even a magazine about business. It's a magazine about thinking. Or what I want to do is make sure that everybody who comes to the magazine walks away with great insights into how to think through the challenges in their business.

(00:17:29):
And so what I'm looking for when somebody reaches out is did they make some interesting counterintuitive decision that solved a problem in their business, and I'll emphasize in. Because, oftentimes, when people hear me talk about solving problems in business, they think, "Aha, but I solve a problem in business, right. I saw that there weren't the best razors in the world, and I made the best razors." That's not what I'm talking about. What I'm talking about is... There's this woman whose name is Joelle Mertzel. She has a company called Kitchen Concepts Unlimited, and she makes a butter dish, and it's a really smart butter dish because it is built on a hinge, right. So this is designed to solve a very specific problem, which Lenny, I don't know if you knew this, I did not, that you don't need to refrigerate butter. Did you know that?

Lenny (00:18:18):
I knew that intellectually, but I still refrigerate it. I know people don't.

Jason Feifer (00:18:22):
Me too, even though I've had multiple conversations with this woman about this. You don't need to refrigerate butter, and if you leave it out, it cuts easier. It's more spreadable. Big problem, the butter dish. So most butter dishes you just lift up. And so if you have warm room temperature butter that's soft, and you lift the butter dish top up, you might bump into the butter, and it's going to make a big mess. So Joelle makes a butter dish on a hinge, right. Opens and closes exactly the same way every single time. No mess. Brilliant, solves a problem. She reaches out to me about this. This is not interesting to us, right. Maybe this is interesting for a cooking magazine, right. Maybe Bon Appétit is interested in this. Entrepreneur's not interested in this because that doesn't help other entrepreneurs to have thought through that problem.

(00:19:13):
But then she tells me something else. What she tells me is that she is, at the very beginning of this, trying to figure out how to answer some basic questions about her audience, like what colors do they want in this butter dish and what price point are they willing to pay? And she wants to do some market research. She goes to a market research company. She says, "How much would it cost to research consumers and answer these questions?" They say, $10,000. She doesn't have $10,000. And then, one day, she's sitting at the airport waiting to board a flight, and she looks around and she realizes that airports are full of people who have absolutely nothing better to do than answer questions about butter dishes, right. Nothing better to do, just sitting there. And you could start at gate one. By the time you get to gate eight, everyone in gate one is new. You could do it all over again, and you could have a 6:00 PM flight, and you could show up at 9:00 AM. Nobody's going to stop you. You can do this all day in the airport. And this is how she starts to do her own market research. She saves that $10,000, and she does it herself. I put that story in the magazine. It's tiny. It's this tiny random company and this random decision. But the reason I did it is because every time I repeat that story to entrepreneurs, they're all like, "Ugh, right, totally. There's always other ways to do things." They love the ingenuity of it. That's what I'm looking for. That's Entrepreneur's stories. So to go back to the point that you were making, it's not just about, "Well, it's a magazine called Entrepreneur. They must write about entrepreneurs, right. I'm an entrepreneur. I belong in Entrepreneur."

(00:20:41):
People think that all the time. No. You have to step back and read what these publications are publishing and ask yourself, "What are they doing? What is the purpose here?" The editors and the writers, they're making decisions about what goes in this magazine, and they're making decisions about how the stories are constructed. Why are they doing that? Who are they trying to reach? When you start to see it through that lens, you start to see the pattern, and you get an understanding a real instruction manual for what it actually means to pitch these publications.

Lenny (00:21:13):
That is such an interesting insight. I had no idea that that was something you should be thinking about. Is there an easy way to understand the mission of the publication? Is there an about page they often add this to or is it, like you said, you just read a bunch of stuff and try to suss it out?

Jason Feifer (00:21:28):
Nobody publishes an about page in that way because the internal logic of the editorial team. But you can certainly make some starting assumptions based on who the publication is trying to reach. Everybody is trying to reach somebody. It gets more complicated the more general interest something becomes, right. What is the New York Times?

(00:21:53):
What is the mission? That's a hard thing to answer. You sort of have to divide it up into sections, right. The mission of the National News Desk is different from the mission of the Business Desk, and even within there, the mission of the Sunday business section is different from the mission of the Monday to Saturday business section.

Lenny (00:22:09):
[inaudible 00:22:09].

Jason Feifer (00:22:09):
So you have to start to really parse it out. And this is the reason why people hire PR is because if they're good at their jobs, they understand a lot of this already. But I really do think that if you spent time with the content and your starting point is, "I understand that this publication is trying to reach X. They're trying to reach these people," then you can start to see the patterns of what it is that they're doing. How are they telling stories? What do these five stories all have in common? They have something in common. There's something that they're all doing, and you can certainly read the tea leaves and try to figure it out.

Lenny (00:22:48):
Awesome. Okay. It feels like we've already gone into step one around prep. What else is involved in preparing to get press?

Jason Feifer (00:22:57):
If we're talking about prep, the very first thing that you need to do is what I had said earlier, which is just ask yourself, what do I need press for? And you need a good answer to that question. And once you have that, the next thing you should do is you should start to think about, "Well, what's interesting about my business? And oftentimes, it's not necessarily what you think, and you can be guided in a way by what's happening in step two, where you start to think about who you're trying to reach out to. Because, for example, the story that somebody might tell me at Entrepreneur is going to be different than the story that somebody might tell Cosmo.

(00:23:42):
There's a reason for a company to end up in, both Entrepreneur and Cosmo, right. Maybe the product is for young women. And so, Cosmo might be interested in some kind of product feature or including the product in a roundup of some kind of products. Whereas Entrepreneur would do the entrepreneur-focused story. What did this founder do? How they do they write? You can take your... You could think about your story and kind of break it up into a whole bunch of different little pieces and then figure out which piece goes to what media. But oftentimes, people make the mistake of trying to do that in reverse, which is to say that they kind of decide what narrative they would like to have out in the world, and then they just go around to different publications trying to sell them on that. I get that all the time.

(00:24:34):
A lot of my pitches that I'll receive in my inbox are somebody who hasn't really thought at all about what Entrepreneur publishes but instead just has something that they would like to get out into the world. I mean, a good kind of dumb example is, yesterday, somebody sent me an email about a company that had just hired a new president. I don't care about that. That's not useful to my audience at all. I'm sure that there is a trade publication, right. Let's say that there was a company in the restaurant industry. I'm sure that a trade publication that follows the blow by blow by blow of a restaurant industry might be interested in your new president. But I'm not because you hiring that new president isn't useful to my audience. Stories in Entrepreneur are not really about the person that I'm writing about.

(00:25:23):
They're really about the audience. They're really me serving the audience through the stories of the people I'm writing about. That's not useful. I wish that they had spent a moment and thought about that, but they didn't. So once you start to think about who it is that you're trying to reach, you can step back and say, "Well, what part of my journey is going to be most relevant to them? And I would push you to be really, really creative about it. Because if you go back to the Butterie example, the butter dish, that little funny story about the airport, I mean, who else is writing about that? It's not central to her story as a brand. It's not central to her sales pitch. It was-

Jason Feifer (00:26:00):
... central to her story as a brand, it's not central to her sales pitch. It was just for us. We were probably the only publication in the world who cared about that, but I really cared about it.

Lenny (00:26:11):
Amazing. Okay, so just kind of summarizing what you shared, think about the goal. What are you trying to get out of press? Goals could be awareness of what we've done, something new, investor interest. What are some other common examples of goals that you see for trying to get press?

Jason Feifer (00:26:27):
Yeah, awareness of something new. But also doesn't have to be awareness of something new, it could just be continued growth, trying to reach into a new marketplace. That's fine. Anything that's tied to growth or reaching a new customer base-

Lenny (00:26:45):
Cool.

Jason Feifer (00:26:45):
... would make sense.

Lenny (00:26:45):
That makes sense.

Jason Feifer (00:26:47):
But it could also be that you're looking to position yourself in your own marketplace a little differently. I see, for example, a lot of people, a lot of big companies, keep knocking on my door because we don't just hear from startups, we hear from major companies as well who are pitching stories. I know why they want to be an entrepreneur. They want to be an entrepreneur because they're trying to position their brand as also being relevant to small business owners. It's helpful to have that kind of context because coverage an entrepreneur can help them go out to the marketplace and say, "Look, we're also reaching X, Y, Z people."

(00:27:25):
So sometimes it's not even about a conversion, but rather it's about a positioning and that's a good reason to also maybe put forward your executives. Sometimes it's just about establishing your CEO or your founder as an authority in a particular area because you want them to be more trustworthy, you want them to be invited to more conferences. Because all of that stuff draws more attention to the company, all sorts of reasons to do this stuff. And then trying to get in front of investors, trying to get in front of partners. Look, there's a million reasons why being visible can be useful, but you need to make sure you understand what you're actually trying to do.

Lenny (00:28:07):
Okay, awesome. That was really helpful. So think about what goal you have in mind for getting press, pick a publication and understand their mission and what their goals are. And then think about some interesting stories that you could pitch them. Not just like we have a new president, but something that you think they'd be excited to share that connects with their mission.

Jason Feifer (00:28:25):
That's right.

Lenny (00:28:26):
Kind of on this topic, I know we want to talk about who to contact and how to figure out who to actually talk to. A couple of questions that come to mind. This is all a lot of work. Founders are really busy.

Jason Feifer (00:28:35):
Yeah, it's a lot.

Lenny (00:28:35):
So begs the question, PR agencies, do you have a perspective on would you recommend working with PR agency? Is there a time when it makes to and doesn't make sense to?

Jason Feifer (00:28:45):
Yeah, I mean it's a ton of work. Everything that I'm describing is a ton of work. And let me be clear, people succeed in getting press without doing any of the things that I'm describing because dumb luck happens in the world. You could very well just bang out an email to some random editor and they might like it. That is entirely possible. You could disregard everything that I've just said. What I'm really helping you do is try to optimize your approach. But yeah, hiring PR can cut out a lot of this. Now you're not doing this research yourself, you're not thinking through these challenges yourself. You're working with people who understand exactly how to identify the most interesting parts of your story and then turn them into good pitches. So why wouldn't everyone do that? The couple reasons. Number one, cost PR can be expensive, so you just have to factor that in. Number two, PR is and can be, I'll say can be, a very frustrating journey because a lot of PR people are very bad at their jobs. They're very bad.

(00:29:52):
And this isn't just me bashing PR people. I have literally been hired to give keynotes at PR industry conferences. And I get on stage and I say most PR people are bad at their jobs and everybody nods. And they all know it. And of course, none of them think that they're one of the bad ones, but they all know it. PR is full of people who are bad at their jobs. Why are they bad at their jobs? They're bad at their jobs because they're lazy, because they're primarily relying upon email blasts, just sending things out, because they have a older idea of what it means to get the word out. For example, if you hire or talk to a PR agency and one of the things that they recommend doing that you should spend money on is a press release, like a traditional press release, run as fast as you can away from that. I don't know if you know this. Do you know this? The press release, there are some purposeful reasons to put out a press release, but the press release is really no longer the primary unit of press attraction.

Lenny (00:31:07):
Yeah, I get that sense.

Jason Feifer (00:31:08):
Yeah. But here's what's fascinating. So a PR agency I wouldn't recommend might do this. They'll tell you, "We're going to put together a press release about this new thing, so you have to pay a little extra money for the production of this press release and then also the distribution of this press release because what we're going to do is we're going to put it out on the wire," because there are a whole bunch of press release distribution wires. So they'll do that, you'll pay the money, it'll go out on the wire. And then they'll send you a report about all the places that this press release ended up on. It ended up on Yahoo Finance, it ended up on Market Watch. And it technically did. The press release is there, it was posted. And zero people are going to see it in the whole world because Yahoo Finance has a section where they just publish every damn press release that gets published by all these different distributors. Nobody saw that.

(00:32:08):
So don't confuse posting press releases even on very big websites with actual success. What you want in an actual PR person is someone who traffics in one thing, and that is relationships. The most important thing that a PR person can have is active relationships with people in media. Why? If a PR person is guaranteeing you press, that's another reason to run out the door as fast as possible because the PR people cannot control this. Writers and editors, they do what they want. It's a completely subjective industry and very frustrating. I completely understand. That was totally subjective. So the best that a PR person can do is shape your story, understand who to pitch, and then get that writer or editor to look at it, to pay attention to it. There are some PR people in this world who I think very highly of. I think they're incredibly smart, incredibly good at what they do, and they only pitch me when they have something that they think I will genuinely be interested in. Instead of a lot of PR people who just send me some random thing every week or every day.

(00:33:21):
I don't pay attention to those people. But, I don't know, just shout out, when John Beer from Jack Taylor PR sends me ... John, I met him in a PR capacity a decade ago and we've since become friends. When he emails me, I pay attention. I don't write about it all the time. I'm not going to write about something just because I like John, but I will pay attention. And paying attention honestly is half the battle because people in media are getting so much email. So you want someone who's going to understand you, understand your industry, understand and know the people who they should be reaching out to, and who really respect you as an entrepreneur and are going to give you the hard feedback. Because there are a lot of people who will go and hire PR and they'll say, "I want you to email this and this and this and this and this publication."

(00:34:16):
And if the PR person just does that, all they're doing is annoying their contacts if they don't really feel like this was meaningful. You should like when a PR person pushes back on you and says, "You know what? I don't think that your story is right for that publication. Here's why." That's someone you should hire.

Lenny (00:34:34):
Is there any other PR people you want to call out as ones that you think are awesome?

Jason Feifer (00:34:38):
The challenge here is that I'm going to regret not including a whole bunch of people who don't pop to mind immediately, but-

Lenny (00:34:44):
We can include them in the show notes, whoever else.

Jason Feifer (00:34:45):
Yeah, sure. Okay, so let's see. Off the top of my head, so John of Jack Taylor, he does a lot of wellness stuff. So PR agencies tend to specialize, and so you want to make sure that you're going with people who really understand you and the media ecosystem that you are reaching out to. So I think John's really smart. Let's see. Hannah Lee at Hannah Lee Communications is great on hospitality stuff. So restaurants, hotels, booze, they're really smart. Jen Sesquila, sorry Jen, if I mispronounced your name. Max Borges Agency, really good on sort of consumer focused products. Greg Delman, he's based in San Francisco, he has a boutique shop called G3 Media and he does a lot of tech startups stuff, just really knows that world. Greg, I'll find writers through Greg because he just knows everybody. I just texted him recently and I was like, "I need somebody who can write about this very specific AI thing." He happened to be at TechCrunch Disrupt and he found some freelancer and connected us. That's great. So those are four. I will have more that'll give you for the show notes.

Lenny (00:35:55):
Amazing. Okay. This is really useful. If any come to mind as we're chatting, feel free to shout them out again. Similar question, when people are thinking about publications to go after, say you're a startup founder. Is there a list you could just share of just like, here's probably the top five, 10 that you should be thinking about? The obvious ones, you talked about entrepreneur, [inaudible 00:36:15] Company, TechCrunch obviously comes to mind. Is there others that are just like, "Here's a good list to start with?"

Jason Feifer (00:36:19):
Honestly, it really, so much depends upon what it is that you're looking to do. You could be a startup, founder and entrepreneur and Inc and Fast Company are for maybe some good reason not at the top of your list because you're a startup founder, but your goal right now is to reach consumers. And those publications don't reach consumers and they don't reach people who are in a buying mindset. They reach people who are in a creating mindset. So I would expect that if you have a startup and that startup is not B2B in some way, that it would be possibly very reasonable that business publications might not be your target right now. Maybe Men's Health is. Maybe, I don't know, anything could be. I think oftentimes people tend to think too close to them about where they belong. Lenny, here's a real kind of exchange that happens, which is if somebody will email me, I don't respond to every publicist.

(00:37:23):
It's just literally not possible. I would not have enough time in the day. I do do my best to respond to every entrepreneur who reaches out because I feel like they deserve a response. And sometimes somebody will email me and they'll send me something and it's just not relevant. And I'll reply and I'll just say, "Hey, thanks. Congratulations on what you've built. But this isn't a fit for entrepreneur." And maybe once a month somebody responds really in a testy way, and they're like, "But don't you write about entrepreneurs? I'm a great entrepreneur success story." It's like, no, that's not what we do. Yes, entrepreneurs are featured in our stories, but no, we're not just a directory of entrepreneurs. Here's a good way of thinking about it. If you have a startup and you're trying to figure out what publications to be in, go look at where your competitors have been featured. That's a great place to start. What audiences are they reaching and how are they doing it? That should give you some direction about where you might want to go next.

Lenny (00:38:33):
Awesome advice. On TechCrunch, do you have a perspective on is it worth investing in getting featured in TechCrunch?

Jason Feifer (00:38:40):
I'll tell you a sort of personal press journey moment, and then I think that it will translate into the answer for TechCrunch.

Lenny (00:38:47):
Amazing.

Jason Feifer (00:38:48):
Okay. Something we haven't talked about so far yet is, and this is sort of almost skipping all the steps that we've laid out to what happens after you get the press. But the point of the press is sometimes to reach the people who are reading it. You get covered in Entrepreneur and entrepreneurs are going to read it and maybe something good will come of it. But sometimes the point of it is not to reach the people who are reading it at all. Possibly a very small number of people are going to read it, which by the way is a real, real possibility. Because although all of these publications that I have mentioned, Entrepreneur, Forbes, Fortune Inc, Fast Company, whatever, these are reaching millions of people, their websites get many, many, many millions of unique visitors each month. That does not mean that your story is going to be read by millions of people.

(00:39:40):
In fact, the largest possibility here is that your story will reach five to 10,000 people, a small number of people because these publications are publishing tons of stuff. So you might get this story, it might look awesome, it might not reach that many people. That might also be okay. Because maybe the reason in your logic for why to get that kind of coverage is not to have reached that publication's audience at all anyway. Maybe what it really is is to tweet it and then put some money behind promoting that tweet because then you can target that you got coverage to the people who you want to notice you got coverage.

(00:40:21):
And I see a lot of people do that. They'll take articles that we ran on Entrepreneur and they'll basically turn them into advertisements. And that's really smart because what they got out of Entrepreneur was the social cachet. It was the validation in the marketplace. And then they're going to do something with that themselves. That's really smart. You also see it sometimes the reason to get coverage, it's just so you can put it on your website. As seen in. As seen in is probably more valuable than anyone actually reading that story to begin with. They probably won't read the story. You might not even have to link it on the website. But you could just get to say as seen in. Because again, it gives you that validation.

(00:40:56):
Me personally, I am building a small podcast company with my friend Nicole Lapin. Nicole Lapin is a bestselling business money expert. And we have a company, she's the founder and I'm an advisor. And it's called Money News Network. We have a podcast on it called Help Wanted that we co-host together. And we got coverage in Variety. And that was the result of pounding on a lot of doors and finally getting someone at Variety to take interest and they ran an article about us. Did we get anything from that story in Variety? The answer is no, like nothing. But you better believe that every email we send out to every potential advertiser, to every partner, includes the link. Variety has covered us. And I guarantee that when someone receives that email, it makes them pay more attention.

(00:41:52):
And I have used it many times too when I reach out to people. It just gives you that validation. So sometimes what you're looking for is a prize to walk around with. And I would bet that the same is true for TechCrunch, which was your original question. Why get the funding announcement in TechCrunch? Probably not because anyone's going to care because they read it on TechCrunch, but now you can use that to your own means. And sometimes that's more valuable than the press itself.

Lenny (00:42:16):
That is an awesome insight. It also makes you realize you may not feel like it was a success after spending all this time getting in a story and entrepreneurs. Like, oh, nothing happened. But the benefits may come later, like weeks, months, years later when you start to share that.

Jason Feifer (00:42:30):
Exactly right. A lot of this is what you make of it.

Lenny (00:42:32):
Amazing. Okay. That was extremely interesting. Okay, let's talk about step two. So initially you prepped, we talked about how to think about who to go after and the mission and goals. Then you get to step two, which just figure out who to reach out to at a publication.

Jason Feifer (00:42:47):
Right. So a lot of people make the mistake of emailing me. If they want coverage in Entrepreneur, they email me. And I understand why they're emailing me. It's really for two reasons. One, I'm the most visible editorial person at Entrepreneur. And so it's easy to find me, it's easy to find my email address. And also they just assume, well, editor in chief, making all the decisions. But no. I mean, think about it. If you have a problem with a purchase that you made on Amazon, you don't email Bezos. He's too busy. And I am not comparing myself to Bezos. But I am the busiest editorial guy at Entrepreneur for whatever the hell that's worth. And I'm just not the guy to pitch because my job actually isn't really to select stories that go in the magazine. My job is to work with editors who develop their own ideas and then I get to say, "Oh, that's a good one," or, "Oh, let's refine that." I'm not sourcing as much. And so you really should start by looking at who's writing about your subject area.

(00:43:57):
And you can do that by going to the website and surfing around. You can do that by Googling around. But you'll find the answer. Every publication is structured differently. Some people have specific beats. Some publications will be like, "This is the person on the transportation beat." And some publications don't. Entrepreneur doesn't really have a beat system necessarily. But if you look, you'll figure it out. "Oh, that editor is clearly interested in food. That writer is clearly interested in food. They seem to write all the food stories." And a good way, again, to do it is to start with the publication and then look at how they're covering your competitors. So a good example is I was once consulting with a guy who has a kind of fun peanut butter company. It's like imagine peanut butter meets Ben and Jerry's, so it's like peanut butter with lots of stuff and fun names. And so he's trying to figure out how to get press. And originally his thinking, the reason why he reached out to me was because he's like, "Well, I'm an entrepreneur. I run a business. I should be in Entrepreneur."

(00:45:05):
I was like, "No, no, no, you shouldn't because none of our readers are going to buy your peanut butter. So who is your target audience? Who's buying your stuff?" And he says, "Millennial moms." I said, "Great. Okay, so Cosmo is a good place to reach them. So let's look at how Cosmo covers snacks." I don't know how they cover snacks. I don't read Cosmo, but let's find out. It's not hard. I went to cosmopolitan.com, searched for snacks. What I found immediately was a lot of stories that are all basically roundup-y and anchored to some time-sensitive things. So it's 10 snacks for Valentine's Day, it's our 10 favorite new fall snacks, whatever. It's all stuff like that. So now we know they are not going to run a thousand word feature on your peanut butter company. Instead, the best that you could hope to do is get into one of these seasonal-ish roundups.

(00:45:59):
So now next step, who's writing these things? Let's look. Let's open some of the articles. The byline is right there. You can click on the byline. You can see what this person does. And in many cases, maybe they're the food editor, maybe they're the lifestyle editor, whatever. You'll see what they cover. And you'll have a good understanding of now how to frame the thing that you're looking for. Now, let me introduce one other possible option. They don't work for the publication at all. They're a freelancer. Publications use a lot of freelancers. Freelancers are basically independent contractors. They're writers who are working sometimes. Sometimes they have longer term deals with publications. Sometimes it's just one-off. My wife is a freelancer. My wife is a freelancer who writes a lot for the New York Times and Washington Post and Guardian. And the interesting thing about my wife versus me is that my wife, whose name is Jen Miller, just so I don't keep saying my wife.

(00:46:58):
So Jen, on a day-to-day basis as a freelancer is hungrier for stories than me because Jen has to hustle for her food. Jen has to find stories and pitch those stories to editors at publications, and that's when she gets paid. So she actually is more incentivized to be looking for stories than I am because I am a salaried employee of Entrepreneur Magazine. And my email address is very easily found and people just send me stuff all the time. And I should add here also, note that a good journalist, a good writer is not actually sitting around thinking that their job is to wait for people to pitch them so that they can just write about the best pitches. Their job as they see it, is to go and find the most useful things for their audience. And they like to do a lot of that themselves. So they're not sitting around just waiting for your pitches. And in fact, your pitches have to overcome their instinct to go find things themselves.

(00:48:02):
So Jen is constantly hustling. Jen is constantly talking to people. Jen is curious about the world and will spend a lot of time hunting things down. But if somebody reads a story that she wrote and says, "Ah, I think I have an idea of what this person is interested in," and then tracks her email address down and then emails her, Jen is getting a lot fewer pitches than me, the chances of her reading it are close to a hundred percent. And the chances of her taking it seriously if it's relevant to any of the publications that she writes for is much higher than me. So sometimes going to the staff person is not actually your best move. Finding the freelancer who's doing the work is sometimes the better move.

Lenny (00:48:43):
So many interesting tactical insights that you're sharing. I love it. With this freelancer tip, how do you know they're freelancers? Is there something in the byline?

Jason Feifer (00:48:51):
If you find them on the publication's website so let's say that you go to Cosmo and you click on a author's bio. If they're staff, it'll say staff. If they're not staff, it'll probably say something else. It might say writer, it might say contributor. It might say Jen Miller is a writer in Brooklyn, New York. But also you can just go one extra step and just Google their name because any smart freelancer has a portfolio website where they should be very easily found.

Lenny (00:49:22):
Awesome.

Jason Feifer (00:49:23):
So sometimes just take their name, plug it into Google, you'll very quickly figure out who they are.

Lenny (00:49:28):
Okay, so let me summarize things that you've taught us so far. One is think about publications that go to people that will buy your thing. So in your example, Cosmo is a good example of someone who would buy this peanut butter thing. Two is don't think of it broad thing. Think about the writer at the thing. So it's not like Cosmo would write about this. It's like, who specifically at Cosmo would write about this? And we find that as go to their site, search for, you talked about search for your competitors, but I think it's even broader, just things related to your area, right? [inaudible 00:50:01].

Jason Feifer (00:50:01):
Yeahs, that;s good point. Search for your category.

Lenny (00:50:04):
Even adjacent things probably are close enough. And then this tip about freelancers is really great, that they're hungrier and that they're more likely to respond to your pitch versus someone that's working there. And then also this point that they're like, their assumption is this is not a good pitch and they don't want your pitch. But freelancers have a higher chance of being interested and will pay attention.

Jason Feifer (00:50:25):
Yeah, freelancers got to eat.

Lenny (00:50:28):
Amazing. Is there anything else along this step of finding somebody at a publication that you want to share?

Jason Feifer (00:50:36):
Well, the next step is going to be how to actually reach out to them and pitch. So at this stage, I think that we've fairly well covered it. And I love your summary. And just to double click on part of that, the reason why you're doing a lot of this is not just for the crazy busy work of it. But it's because you have to understand that the media ... Just sort of go back to translating the media. The media, which is a phrase that is used in all sorts of different ways, is a pretty bad way of actually understanding the media because the "media" makes it feel like it's a unified entity. In politics, the media will be criticized as a sort of multiple publications colluding together in some way. But the way that we're talking about it is just as organizations that you're trying to reach out to.

(00:51:25):
But really and truly, these are just publishing companies made up of individuals. And those individuals are all making fairly subjective decisions about what it is that they're going to write about. And there are layers of approval that they have to pass through. So nothing makes it into the print magazine, for example, without me saying yes. But I'm also trusting my editors to be passionate about the ideas that they're finding and convince me of yes. And so the thing that you are really looking to do is to find the way-

Jason Feifer (00:52:00):
The thing that you are really looking to do is to find the way in to a publication. Because nothing gets covered until a single individual at a publication takes interest in you enough that they go to somebody else and say, "I think that this would be a good story," and that other person says yes.

(00:52:17):
So you have to find your way in. Because media is not a coordinated effort. It's a bunch of people showing up every day trying to figure out how to make the best thing for their audience.

Lenny (00:52:27):
Amazing. Okay, so that's a great segue to final piece, which is actually, get someone excited and write about you.

Jason Feifer (00:52:33):
So how do we do that?

Lenny (00:52:33):
How do we do that?

Jason Feifer (00:52:36):
This is where the rubber hits the road, okay? So things not to do, don't call them, if you track down their phone number. Which is a real thing that happens. People call my personal cell phone number.

Lenny (00:52:48):
Oh, wow.

Jason Feifer (00:52:48):
It doesn't happen often, but it happens. And I don't even know where they get it from. But I don't like it.

(00:52:53):
And media people are torn on whether or not DMs by social are an okay way to reach out. I find them kind of annoying. Because, number one, the format doesn't lend itself very well, right? If you write anything wrong in a DM, it just looks like this endless thing that I got.

(00:53:13):
But also, I don't know, my Instagram DMs, I just kind of don't think of as the place to be pitched. But other people don't care. So I don't know, you can roll the dice on that.

(00:53:21):
Email is just the most traditional way. If you know somebody's going to be speaking at a conference, that's great, come up, you can talk to them. But the question of course is, what are you sending them? And here's what you're sending them.

(00:53:34):
You're really sending them the product of the work that you have done in the previous two steps. Because you have now spent some time thinking about your story, and who you're pitching, and the publication, and how they're telling stories to their audience.

(00:53:51):
And then the individual person who you're reaching out to, who you now have some sense of how they write about this. And you're taking all of that, and you're trying to distill it down into a presentation that they're going to find appealing.

(00:54:02):
Which again, to go back to the thing about how press is not that dissimilar to going out and raising money, that's kind of what you're doing when you go and meet an investor too.

(00:54:12):
If you have meetings with 10 investors, the way in which you talk about yourself and the company should not be exactly the same with those 10 investors, because they're all going to have somewhat different approaches and different thesis.

(00:54:25):
And you're not trying to scam anybody, but you're just trying to be as customized as possible by building in your knowledge of what it is that they do, and what their firm does. And the same is true for media.

(00:54:35):
So all of this is really going to take the form, in its most traditional sense, of a short email. A short email pitch. And what does that look like? I mean, look, there is literally no magic answer to that. I wish that there was, but there is not. There's no format. People always ask me, what should the subject line of the email be?

(00:55:00):
That's is a good question. There's not one answer to that. The closest that I can give you to an answer is that, picture me. Picture me at my computer. I have a lot going on, and I'm glancing at my email, and 40 new emails are sitting there. And my instinct is to delete all of them as fast as possible, but I'm going to glance at each one.

(00:55:23):
I'm not going to open each one, but I'm going to glance at it, which means that I see the subject line and I see the preview text, or just the first thing that somebody had written. What you want to do is write something that makes it pretty clear to me that this is targeted to me. That's step number one.

(00:55:40):
Because most of those emails that I got in my inbox are not targeted to me. They're mass blasts, and I'm delete, delete, delete, delete, delete. So which is the one that actually is reaching me? And sometimes you can do that by referencing something that I wrote in the past. I see people do that a lot. Don't fake it. People fake it all the time. People email me and they tell me they're fans of my work, they've never read my work. It's very obvious, right? Don't do that. But if you've read something, or if you're familiar with something, if you're familiar with the publication in some way, any signals of that are good.

(00:56:15):
Because again, what you're trying to do is just separate yourself from noise to, this is customized to you. Because If you think about it, this is really an efficiency question. What I'm trying to do is, I'm trying to spend my time on the things that have the highest percentage chance of being relevant to me. And I'm filtering out the things that seem not relevant to me, who are wasting my time.

(00:56:41):
So if I see something where somebody's writing me and they have a sense of the publication and they have a sense of me, there's a higher percentage chance that the next things that they're going to tell me are going to be relevant to me. Maybe even turn into a story.

(00:56:53):
Which is great. I like when that happens. Because it saves me time, frankly, right? It's one less story I have to find myself. So I'm happy for it, but it's got to be right. So you want to structure ... And then the email that you're writing is don't go on forever, like three paragraphs max.

(00:57:09):
And you are telling the version, you're not writing an article, but you're telling me the thing that you are pretty sure I'm going to be interested in. It's the difference between, going back to the butter dish example, woman sending me a three paragraph email about the butter dish itself, and opening up, telling me a little bit about the butter dish, and then immediately moving into this very clever story about the product market testing survey.

(00:57:43):
That's the difference. She told me the story that was going to be relevant to my audience. She got there quickly, and it felt like, to me, this is a interesting human being with an interesting entrepreneurial story to tell, and that's why I'm going to engage.

Lenny (00:57:57):
So that story actually came through a cold email?

Jason Feifer (00:58:00):
That was a cold email. Yep. Just showed up one day.

Lenny (00:58:02):
Amazing.

(00:58:04):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation AB testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like DraftKings, Zapier, ClickUp, Twitch, and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments.

(00:58:18):
Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential. But there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern grow team stack. This leads to wasted time building internal tools, or trying to run your own experiments through a clunky marketing tool.

(00:58:30):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most about working there was our experimentation platform, where I was able to slice and dice data by device types, country, user stage. Eppo does all that and more, delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytic cycles, and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover.

(00:58:49):
Eppo lets you go beyond basic click-through metrics, and instead use your north star metrics like activation, retention, subscription and payments. Eppo supports tests on the front end, on the backend, email marketing, even machine learning clients. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com. That's get Eppo.com, and 10X your experiment velocity.

(00:59:11):
Is there any other examples that come to mind, of someone doing this well? For people to have more kind of examples of here's...

Jason Feifer (00:59:17):
Oh sure. Well here, let's see. We'll have to do this in real time here. But I keep in my inbox a folder called Bad PR Pitches and a folder called Good PR Pitches. We can go through both.

Lenny (00:59:28):
Let's do it.

Jason Feifer (00:59:29):
All right, I just pulled this up. This is, and I haven't read this in a long time. I'm kind of trying to read ahead as I'm talking just to see if this is appropriate to read. But I think so. I don't know, whatever. We're just going to read it and see what happens.

(00:59:42):
All right, so the subject of this was, "Idea for entrepreneur and Problem Solvers, how the Border Closures grew my business." So this was sent to me in September of 2020.

Lenny (00:59:54):
And this is a good or a bad?

Jason Feifer (00:59:56):
This is good, this is good. This turned into an episode of a podcast that I do for Entrepreneur, and I might've also then converted it into an article I can't remember.

Lenny (01:00:06):
Awesome.

Jason Feifer (01:00:08):
And so here's what she did. So her name, I shout her out. So this is Meg O'Hara. And Meg O'Hara is a painter, a Canadian landscape painter. Which again, a small business.

(01:00:21):
And she writes, "Hi Jason, I have an idea for a story I think would be valuable and relevant to you, Entrepreneur Magazine and the Problem Solvers Podcast." That's the show I do for Entrepreneur. And then she says, "Here's what's going on with my business. All entrepreneurs had to be flexible during Covid. This is a story about how one artist in Canada benefited from the border closure." This just sort of intrigues me. Oh, how?

(01:00:42):
"When Covid hit in March, all ski resorts across North America shut down early. Skiers are a high earning demographic in Canada. They fall in the top 5% of income."

(01:00:53):
Okay, well anyway. So she goes on. What she tells me, I remember this now, what she tells me is that her business used to be being hired by ski resorts to come and paint landscapes for their facilities. And when the border shut down and people weren't going to these resorts anymore, she had to come up with a completely different way of doing her business.

(01:01:15):
And so she started to think, well, I can't work for these resorts anymore. They're not hiring me. But all these skiers who used to work at the resorts who have seen my work, or who used to ski at the resorts who were maybe familiar with my work, they're not skiing either. They probably are sitting around wishing that they were skiing. They'd love something to see of their favorite ski location, and they also have money sitting around because they're not spending it on the ski resorts.

(01:01:39):
So then she lists off the problems and the solutions in bullet points. Which I love. Because she has listened to the show, the Problem Solvers Show, which is structured in exactly that way. Tell me the problem, tell me the solution that you came to. So she lists it off.

(01:01:53):
Here are the problems: the skiers can't come, people are spending more time at home.

(01:01:56):
The solution: I create artwork for their homes that depicts their favorite views from skiing as they were. She goes on and on and on.

(01:02:03):
I read this and I just think, there is something here about what this person did to reinvent their business at a time in which one marketplace shut down, but it created a new one that I think people would like to hear. Because at that time everyone was thinking about how to reinvent themselves and their business.

(01:02:21):
And even though I reach people who have very complex and large businesses, sometimes it's really a beautiful thing to hear a single individual who does the simplest thing in the world, which is put paint to canvas, talk about how she did it for herself. Because you can extract these wonderful little lessons about how to reinvent yourself that I think are going to be relevant to a very broad audience.

(01:02:44):
So Meg sent me that email, I replied and I said, "I like it." And we did it. So that's a good example of someone who spent time understanding my work, down to the structure of how I'm communicating, and then sent me a pitch that very quickly and clearly seemed customized to me, and told me her story in a way that I could imagine telling my audience.

(01:03:12):
At that point, it's a pretty easy yes,

Lenny (01:03:14):
That is an amazing example. I just took some notes on things that she did right based on things you've shared in the past.

(01:03:19):
Even just from the subject line or the first sentence, it was clear that she knew you. She knew you had this podcast, she knew the magazine, and she even expressed this specifically, you're going to be interested in this. She mentioned how this, she has a story. She starts immediately with a story. There's not the value prop of the company, here's what we do and here's why we're awesome. And then the lessons, the mission of Entrepreneur you talked about, is insights and lessons that people achieve, and she just went straight to here's what we've learned.

Jason Feifer (01:03:49):
That's right.

Lenny (01:03:50):
So I could see why that resonated.

Jason Feifer (01:03:51):
Yeah, it was great. And the next thing that made it a real success, by the way for her, was that once I got her on the phone, she was, and I find this, this is a make or break thing for me. Because I can talk to somebody and then kill the story, or not run the podcast. She was willing to be open about challenges.

(01:04:17):
I mean, she had reached out because of challenges, but not everyone is. I will get a pitch from someone who is presenting like, oh, we had this challenge in the business. But then when I talk to them, they act as if there was no problem. Or the problem was really small and their ingenuity immediately made this a very successful business. And that's not interesting to me.

(01:04:42):
Because success stories are not interesting. They're not interesting to anybody. It's not useful for you to just hear that someone else succeeded. What's useful is for you to hear how someone else faced challenges that you faced. And got through them so that you can see. Aha, that's an interesting strategy to use for me.

(01:05:01):
I hate success stories. I love problem solving stories. And that's why when I talk to an entrepreneur, I expect them to be really open about that stuff. And if they're not, I basically lose interest.

Lenny (01:05:13):
The hero's journey. I'd love to hear another example. But before that, hearing this, obviously it takes a bunch of time to do this for a founder. I guess, two questions. Just, how many places should somebody probably try to reach out to give them a chance of being successful? And then do you have any thoughts on how much time they should put into something like this? I know it's a very broad question. But, any thoughts there?

Jason Feifer (01:05:35):
Yeah, it's a really broad question. So again, this is in some way why, in a large way, why a lot of people hire PR. Because PR can just move this along. They can reach a lot of people very fast, whereas you as an individual cannot.

(01:05:51):
One way to think about it is, you're going to be on the hunt. You're going to try to make this work, and you're going to take a couple bets and hope that some of them pay off.

(01:06:01):
Another way of thinking about it is, this is a passive activity. And I'll spend some time when I'm reading media, thinking about this, kind of developing an idea. Another thing that you can do, follow a bunch of writers and editors on social media.

(01:06:20):
Meg, I can't remember the order of operations here, because I know that Meg follows me on Instagram now, because she's DMd me many times. And I respond to everybody. I can't remember if she followed me before, but she might've. And maybe she even DMd me a few times. Usually it's somebody's responding to an Instagram story or something.

(01:06:38):
And I've seen a lot of people use this strategy with me, and I think that it's a really smart one. Which is basically, before you ever pitch, just get me to recognize your name. Just engage in social media in a very casual way, such that when you email me, I think, do I know who that person is? Meg O'Hara, I think I know who that person is. It just makes it more likely that I'll open the email.

(01:07:08):
And I see a lot of people do that. They'll spend a long time engaging with me on social media before ever pitching me. I know what they're doing, I understand that it's probably calculated. I still like it. It's smart. Because it means that by the time that they've reached out, I think you have a pretty good sense of my work. Which means that what you're bringing to me is probably in pretty good faith. And for that, I like it. It's a good filter.

(01:07:36):
So if you've been listening to this whole thing, and you're thinking, this is a tremendous amount of work, I have a new product launch, or I have a bunch of budget that I can spend on this, this individual kind of approach, it may not be for you. You might want to just spend a bunch of time instead interviewing different PR firms. And find the one that seems most aligned with and understands your story, and your vision, and knows people in your space shortcuts a lot of this.

(01:08:06):
But even then, even then, I think that having heard this is really useful. Because at some point, if the PR person is successful, you are going to get on the phone with the writer or editor. And it's very useful to understand how they think. That they're not there to serve you. That this isn't a service that they're providing you.

(01:08:27):
So you better understand what they're entering into this with, and what they have in mind. When they're asking you questions, they're asking questions, thinking, this is what my audience is going to be curious about. This is how I'm going to drive this person in this interview towards the kinds of insights that my audience are going to find gratifying.

(01:08:44):
So the more that you understand who you're dealing with, the better.

Lenny (01:08:48):
And also just having done it yourself, you'll better understand what to ask your folks, how they're going to work, find opportunities to improve the way they're operating. On that question of quantity, say you're doing this, say you're spending the time. I'm going to really invest in understanding Jason and whoever else.

(01:09:05):
Is there a rule of thumb you'd recommend? Try to do this for three publications to get one, or is it five? I don't know. Is there anything there that you could recommend?

Jason Feifer (01:09:14):
So it's really dependent upon how easy you are to write about. I may just sort of note, if you are some kind of B2B service, especially in some kind of very niche or wonky space, it's going to be really hard for you to get [inaudible 01:09:40]. So hard that it might actually not even be worth trying. Because there are other things that you can do, or things that we haven't even talked about yet.

(01:09:46):
You could say, you know what? Screw it. I'm not going to try to get coverage for my company. Why don't I just try to position myself as an expert? Right? It's a totally different kind of approach. Where instead, what you're maybe trying to do is just hook onto the news, try to get a quote or a perspective to a reporter who might be writing about something. I get these all the time.

(01:10:07):
Something breaks, some news breaks, and people start reaching out to me. And they'll say, "This just happened in the news. And my client," or sometimes just the individual, "I have this insight into this, and here's what I would say if you want to interview me."

(01:10:22):
It's not going to be a feature about you, You're not going to be the subject, there's no photo of you. You might get a quote. You might get a quote in a story. Which again, is all you need to be able to say as featured in on your website. So that's the reason why people do that.

(01:10:33):
So sometimes it's about that. Sometimes it's about you could just be a writer. You might try to just pitch authoritative articles by you to different publications. Get yourself out in that way. Sometimes, again, you're not going to be able to be easily written about. And sometimes you are. Sometimes you made some insane technology that everyone's going to be talking about, and it's going to be super easy for you to get press.

(01:10:56):
At which point your hit rate is going to be much higher. That's why going into this with really realistic expectations, and if you're going to work with PR, having PR who can set and hold you to those realistic expectations, can just save you a lot of heartache.

Lenny (01:11:12):
Along the same lines, there's always this idea of exclusivity and people want to write first about a thing. Say you talked about an awesome technology. Do you have advice on, do you just pitch the same thing to all of them and hope they all write about it? Do you pitch them different stories? Do you offer one an exclusive, any advice there?

Jason Feifer (01:11:29):
Everyone has a different approach to this. The number one rule here is just, don't do it in a way that the people in media feel like you're playing them. Because they won't have tolerance for it. I would rather walk away from something like this than do some funny dance with somebody.

(01:11:48):
So my favorite version of this goes like this. Actually, there's a founder who recently, I met him years ago. So when he reached out, I recognized the name immediately. And he reached out and he's like, hey, we did this really interesting thing and we haven't told anybody about it yet. And I'd love to see if it's a fit for entrepreneurs.

(01:12:10):
So I hop on the phone with him, and he tells me. And I'm not going to tell you what it's yet because we haven't run the story. But after 15, 20 minutes, I say, yeah, you know what? This is a really interesting story.

(01:12:20):
And frankly, I know other media outlets are going to be interested in this too, particularly because a finance element to it. So I think the Wall Street Journal, and Bloomberg, and those kinds of places are going to be interested in this.

(01:12:32):
He wants to go to Entrepreneur for whatever reasons he wants. I mean, I think probably two. Because number one, he wants to position himself towards that audience. And then number two, there's a trust factor. He knows me in a way that he doesn't know the editors over there. And so he feels like I'll probably treat the story more carefully.

(01:12:49):
So we worked out a deal, which he proposed. And the deal is that we'll get the exclusive, and there's going to be a three-hour window after our story runs, and then they're going to start responding to everyone else. And then they're going to start talking to other people, or maybe they'll even line it up and reach out to some other media.

(01:13:10):
And that's fine with me. I understand. And we're going to create a little embargo window. And we'll go first, and then they're going to talk to everybody else.

(01:13:21):
Sometimes you can offer an exclusive to someone in that you are going to release the news to everybody, but only one media outlet is going to get the interview. Which works really well if you have a big personality.

(01:13:35):
So for example, recently a company that Mark Cuban has invested in offered us that, right? They're like, we have this news. We're going to reach out, we're going to send the news everywhere, but we're going to give you the exclusive interview with Mark Cuban. He's going to do one interview and he'll do it with you. You can parse it out in any way. You just want everyone to feel like you're being upfront with them.

Lenny (01:13:57):
And that they're getting something special, as much as possible. That makes sense.

(01:14:02):
You touched on this relationship piece, and that's something I wanted to ask. It feels like in tech, a lot of reporters end up writing a negative story, because a lot of times that's what people want to read. Why is this destroying the world?

(01:14:14):
I actually had a fast company do a thing on me, and I talked to the reporter, and I had no idea. Was he going to just completely tear me apart, or is he going to be really friendly and positive over what I'm doing? And I have no idea, and it just comes out.

(01:14:24):
It's not like I look at it before it comes out. So do you have any just advice to give you a set, help if this is going to turn into something positive or negative? I know you have no idea

Jason Feifer (01:14:34):
What happened, by the way? Was it positive or negative?

Lenny (01:14:35):
Super-positive.

Jason Feifer (01:14:35):
Great.

Lenny (01:14:37):
I was very happy with it, yeah.

Jason Feifer (01:14:38):
Okay, good, good. I'm glad to hear that.

(01:14:40):
So part of it is the publication itself, right? Entrepreneur, and I would say Fast Company, are just sort of not in the business of running negative stories. And the reason is, it doesn't serve our audience. My audience is coming to me to learn things for their business. Tearing somebody apart just doesn't help them in any way.

(01:14:59):
So part of it is just what ecosystem are you dealing with? You can also look at the past work of the writer. And if you work with a PR person, it's funny because occasionally somebody has accidentally forwarded this to me, and I'll see the dossier that a PR agency will put together on me.

(01:15:17):
But a PR agency, if they set you up with an interview with someone, they'll usually do some digging. And they'll find, what does this person usually write about? What kind of stories do they do? What are they generally interested in? So you can have a sense, right? What kind kind of thing are they doing?

(01:15:33):
And past that, there's also a question of, well, what are you doing in the world, right? I mean, if there is something somewhat controversial about you, and especially if you're engaging with an outlet that is interested in that kind of stuff, there's a halfway-decent chance they're at least going to explore it with you, and ask you about it. And if you're weird and cagey with them, they're going to think that there's more to it, and they're going to start digging more.

(01:16:03):
But the ultimate answer here is that every part of this, and this has come through, I'm sure, in our whole conversation, every part of this process is really out of your control. Does somebody pay attention to you? What do they write about you? When do they write about? All of it is outside of your control,

(01:16:23):
Which again, is the reason why it's not smart to think about press as a primary strategy for driving growth. It's a good add-on, but these people are going to do what they're going to do. And the best you can do is read the tea leaves.

Lenny (01:16:37):
Yeah. It was a very weird ... I don't get press often, it's not like something I pursue. But it was just like, this is wild. I'm just going to talk to this guy, and then something will come out. I have no idea what it might be.

(01:16:46):
He might have things wrong, because I didn't get a chance to review, and might skew things. But it's a strange experience to go through. But it all worked out great.

Jason Feifer (01:16:55):
Yeah, it is. It's very strange.

(01:16:58):
It is, it's strange. And I find that people often don't ... In business, people understand the structure of what's happening. They understand that we're a business magazine, we're going to write a story about a business. It's going to take a certain form.

(01:17:14):
But I've done a lot of different writing, and I have had the experience many times over my career where I will spend a lot of time with people, and they will have really no understanding of what it is that I'm doing at all. They can't conceptualize it.

(01:17:30):
And then the story will come out and then they'll always reach out to me and they'll be like, oh, now I finally understand what you were even trying to do. It's fascinating.

(01:17:40):
It is a vulnerable experience, and you have to know that. And the more you try to control it, the more the reporter is going to be annoyed at you. And the more, in fact, the reporter might try to take a shot at you in the story as a result. Because they found you too controlling, because they felt like you...

Jason Feifer (01:18:01):
They found you too controlling because they felt like you had something to hide. This is not a comfortable thing. You have to go into this being vulnerable and you have to know that there's a chance that it could blow up in your face. That's the price that you're paying for reaching their audience.

Lenny (01:18:19):
Great advice. How about we do just one more example of an awesome email pitch that you got and then we get to our very exciting lightning round.

Jason Feifer (01:18:26):
I'll tell you about a pitch. I don't know that I have it in my inbox still, do I? No, it's not there, sadly. I'll just tell you about it.

Lenny (01:18:32):
Yeah.

Jason Feifer (01:18:33):
Ii leads to something that is another way of thinking about getting press, which I think is really important for people to remember. So far, Lenny, we've spent the majority of our time talking about press in the form of some kind of feature on you, writing about you or including you in some kind of prominent way in a story that's basically highlighting the thing that you wanted to get out there, your product or something about your business, something. Then we talked a little bit about another way of doing it, which is sort of putting you out as an expert in authority. There's another way of thinking about this, which is that you can either create or present context in which you just happen to be a part.

(01:19:18):
Here's the story pitch that I got that leads into this. This is years and years and years ago. I had just started at Entrepreneur. I hear from a guy named Fred Ruckel. Fred Ruckel has got a cat toy and it's called the Ripple Rug. It's basically, imagine a rug and then another rug kind on top of it, but ill-suited. The rug is lumpy, there's a lot of lumps in and there are holes. This is for a cat to kind of crawl in and out these spaces and bat and do whatever cats do. I don't know. I don't know a cat. He wanted to tell me about the sales of this Ripple Rug and about how the sales are skyrocketing and all the things that he thought made it special. It's made out of recycled bottles and whatever the stuff, made in the USA, all cool stuff, but not relevant to me because we're not cat toy monthly and we're not reaching a whole bunch of cat owners, not that I know of.

(01:20:16):
I replied and I said, what I usually say, "Congratulations on what you've built, but it's just not a fit for coverage." Now Fred stumbled his way into this, but he did really a very smart thing because what he responded with was he said, "Totally understand. If you're ever interested in learning about a gigantic scam that's happening on Amazon and eBay that we've been caught up in, let me know." I was like, "Oh, well, yeah, I guess I am interested in hearing about that." I said, "Tell me more." He sent me this long email. Fred loves long emails, and I got him on the phone and had him explain, and finally I understood it.

(01:20:53):
This is, and maybe people are familiar with this, but this is sort of known as Amazon to eBay arbitrage. Basically the idea here is that Fred is selling his Ripple Rug on Amazon, or at least he was then, I don't know if he still is, but he's selling his Ripple Rug on Amazon. There are a lot of people who are copying the listing for his Ripple Rug and making their own postings for it on eBay. They sell it for a slightly higher price. Let's say that, and again, I'm making these up, but let's say the Fred is selling his Ripple Rug for $30 on Amazon, so somebody will sell it for $40 on eBay. Then somebody buys it on eBay, they find it, they buy it on eBay, they pay $40, that person gets $40, takes $30 of it, goes to Amazon, buys the Ripple Rug, and then just has it shipped to the buyer. It's arbitrage.

(01:21:47):
You might think, "Well, why would Fred care about this? He still gets the sale." The reason he caress about this is because the Ripple Rug shows up at the customer's house and it shows up in a Amazon box, even though they bought it on eBay. They think, "Why did that happen?" Then the next thing they do is they go to Amazon and they discover that it's cheaper on Amazon and now they feel ripped off. Who do they feel like they got ripped off by? Fred, because they don't know about the arbitrage. They don't know that they exist.

(01:22:21):
This person who has at this point opened the cat toy and probably had their cat roll around in it, now shoves the whole thing back in a box and returns it and Fred gets dinged and that's why he doesn't like this. He has tried and tried and tried to get Amazon and eBay to stop this, but he said, "Nobody seems to care and all these small businesses are losing tons of money on returns because of this." I had never heard of this. I thought it was fascinating. It's like a problem small business owners are dealing with. I was like, "Fred, do you know other people who are dealing with this?" He's like, "Yeah, I talk to them on the line all the time." He sends me off.

(01:22:54):
I reported this whole thing out. I wrote this three 4,000 word story on this thing, and Fred was the main character because he was the way to understand this problem. I did all the reporting and I contacted the platforms and I contacted the people who make the arbitrage software. I did a whole report, but Fred got his press because sometimes, and here's the lesson, sometimes you are not the story, but you can be part of the story. Sometimes that means if Fred stumbled into it, but I get plenty of people who've reach out and maybe they have a real estate startup and there's something really interesting happening in the real estate space and they reach out and they tell me about this really interesting thing that's happening in the real estate space and the role that they happen to play in it. Now I think, "Oh, well that's interesting. Maybe there's a story about that."

(01:23:46):
My wife, the freelancer, Jen Miller, she's done this many times where she once did this story about there was a bunch of startups that were all related to helping people prepare for death in some way or another. She's not going to write about one of them, but when somebody reached out and said, "Hey, here's a trend happening and we are one of them." Well, great, that's an interesting story. She wrote that and the company that reached out to her got kind of prominent billing because they were the ones who reached out. You know Barbara Corcoran from Shark Tank?

Lenny (01:24:14):
I think so. I think so.

Jason Feifer (01:24:15):
Yeah. She's been a regular Shark Tank since the very beginning.

Lenny (01:24:19):
Mm-hmm.

Jason Feifer (01:24:21):
She made her fortune by building a real estate company called Corcoran, realtors, buy and sell property. The way in which she built this company is fascinating. Barbara, before she was Barbara Corcoran of Corcoran Realty, Barbara Corcoran was random New York City realtor Barbara from New Jersey. She was trying to figure out a way to distinguish herself from the masses. She came up with an idea which was to take her own sales data, the only window she has into the Manhattan real estate market at that time is what she is what her clients are buying and selling, which she's facilitating. She has that data, is going up or down relative to last year. She puts all this data together in what she calls the Corcoran Report, and she starts sending the Corcoran Report out to the New York Times and the New York Post and whatever.

(01:25:18):
Because nobody else at the time was putting together a report on the health of the Manhattan real estate market, everyone started reporting on the Corcoran Report as if it was an authoritative thing. It's produced by Barbara Corcoran, which immediately put her in the position of being an authority in this space. That was so smart, and I see it happen all the time.

(01:25:37):
My inbox will also be filled with, for example, a company that specializes in remote work consulting. Especially remote work consulting, you can hire them, it's a B2B service. It's hard to get press for that, here's what they do. They pay a surveying firm to find all sorts of things. The top states for remote work, the top companies for remote work, the top whatever for remote work. They produce all these surveys and they send the surveys out. The surveys get covered because now they're creating a piece of news. They're creating some context in which they just happen to live in. Hard to write about them, this random company, but you write about the survey, that's interesting stuff. Oh, it turns out that Utah is the top, I don't know if that's true, is the top state for, that's something that people will write about. You're giving people things to write about. Then once they do that, you are a part of the story. I get those pitches all the time. I occasionally bite on them and Fred from Ripple Rug got himself a big feature as a result.

Lenny (01:26:38):
That's an amazing other strategy. I imagine if I was a founder, I'd be like, "Hmm, what trends can I think about that I can tap into?"

Jason Feifer (01:26:44):
Yeah. Sometimes you have it in your own data. If you have a lot of data, you might, Zapier. Zapier is a great example. I get a pitch from Zapier every single year about the fastest growing business apps of the year based on Zapier data because they see what people are using and they just compile that together into a top 10 list and people run it. It's very smart.

Lenny (01:27:09):
Amazing. We've gone through all three steps. Is there anything else that you wanted to touch on that we haven't touched on? Anything else that you think would be really valuable for founders or product leaders trying to get press that we haven't already shared?

Jason Feifer (01:27:23):
This has come up in different ways, but I'll just put a point on it as a maybe final way of thinking about this. Be human, be human. Press releases don't work because they're not human. I don't like interviewing people who are on talking points because that's not human. You're ultimately engaging in a human business. A subjective decision is being made about how to serve an audience of humans. There's no right or wrong. There's no way to know. Media is a sort of barely data-driven industry because every story is kind of different. It's like it's hard. It's hard to optimize the product because the product changes every minute. You're dealing with humans and the more that you can be human in every step of this process, when you pitch, write a human email, don't write a thing that looks like it came off of some marketing copy. Write a human email to another human and then when that person engages with you, be very human with them.

(01:28:26):
I mean, Lenny, the reason why that fast company reporter liked you, I am very sure was because when they got on the phone with you, you were just like a normal nice guy. If you presented yourself differently because you just wanted to frame yourself in some way or you felt protective or something or whatever it was, the reporter would've thought, "This guy is a dick," and he would've written a totally different story.

Lenny (01:28:53):
Mm-hmm.

Jason Feifer (01:28:54):
Be as human as you can and you will be dealing with a human who will receive that.

Lenny (01:28:59):
Amazing advice. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round.

Jason Feifer (01:29:04):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:29:05):
Are you ready?

Jason Feifer (01:29:06):
Let's do it.

Lenny (01:29:07):
Let's do it. What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Jason Feifer (01:29:12):
Andrew Chen's, The Cold Start Problem has come up over and over again for me because they're just really great lessons about network effects. I've been having a lot of conversations about anxiety and perfectionism with entrepreneurs lately, and a book by a psychotherapist named Katherine Morgan Schafler called The Perfectionist's Guide to Losing Control, is, I think, just a really great read.

Lenny (01:29:34):
Super cool. What is a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Jason Feifer (01:29:38):
Movie? I don't get to see a lot of movies these days. I have two little kids, but I took my eight-year old to see the new Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, which was great and a really nice way of, I loved them as a kid, and so it was cool to see the modern version. Then my wife and I just finished Better Call Saul like years late, but it was just perfect.

Lenny (01:29:56):
I haven't watched that series yet. I loved Breaking Bad.

Jason Feifer (01:29:59):
Oh, it's worth it. You got to.

Lenny (01:30:01):
Okay. Another series I got to get started on.

Jason Feifer (01:30:03):
I know it's too much, too much television.

Lenny (01:30:05):
I usually ask this next question too, like product leaders and growth people, but I'm curious what the answer for you would be is. Do you have a favorite interview question you like to ask people you're interviewing? Usually it's about people you're hiring.

Jason Feifer (01:30:16):
Interviewing a job candidate?

Lenny (01:30:16):
Yeah, that's the ideal, but take it either way.

Jason Feifer (01:30:19):
I'll take it a little bit different because we've been talking about press. This is a really great strategy for interviewing people, and I'm going to tell it to you because I think that it's also good in any other context, and it might be a thing that somebody will do to you in an interview. My favorite strategy for interviewing people is to throw a theory at them, and I don't mean a theory of the world. I mean that maybe 10 minutes in after they have told me a couple different things and answer some different questions, I'll make a connection in my head and I'll say, "I want to run a theory by you. Do you think that the reason why you are really interested in this or you made that decision is actually because of this other thing that you told me a little bit about?"

(01:30:59):
You're listening. It's really active listening, and you're combining things together into some theory. The reason why the theory works so well is because it forces people to think in real time in front of you. I like that because I often interview people who have been interviewed a million times before. I interview Jimmy Fallon and The Rock and whatever. They've been interviewed a million times before, so how do you get them to think in front of you? The answer is to ask them the thing that they haven't been asked. What I love about the theory is that it shows them that you're really listening and you're trying to understand them. "It's so interesting that you did that. I wonder if it's because of," X, Y, Z thing. That gets them to react in a really earnest honest way.

(01:31:49):
I would say for what it's worth, as a job candidate tactic, it's not that bad either. My favorite job interview that I ever did as a candidate that I didn't even get the job was years and years ago, I interviewed for a job at New York Magazine. I interviewed with Adam Moss, who is not there anymore, but he was the legendary editor in chief. He made me, on the spot, drill down specifically into an idea. He was like, "What's your favorite section in Strategists," which is one of the sections of magazine. I was like, "I really like the real estate section." He's like, "All right, what would be a good neighborhood that we should feature in the real estate section?" I was like, "Oh, I don't know," I named a neighborhood. He's like, "What would be three good elements of that?" He just kept pushing me, drill down, drill down, drill down. There was no right or wrong answer. He just wanted to see how I thought. I found that to be incredibly powerful, and I do a version of that when I interview people.

Lenny (01:32:48):
Awesome. I love that. What is a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really like?

Jason Feifer (01:32:54):
I use BIGVU, I don't even know how to pronounce it, BIGVU, B-I-G-V-U, all the time. It's a teleprompter app. I spent like $150 buying an actual teleprompter because I make a lot of video and that teleprompter is, it's actually for people who are just listening to this, I'm pointing at another desk across my room where it's sitting there and I've never used it. The reason is because then I discovered BIGVU, which is just a app that runs a teleprompter very close to the camera, either in horizontal or vertical mode. I've tested it out in a million different ways, and it really works like you're reading it and it really looks like you're looking directly at the camera. I love it. It has saved me so much time.

Lenny (01:33:33):
That is cool. You basically put your phone on your screen next to the camera or wherever your camera is?

Jason Feifer (01:33:39):
No, no, no. This would be for if you're recording, if you're recording on the phone.

Lenny (01:33:44):
Got it. You're staring at the phone and it's telling you what to say. I get it.

Jason Feifer (01:33:44):
Yeah. Yeah.

Lenny (01:33:44):
That's awesome.

Jason Feifer (01:33:47):
You write a script and then you just import the script and then you choose the speed and you can fuss with it, how many words per minute, and then it'll run the text very close to where the camera lens is.

Lenny (01:34:01):
Amazing. All right.

Jason Feifer (01:34:02):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:34:02):
I'm going to check that out. What is a favorite life motto that you'd like to repeat yourself, share with friends, something that comes up a lot,

Jason Feifer (01:34:10):
Something that I've been repeating a lot to people is something that I heard, so I recommended Katherine's book, The Perfectionist Guide to Losing Control. I met Katherine because I, we've since become friends, but I interviewed her for the podcast when her book came out. We were talking about feeling overworked and being stretched too thin, and she gave me this question, which I think about almost daily, and I repeat to people all the time, and that is, "What's the point of building something if you can't maintain it?" I love that question because I, like probably everyone listening to this, pushes themselves really hard, and at some point you have to step back and think, "Am I building something where at some point there is sustainability for me here, or is this unsustainable and what's the point of building something if you can't maintain it?" It's a great reminder for why you're building something and how you have to build it.

Lenny (01:35:03):
I have a very similar quote that my sister's partner once said that has stuck with me forever, which is, "Life is maintenance. Basically everything that you buy or bring into your life, you have to maintain."

Jason Feifer (01:35:16):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:35:17):
We got a new air conditioner. Now, we have a guy that comes every year to check it. You got a generator, someone's got to check that thing all the time. We got a toy, now I got to think about where does it go and do we throw it away? Do we keep it? Everything that you bring into your life, you have to maintain basically for the rest.

Jason Feifer (01:35:17):
Yeah, it's really true.

Lenny (01:35:33):
Yeah, so it's really, I think specifically for work, it's like you start a new project, you're going to have to-

Jason Feifer (01:35:39):
You're going to have to maintain it.

Lenny (01:35:40):
... maintain it, like this podcast, right? It's like, do you want to start a podcast and do it forever?

Jason Feifer (01:35:45):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:35:46):
That's a part of it. Part starting something is you have to maintain it.

Jason Feifer (01:35:49):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:35:49):
Yeah.

Jason Feifer (01:35:50):
I know we're in the lightning round and we've defied the logic of lightning rounds, but I'll just add one other thing to that, which is that I interviewed Michelle Pfeiffer for the cover of the magazine, and one of the things that I thought was most fascinating was that she started this fragrance company, and it's called Henry Rose. She said the major difference between making movies and building a company that she found, was that when you make a movie, all the work happens in the beginning. You make the movie and then the movie is out, and then you are done. You don't have to work on the movie ever again. She was not really mentally prepared for a company being the exact opposite, that the launch of the company is actually the start of the work and there's an endlessness to it. She said that it took her a solid year to adapt to that reality, and then it became fun. I think it's the thing people forget.

Lenny (01:36:42):
Mm-hmm, Well, that story, it's cool that you got to interview Michelle Pfeiffer.

Jason Feifer (01:36:45):
Yeah, she's great.

Lenny (01:36:46):
Final question. I was reading your profile line and you said that the only reason you were able to achieve what you've achieved in life and got to where you're today is something that you called the opportunity set B.

Jason Feifer (01:36:57):
Oh, yeah.

Lenny (01:36:58):
Can you just explain what that is and why that is so important to you?

Jason Feifer (01:37:02):
Oh, yeah, sure. In front of you right now, you, Lenny, you everyone listening, watching, there are two sets of opportunities. Opportunity set A and opportunity set B, opportunity set A is everything that's asks of you. If you have a job, it's what your boss expects of you. If you have your own company, it's what everybody expects of you. Doing good at those things is really important. That's a measurement of success. That's opportunity set A, everything that's asked of you. Then there's opportunity set B and opportunity set B is what's available to you, even though nobody's asking you to do it. That could be, again, if you have a job, that could be taking on new responsibilities or joining a new team or something. Personally, it could be pursuing a hobby. It could be starting a podcast because you like listening to podcasts, anything.

(01:38:01):
What I have found throughout my own career is that opportunity set B is always more important, infinitely more important. The thing is that if you only focus on opportunity set A, then you are only qualified to do the things that you're already doing. Opportunity set B is where growth happens and where you push yourself in different directions. I found a long time ago that it was just really helpful to think about these two things. Oftentimes, maybe we don't do opportunity set B because we don't know how it's going to pay off, or we don't know where we're going to find the time. I have always found, always, that engaging in these things of what is available to me, what's available to me right now around me, and nobody's asking me to do, leads to the next growth either because it turns into an actual opportunity or because it informs some future opportunity.

(01:38:58):
I got to Entrepreneur Magazine, zero, zero people, when I became editor in chief, zero people said, "You should hit the speaking circuit. You should get really good at being interviewed on podcasts. You should write a book." Nobody said any of that. My job was to make a good magazine and direct the editorial of the brand, but all those things were available to me, and once I recognized that, I realized that I can pursue them and in doing so, also think differently about who I am. Am I a magazine editor? Not really anymore. That's one of the things that I do now. I think of myself as an entrepreneur, as a person who is now in the business of helping others. I'm an entrepreneur who helps entrepreneurs. That's what I think of myself as. I only got there because I was thinking, I am here and therefore I can get there. Nobody's ever going to ask me to do it. I have to do it myself. It's the thing that I always think about, and it's the thing that keeps me up at night. What am I doing now that is leading me to something else? I'm the only one who can figure it out.

Lenny (01:39:59):
Beautiful. It reminds me of a recent podcast guest's advice, which is the best way to track your progress in your career and in life too is just measuring how many, "Oh shit" moments you have because those are the moments where you're growing, you're doing something. I think maybe it's an example of an opportunity set B where it wasn't the default path that's like, "oh, I think I should do this, even though it's really hard."

Jason Feifer (01:40:20):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:40:22):
What a beautiful way to end it. Jason, not only do I want to start working on press, it feels like very achievable to get press now. That was really energizing, like, "Holy shit, I could do this. I could just find some people, pitch them. Here's how I do it."

Jason Feifer (01:40:33):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:40:34):
Not only that, I'm going to look for some opportunities set B routes for myself too. Thank you so much for being here. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, maybe pitch you on their story? How can listeners be useful to you?

Jason Feifer (01:40:47):
Oh, so Lenny, thanks for all the work you do, which I just really love, and for creating the space for me to share all this insight. How can you find me? Well, I'll offer two things. An opportunity set B, like a good launching point for both of them, I wrote a book, it's called Build for Tomorrow. It is meant for anybody who's going through any kind of change in their lives or their work. There's an audiobook version that I read myself, but also hardcover and eBooks, just find it wherever you get books. Again, it's Build for Tomorrow. Opportunity set B, that whole thing, is actually a chapter in the book, so I go into a lot more detail there.

(01:41:20):
Then if you want to get in touch and also get those kinds of things, I have a newsletter, which is called One Thing Better each week. One way to improve your work and build a career or company that you love. Again, the kind of opportunities set B, that's the kind of thing that I put out. It's very much about the personal and emotional side of work. You can find that by going to the web address onethingbetter, that's one, O-N-E, onethingbetter.email. Just plug that in. Onethingbetter.email. I said that's a good way to reach out to me because if you get the newsletter and you reply to it, it goes to my inbox. I guarantee I will write back to you.

Lenny (01:41:56):
Inside track. Jason, thank you again so much for being here.

Jason Feifer (01:42:01):
Oh, thanks Lenny. This was so fun.

Lenny (01:42:03):
Bye everyone.

(01:42:05):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Jessica Hische (00:00:00):
Most people are better at understanding the feelings and sensations that typography and logos give us than they give themselves credit for, because what we are as people are endless absorbers of patterns, and information, and all this kind of stuff as we move throughout the world. We don't take time to sit and digest it, but it's still coming in and getting logged, and so even as a non-designer, I think you can look at examples of logos where something's not quite right and be like, "Something's not right here, I just don't know how to name it." But I think a good exercise is just like looking at fonts that are available in the world and asking yourself, "What feeling does this give me?"

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:47):
Today, my guest is Jessica Hische. Jessica is a design legend, and it was such an honor to both have her on this podcast and also to work with her on a refresh of my newsletter and podcast logo and brand, which is launching around the same time as this episode comes out. Jessica is a lettering artist specializing in typographical work for logos, film, books, and other commercial applications. Her clients include Wes Anderson, the United States Postal Service, Apple, Nike, Tiffany and Company, The Gap, and Penguin Books, and her work has been featured in design and illustration annals, both in the U.S. and internationally. She's helped create logos for Philz Coffee, Eventbrite, and Mailchimp, is a best-selling children's book author, and if you live around the Bay Area, you've seen her work all over the city without knowing it. In our conversation, Jessica shares the process that she went through to update my logo and brand for my newsletter and podcast.

(00:01:38):
What specific elements of a logo and brand impact how you feel about that brand, why a good enough logo is just buying for a long time for most startups, and when it makes sense to refresh your look, also some really clever productivity tips, design advice, and a bunch of really fun stories. Jessica is a master at what she does and I am excited to spread the Jessica Hische gospel. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes, and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Jessica Hische. Jessica, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Jessica Hische (00:02:19):
Happy to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:21):
I thought it'd be good to start with asking you just to describe what it is you do, because you're very atypical of the kinds of guests I have in this podcast and you also have very unique skillset.

Jessica Hische (00:02:32):
Yes. Well, I will describe what I'm most prominently known for, because I'm a person who just does a lot of things, but the thing that I do the most professionally is custom typography, like bespoke lettering pieces. That translates to working for all kinds of things. Sometimes it's for film and television. I've done movie titles and things like that and television credits and stuff. Sometimes it's book covers. Actually, a lot of times, it's book covers, and then a big part of my business is doing logos, and logo refreshes, and things like that, so basically being the person who knows all the things so you don't have to have that person on staff when it comes to typography.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:17):
This episode is brought to you by the Enterprise Ready Conference, a one-day event in San Francisco bringing together product and engineering leaders shaping the future of enterprise SaaS. The event features a curated list of speakers with direct experience building for the enterprise, including leaders from OpenAI, Vanta, Checkr, Dropbox, and Canva. Topics include advanced identity management, compliance, encryption, and logging, essentially at complex features that most enterprise customers require. If you're a founder, exec, product manager, or engineer tasked with the enterprise roadmap, this conference is for you. You'll get detailed insights from industry leaders that have years of experience navigating the same challenges that you face today. Best of all, it's completely free. Since it's hosted by WorkOS. Spots are filling up quickly, make sure to request an invite at enterpriseready.com. That's enterpriseready.com. I am excited to chat with Christina Gilbert, the founder of OneSchema, one of our longtime podcast sponsors. Hi, Christina.

Christina Gilbert (00:04:21):
Yes. Thank you for having me on, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:23):
What is the latest with OneSchema? I know you now work with some of my favorite companies like Ramp, Vanta Scale, and Watershed. I heard that you just launched a new product to help product teams import CSVs from especially tricky systems like ERPs.

Christina Gilbert (00:04:39):
Yes. We just launched OneSchema FileFeeds, which allows you to build an integration with any system in 15 minutes as long as you can export a CSV to an SFTP folder. We see our customers all the time getting stuck with hacks and workarounds, and the product teams that we work with don't have to turn down prospects because their systems are too hard to integrate with. We allow our customers to offer thousands of integrations without involving their engineering team at all.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:01):
I can tell you that if my team had to build integrations like this, how nice would it be to be able to take this off my roadmap and instead use something like OneSchema, and not just to build it but also to maintain it forever.

Christina Gilbert (00:05:12):
Absolutely, Lenny. We've heard so many horror stories of multiday outages from even just a handful of ad records. We are laser-focused on integration reliability to help teams end all of those distractions that come up with integrations. We have a built-in validation layer that stops any bad data from entering your system, and OneSchema will notify your team immediately of any data that looks incorrect.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:32):
I know that importing incorrect data can cause all kinds of pain for your customers and quickly lose their trust. Christina, thank you for joining us. If you want to learn more, head on over to oneschema.co. That's oneschema.co.

(00:05:47):
Part of the reason I was excited to have you on this podcast is that I was lucky enough to get to work with you on a refresh of my logo and brand for my newsletter and my podcast, which I'm very, very excited about. It's actually going to be launching right around the time of this episode going live, so this is, in part, a celebration of the new look, and logo, and brand. I thought it'd be an awesome excuse to bring you on the podcast and give an inside glimpse into the process of updating a logo and a brand. Partly, because I think it'll just be people are like, "What the hell? How did this change? Where did this come from? Why this versus that?" and also just for people that are thinking about this for their own product or business, to understand the process and understand when it might be right for them, when it might be not right for them. Broadly, how does that sound?

Jessica Hische (00:06:32):
Sure. Yeah, of course. Everybody that starts a company knows that they need a logo. That is a big thing. Some people start a company and think the logo is going to drive the culture of the company, which I don't think that that is true. I think that the product itself, and the team you build, and the people you put together are the thing that should be driving things forward, but I do think the logo and the brand assets can generate a lot of both internal and external excitement and just tell people what to expect from the thing that they're about to engage with. Some people say don't judge a book by its cover. I'm the opposite, where any book... The cover of the book should be giving you incredible insight into what is on the interior of the book and setting the tone and setting the vibe so that when you open the book and read the book, it's a symbiotic thing where you're like, "Oh, I understand what I was getting into. This got me excited about starting it," and whatever. It keeps that ball rolling.

(00:07:34):
But with the refresh work that I do, a lot of people start companies and they have a certain amount of money. If they're bootstrapping it, they have less. If they get venture money, they have a little bit more. But what they don't want to do is spend venture money on a massive brand exploration when you're still in the hiring process, you're still trying to get early stage engineers, and all that kind of stuff, and so I am sort of a weird contrarian in this way in the brand world where brand people are like, "Brand is everything. You need to take a significant investment in brand because that guides the vision of the product or whatever." But I think being a bit more of an insider within the tech world, I understand that sometimes people start companies and have an intention to do something.

(00:08:24):
While they're doing that, they're building the team, they're doing cool stuff, but then the company has to pivot for one reason or another, whether a competitor immediately comes out with a thing that you're doing or the technology that you're doing gets postponed, whatever's going to feed into it, and so if you invest super heavily on the whole brand vision from the jump, sometimes it's like throwing away money if you have to pivot. What I love about the work that I do is that I understand that a lot of people have to just have something to put on decks and have something to put on a holding page or whatever, and internal teams are totally capable of doing that early work. But then if it does become successful, you don't want to get locked into whatever it is that you had to throw together before an investor meeting or something.

(00:09:15):
I come in then to take the existing vibe and smooth it out, address any of the concerns that came up. A lot of times, it's really utilitarian stuff like this doesn't scale well, or this thing falls apart in this context, or we never had a good avatar version of it, or whatever. Sometimes it's really specific utilitarian fixes, and sometimes it's just about growing it up and sophisticated it without losing what was there in the first place that people got excited about.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:46):
To give people maybe a couple more tactical piece of advice here, what's a sign that it's maybe time to do something with your logo and brand from you took a first pass, it's good enough, your wife made one, your husband made you a logo, it's like, "Well, this is great. Let's just go with this"? What's a sign that maybe it's time to, "Okay, we should actually at least uplevel this, not necessarily hire studio but takes something to make it better"?

Jessica Hische (00:10:10):
Well, one of the things is if, suddenly, you're starting to deal with the greater rollout of the look and feel of the brand. If you, at first, just basically had a really beta website and small version of the app but you're about to do a new one that kind of updates and expands it, that could be a really good time to roll it out. One of the things that a lot of people do when they're starting a company is that they'll make a logo with a font that is really popular or widely available or free. If you are about to, let's say, print a bunch of swag for new hires, or you're hosting a conference, or whatever is that event where suddenly you're going to physically invest money in making stuff with your brand on it, that might be a good time to do it.

(00:11:03):
One of the reasons why I tell people why having a custom logo or custom typography can really matter is that if you're using something that's available to everyone, the chances of someone else coming in and copying you are very easy and high. You might be one of these lucky companies that just out the gate is outrageously successful, but with success comes people climbing up behind you trying to copy your success. If that success is very easily copyable and people will try to trick your customers into coming their way by repeating the things that you're doing, including the branding, one way to avoid that is by doing something that's more customized when it comes to the logo and brand.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:47):
Let's actually talk about the work that you put into updating my logo and brand. From that, we can spin off into lessons and insights that you have along these lines. Overall, just high level, what's the process you go through to go through a logo refresh?

Jessica Hische (00:12:01):
Sure, of course. Super high level, it's figuring out what the goals are. Some people have a goal where they want their customers to not notice it at all. They're like, "Oh, everybody loves this, but I, the person with a design eye, can see all the problems with it. I need to roll something out that fixes the problems that I see but that no one else really notices." If that's one approach to it, which is a very close in refresh where we're just trying out little things to make it feel custom or fixing things that have come up when stress-tested, whether it looks crazy when you scale it and looks like horsey and heavy-handed when you scale it too big or when you scale it too small, you lose a lot of legibility and stuff like that. That's what would be a really close in exploration.

(00:12:53):
For other people, they might have bigger goals where they're about to pivot the company to try to attract a different audience or things like that. They might have this really cool and successful group of people that are super users but they're trying to expand it, so then it's about, "What can we do to shift the vibe to make it include these new people without excluding our core folks?" My first round is figuring out what that scope is, how experimental, how broad are we going to go for that first round, because then everything else cascades from there. If we go really broad for the first round, then we're in this process of narrowing down the scope as we go down. Whereas if we go really close in for the first round, we're already just talking about really technical stuff.

(00:13:45):
This is another thing that is a little bit unique to me that not everybody else does, but I will hand off files to clients to try in situ really early on if what we're trying to do is solve utilitarian issues. Most other people are like, "No, you don't get the files until we do the final because I don't want you to run away with this or whatever." There has to be some trust with it. Yeah, figure out what we're trying to accomplish and always keep those goals in mind, and then scope out the process based on what those goals are. For each round, we're addressing different things. First round might be about just capturing the overall look and trying things as broad as we can, and then the next round is, "Okay. Well, now we have generally a look that we want, but is it the right weight? Is it the right letter height? Do we have enough details?" That kind of thing, and then we get narrower and nerdier as we go along in the process.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:45):
Awesome. In the experience of my podcast logo, I was an ass. At the end of it, I'm like, "No, this isn't right," because we narrowed, narrowed, narrowed, and then I was like, "No, I'm not feeling it," and then we unnarrowed it and went back. [inaudible 00:15:02]

Jessica Hische (00:15:01):
That is not an uncommon experience though. This is why there's a few things that I'm not opposed to that I know people that are very opposed to. I'm not opposed to Frankensteining options together. To me, it's like I'm giving you a menu of all the things that we can do, but I'm like a chef that puts a menu together where you can combine different appetizers and different mains and they all still make sense. Some people will give you a menu and if you try to do that, it's insane and it tastes terrible. But for me, everything that we're doing, I feel like, mixes and matches fairly well, and I will let you know if it doesn't.

(00:15:37):
It's not unreasonable for clients to go down one path and then use that as validation or confirmation that something that we did much earlier was actually the right way. In that way, if a client ever asks me to do something, they're like, "Let's see it in purple or whatever." There's designers that will really fight you tooth and nail, because they're like, "That is wrong, that is wrong," but I know that some people just have to see it before they can let it go. Sometimes you have to walk down a path before you're able to understand what the right thing to do was all along.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:10):
That's exactly how it felt for me. Going back to the goals, the different goals people have when they're exploring this, you mentioned there's just little problems with the logo, it doesn't scale, it doesn't print well, that kind of thing. Another goal is people are pivoting and they want to change the vibe and the feel of the brand. What other goals might appear that you've come across why people want to do this?

Jessica Hische (00:16:31):
Well, sometimes there's a legibility issue that is really glaring once you see it and then people are too close in to notice it, so this is why it's like you have to show it to a lot of people that aren't familiar with looking at those letter forms and stuff. The one that came to mind immediately when you asked was when I did a refresh for Jeni's Ice Cream, which is a really amazing ice cream brand based out of Columbus, Ohio. They had a few utilitarian things in mind. They had this long J that created this pocket of white space underneath it that made it really hard to design with, but then the biggest glaring one was that they decided to make the apostrophe of the Jeni's over the I as a cool thing. It made the word look like it said penis because of the way that J was drawn.

(00:17:18):
It had a little loop at the top of the J. That was the most specific fix that I've ever had to do, is make the logo not say penis anymore. But yeah, I feel like a lot of it is misreads. When you think about logos and things like that, you want it to be something that, at a super fast glance, people can read it right away. That doesn't mean that everything has to be simple, but it just means that everything has to be incredibly legible, especially when you're starting a new company or you have a less recognizable brand. Because eventually, you become a household name and then people can look at just the color and recognize that it's you or whatever, but it takes a long time building equity before you get that. Until that, it's really important that the legibility is just super tight.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:04):
Let's talk about actually thinking through my new logo and brand. Can you just talk about what you had in mind as you started to explore directions and we started narrowing what was the mindset, and the approach, and the vibe?

Jessica Hische (00:18:18):
I think with the Lenny's brand, you are what I would call a person that has a beloved fan base that we don't want to exclude or offend by shifting gears super crazily. When I was looking at redoing your brand, it was about what's here that we can look at that we should keep or at least explore keeping in order to make sure that it still feels the same on the other side? We didn't want to do anything super drastic. Some of the things to think about in that way are you have this sort of handwritten approach to a lot of the parts of your brand, and I was like, "How do we do something that feels handwritten, that feels like it could jive with the handwriting scripts and stuff that you were using but might feel a little bit more refined moving forward and in a way that could blend with illustration so that the illustration and the letter forms all feel like they were created by the same hand?"

(00:19:17):
A lot of times for me, when it comes to doing an exploration like that, it's about how do we make sure everything feels like it was created at the same time and not that we just tacked on new things? Figuring out how to blend everything together is important. Color was also a big one. I feel like people's color stories are something that is an immediate read, where if you blur your eyes and look at a brand, you can recognize it by its color, and so I think keeping your color similar was a big one too. But then I really wanted to try different approaches with the typography, doing stuff that was a little bit more clean, doing stuff that still had a bit of a funky edge to it. Because your original Lenny's podcast type had this sort of cut papery, a little bit off kilter vibe to it, and so trying to capture that but with new cleaner typography. That was really fun.

(00:20:13):
I was using a typeface Degular as part of it, which has a nice wonkiness to it. It was drawn by a friend of mine, James Edmondson, who I love all of his stuff. That was one of the things that we approached because I felt like it could capture the look of the original cut paperesque type. But yeah, it was really fun to try a lot of different things and work within the iconography that you had used on a few stuff with the microphones, and also marshmallows, and campfires, and all kinds of things, and just trying to make a more unified system.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:47):
Are there things that didn't work as you tried to explore this process that you recall, that might be worth sharing of just like, "Oh, that was a cool concept," but didn't quite work the way you thought?

Jessica Hische (00:20:57):
With working on this refresh, so much of it was thinking about what are the immediate uses of the logo. Your logo, you have these very specific uses that you need it for, the avatar for the podcast being a top one. Some people, they'll design a logo and then have these illustrative versions of the logo that get rolled out for other things, but I feel like those layouts were actually more important than even just having a basic letterhead-esque logo. That's an interesting way to approach it, because usually, it's like let's start simple, and expand, and make it crazier. I felt like we had to always keep those things in play, so it was designing brand assets while also designing the logo. Sometimes you'll see examples of that in early explorations just because it makes it feel real to the client.

(00:21:53):
That's why there's always the tote bag. You got to put the logo on the tote bag and then it feels real or whatever. But in our case, we had really specific uses that needed to get explored very early on, and that made it a slightly different process for me. In terms of things that didn't work though, I think just trying to work on the level of detail within the illustration and type so that it could shrink down, because we knew... One of the primo examples of the logo being used was on that podcast avatar, and some of the versions felt a little bit too detailed to shrink down that much. Trying to get the balance of that, having the illustrations feel illustrative and whole, but not when they scaled up, to feel too simple like we just pulled it from a icon library. I think that was an interesting challenge.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:46):
One of the impetuses for changing my logo, for motivating me, is my wife's a designer, as you know. She's got strong opinions about my logo, and she always was making fun of my logo saying it looked like a clip art fireplace that anyone just could just plug and play. She's always like, "Oh, that's so bad. You got to change it." That was one of the motivators. I think I might have shared that when we started working together.

Jessica Hische (00:23:08):
Yeah. Also too, I think that really talks to what I was saying earlier about making sure that everything feels like it was created together rather than it feeling like these disparate elements, because I think you can have an icon or logo that is quite simple as long as the rest of the brand matches that simplicity. I think, for you, the biggest thing was making the illustration and the typography just feel like it came from the same universe instead of feeling like these separate elements. When I first moved to San Francisco, I moved to San Francisco from New York, and as a New Yorker, I had an apartment with a full kitchen that never got used. I just ate at restaurants and did takeout for the seven years or whatever that I lived in New York.

(00:23:51):
Learning to cook, at first, when you learn how to cook, it's like you're making a pot full of ingredients and none of the ingredients are actually working together. But then the more you do it and the more you understand how these things are meant to blend and cook at different temperatures at different times, you start having this cohesive dish rather than hot ham water. You know what I mean? I feel like a lot of clients come to me and they have hot ham water when it comes to their brand. It's just about turning that into a soup, something that feels real.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:25):
I want to take a quick tangent. Most people listening to this podcast are not designers. They're product managers, founders, engineers, and folks building product. I've always wanted to see the world through the eyes of a designer, because there's so much I don't see and there's so much that affects how I think about something that I don't understand when I look at a logo, and so I thought it might be helpful just to spend a little time helping people see a designer a little bit. Let me just ask you this question. When people look at a logo or a brand, what are just elements that make it what it is, that make you feel the thing you want to feel that we may not recognize?

Jessica Hische (00:25:06):
I think most people are better at understanding the feelings and sensations that typography and logos give us than they give themselves credit for, because what we are as people are endless absorbers of patterns, and information, and all this kind of stuff as we move throughout the world. We don't take time to sit and digest it, but it's still coming in and getting logged. That's why if you see something funky in the world, you're like, "That's weird. I don't like that. I don't know why I don't like it, but I know I don't like it." I think even as a non-designer, you can see that in typography. The whole being able to recognize patterns thing, I talked about this a bit at config, it's like it's a safety thing. Looking into the world, your eyes can spot that thing that's a little bit off, and that thing that's off feels not safe to you.

(00:26:08):
It's thinking about when we look at a meal and there's a thing on the plate that looks like it's moldy or something like that. You understand that doesn't look right to me, this doesn't smell right to me. Your body knows it before your brain knows it. Even as a non-designer, I think you can look at examples of logos where something's not quite right and be like, "Something's not right here, I just don't know how to name it." But I think a good exercise is just looking at fonts that are available in the world and asking yourself, "What feeling does this give me?" and just write them down. It doesn't matter, just give yourself permission to say whatever is happening in your mind, the first thing. Don't overanalyze it. Just look at it and be like, "That feels calm to me. That feels exciting to me. That feels whatever to me."

(00:27:00):
The more you do that, the more you can start seeing similarities in the ones that feel exciting, and the ones that feel calm, and the ones that feel whatever, and then get into analyze mode of, "Oh, these 10 things that I said feel calm are a lighter weight, have more generous spacing, have rounded edges, have rounder bowls to the letter forms." You just start seeing commonalities between the things. It's just about seeing them all together to understand what those similarities are. I think anybody can do that. I mean, you're not going to have the language of the leg of the R and the tittle of the I. Don't worry about that. You don't have to know typography language to think about it, but anybody's capable of doing that. It can be really fun to just stop and ask yourself and notice.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:58):
This is great. I want to go actually a little deeper. What I'm hearing is look at something, tap into the feeling you feel when you look at it, actually pay attention to it because there's wisdom in that. The specific things that you pointed out that impact that feeling are, you mentioned, spacing between the letters, the edges. I imagine there's just the color of it. What other specific elements impact the way someone feels when they look at a logo?

Jessica Hische (00:28:26):
There's the width of the letter, so if it's really narrow versus really wide. I always think about the width, the weight, [inaudible 00:28:35] facing, sort of detailed treatment of things, whether things are very hard and jagged or soft and how soft it is. Sometimes we just add a tiny bit of softness so that it just feels printed. You can take a typeface like Helvetica, just the one everybody knows. But if you take Helvetica and just ever so slightly round the edges just a little bit, all of a sudden, you have this typeface that feels more vintage, or softer, or whatever, because we're perceiving it, we would perceive it if it were printed on paper versus perceiving it as this hard geometric piece of technology that we're viewing. You know what I mean?

(00:29:20):
I know that it's because when you look at stuff printed on a page, it bleeds into the paper a little bit, which means that that softness reminds us in our bodies of a thing that we've seen that was printed. It's cool to sort of walk back your feelings also. You'll look at something and go, "That feels like this," and then ask yourself why does it feel like that. It might be because you saw it on a flyer for a band when you were 22, and it brought out that feeling in you of what it felt like to be 22 at that thing. That's a very specific feeling to you, but it can inform your decisions about design, because you can be like, "Oh, I'm not that much of a special snowflake." Other people might have that same reaction but have different experiences that are adjacent to that reaction.

(00:30:08):
It's cool because you are reverse-justifying decisions. I think that's a really fun exercise to do, is to Song Exploder your intuition. You make a decision intuitively or look at something and intuit what you feel from it, and then really try to dive in, "Why do I feel that way? What could this have reminded me of that made me feel that way?" You have to be just so forgiving and loose with yourself as you do it because then you'll get into some really weird stuff, and that's really great inspiration juice for picking other things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:51):
I love the exercise that you gave. The one you gave earlier is look at a bunch of fonts, look at your font folder. Is that a place to go, just open up your font folder and just go through them?

Jessica Hische (00:30:55):
Totally. Look at your font folder, or go to MyFonts, or a place where there's a ton of fonts, and just search for something. Search for sans serif or whatever. Search for a really basic category of fonts. Serif, sans serif, script, whatever, the top level edge of stuff, and then just page through, page through, page through. Screenshot stuff that you like and make a folder full of screenshots, and then you can take those screenshots and start categorizing them. "Oh, this one feels feminine. This one feels masculine, this one feels aggressive. This one feels whatever." Just take some notes on it. Then, you ask yourself, "Well, why did I feel that way?" You're like, "Oh, well, this feels feminine because it reminds me of wedding invitations," and wedding invitations feel inherently bridey versus groomy. All of a sudden, you're like, "Okay. Well, now I know that if I'm going to use a script for something, this zone of script feels very wedding, so maybe I avoid that for this brand that's actually a cutting edge food packaging company or whatever because it feels too aligned with that industry."

(00:32:10):
Stereotypes are real and trends are real, and what can sometimes happen is some industry usurps an entire style for a period of time. If you use anything within that style, it's like you're aligning yourself to that industry. I mean, everybody that does branding, one of the things that they do is they analyze the competitors of the company. You just look at a landscape of what are all the competitors doing, what is their visual vibe, and do I lean into that or do I avoid that? If I lean into it, then I'm immediately getting this... Everyone that looks at it understands I'm a FinTech company because I look like a FinTech company. If my whole thing is I'm trying to be divergent from that, I'm trying to show how different I am from the status quo, then you use it as a reactionary thing of I want to do nothing like that and do something really different so people understand this isn't just another FinTech company.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:09):
Yeah. I'm thinking green. The color green has to be a part of the logo if you want to be a FinTech company.

Jessica Hische (00:33:13):
Yeah, exactly. If you're trying to be weird, then you're like teal.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:19):
On this topic of seeing a designer, is there any other tip, just before we move on to a different topic, of just how someone could learn to see a designer a little bit more?

Jessica Hische (00:33:30):
Yeah. Another thing to notice, because I'm assuming you're... Product people, I feel like a lot of product people end up having some engineering background, whether or not they're engineers themselves. They have to interface with the engineers and they build stuff, and so they come at it from a data standpoint. I can always tell when there's an engineer that has suddenly got taken an interest in type design and is now a type designer, because everything is very, very regular. You can draw a grid on top of everything and the lines all line up perfectly. You see lots of reverse justification of that when people are making logos and they have a more engineering background. The thing to notice, that is interesting within type, is that, yes, you're absolutely following rules, but you're breaking those rules quite often to correct for optical tricks.

(00:34:24):
If you look at a geometric sans serif, for instance, that's like a category of sans serifs, and they're meant to have a lot of really strong geometry, be very regular, like most of the sans that you think of that you're like, "I'm in love with this over the last 10 years," like geometric sanses. But when you really start to examine them, you notice that there's all these little things that people are doing to make them look perfectly geometric even though they are not mathematically perfectly geometric. That's another thing that you can do, whether you're doing it in Figma or doing it somewhere else, is just type out a couple of lowercase letters. Lowercase specifically are really good for analyzing this because they're smaller than the uppercase letters. You usually have to accommodate for the weight a little bit differently. You'll notice that when strokes combine, so say I have an A and I'm combining the lower bowl of the A, I'm going to get a little thinner as I come into that.

(00:35:23):
Or say I have a two-storey A, so a two-storey A is the one that's like this and then a bowl, you might notice that this vertical of the A there, the bowl actually eats into that stroke a little bit to erase a little bit of that added weight that would've been perceived optically had you kept everything perfectly regular. It's weird because you end up creating something that's perfect and then have to make it not perfect in order to make it be perceived as perfect. That's another just fun thing to start noticing. You notice it a lot more on typefaces and typography that is heavier in weight, because when things are heavier weight, you're constantly managing these really inky moments where things join together and you have to subtract a bunch of weight from that so that it doesn't get perceived as this dark mark where the letter is happening.

(00:36:22):
I think about lowercase Rs and lowercase Ns, where the shoulder of the N or the R comes out, sometimes the top of the R is actually narrower at the top than it is on the bottom, and that's to try to subtract some of that weight in there where that join happens. Anyway, that's just a fun thing to notice that you have to do that. Once you start seeing it, you start seeing where it happens more often, and the answer of why it happens is because correcting for this optical weight issue. You're like, "Oh, man. Now I have x-ray vision. I can see all these weird things I've never seen before." It's very fun. But anyway, a lot of people, when they first start out doing typography, whether you're an engineer or whether you are a designer, they don't account for that. I can always just look at something and see whether someone is truly an expert at typography or whether this is a fun hobby for them when they're pretty fresh at it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:20):
The exercise here is open up Figma, start typing, and make it really big so you can basically see the font really zoomed in.

Jessica Hische (00:37:20):
A single letter.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:27):
A single letter.

Jessica Hische (00:37:28):
Make a single letter the whole page and then just draw some vertical lines, or do the thing where you draw a little circle or whatever and see if that circle is the same size at the point where two strokes join together or the point where the stroke is just vertical and on its own. You'll notice that there's differences even in typography that's meant to look extremely rigid and geometric.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:53):
I want to come back to my logo just to close the loop there. Talk about just the final result that we landed on, and why you think that was the final answer, and what you think people might get from it, whatever comes to mind.

Jessica Hische (00:38:07):
Yeah, totally. I think the final answer or the final logo, we took it down a lot of different paths trying to see where it was going to land, but ultimately ended up keeping it pretty close to home and really focusing on that asset of the fire. We tried so many different versions of it's microphones with the fire and marshmallows with the fire, et cetera. It was just about sometimes the simplest solution is the correct solution. I don't know, I just feel like in terms of what we were doing for blowing it out and making it really cohesive, we went a lot of directions where there might've been multiple versions of the logo depending on the scale and ultimately ended up in a place where it's much more in line and consistent across the bar.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:55):
Yeah. Maybe what I'll do is we'll share, I don't know if you're comfortable with that, we could just share all the iterations somewhere that we went through.

Jessica Hische (00:39:01):
Oh, yeah. I love sharing iterations. It's very fun. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:03):
Okay, cool. Sweet. The biggest issue we had with the podcast logo specifically is, originally, I was thinking the mic made sense to differentiate it from the newsletter. At the end of it, it's just like, "Why do we have this freaking mic in there? It just feels strange." That's where we revisited the whole idea and killed the mic and went back to a different version of the fireplace but with marshmallows.

Jessica Hische (00:39:24):
Yeah, I love the marshmallows.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:26):
Awesome. I love it. That was my wife's... My wife loves the marshmallows also, and it's so versatile. We can use it in so many different ways.

Jessica Hische (00:39:33):
Indeed.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:34):
I guess maybe one last thread there is we explored handwritten typography that you created from scratch, and then there's the block letters. Maybe just thoughts on those two options and benefits and why go one direction versus another?

Jessica Hische (00:39:51):
The handwritten one, I really liked because I felt like we could bring the line quality of the illustration into the handwriting, but then the only problem with the handwriting is that if you want to blow that out, if you want to include other handwriting throughout the rest of the brand, finding something that matches that perfectly without creating a custom typeface is a whole thing. I really like being able to combine the two, where we have this broader visual vocabulary that we can pull from, because you're going to have headlines, you're going to have subheads, you're going to have all these other uses for typography moving forward. If you just have one thing to pull from, it's a lot harder to work with. It's just nicer when you have a few elements to play with. It's like having a wardrobe. If you have only one shirt and one pair of pants, there's only so many things that you can do. But if you have all these things that work together and can recombine, then you can blow out a brand system much more easily.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:44):
Yeah. That's one of my favorite things about working with you, is you create all these different variations of ways to use it. It doesn't always have to be the handwritten one. It could be the blocky outlining one. It's not like, "This is it, don't change anything about this. This is the only way to use it."

Jessica Hische (00:40:57):
Well, part of that is because some brands, if you have a massive company, like hundreds of employees generating hundreds of things, sometimes having too many assets can overcomplicate stuff. Because unless you have a really, really well-written brand book outlining how to do everything that people are adhering to very closely, you can get the assets running rampant throughout all of the stuff and being used incorrectly. But because you're not a massive company and you have creative control over the things that are happening and can help direct that, we can be much more playful with the assets and give you the ability to use things in different ways. It depends on how much you trust all the people that are handling your assets.

(00:41:43):
I am of the mind that you shouldn't need a 500-page brand book in order to direct how the brand is used moving forward, and that if you do, the brand might be quite complicated, or there might be even just parts of the logo that make it difficult to work with. My goal always when designing a logo is to design a logo that's so easy to use that you don't have to be an extremely skilled designer to design well with it. That's my number one goal, because I know not everybody is going to be at a stage where they have an internal brand team or a designer that's a rock star designer that can work with really complicated assets and make them look good.

(00:42:28):
I just want the assets to teach you themselves, by just how they exist, how to use it. You, as a person that has any taste whatsoever, and hopefully people that you're hiring for any job at your company have some degree of taste. If you hire an engineer, they have to have taste about how that happens. If you hire a marketing person, they have to have taste about how that happens. They should be able to look at that and intuit most of the way that you should be able to use it without being explicitly told, "Do not do this."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:01):
This episode is brought to you by Merge. Product leaders, yes, like you, cringe when they hear the word integration. They're not fun for you to scope, build, launch, or maintain, and integrations probably aren't what led you to product work in the first place. Lucky for you, the folks at Merge are obsessed with integrations. Their single API helps SaaS companies launch over 200 product integrations in weeks, not quarters. Think of Merge like Plaid, but for everything B2B SaaS. Organizations like Ramp, Dorado, and Electric use Merge to access their customer's accounting data to reconcile bill payments, file storage data to create searchable databases and their product, or HRAS data to auto provision and deprovision access for the customer's employees. Yes, if you need AI-ready data for your SaaS product, then Merge is the fastest way to get it. Want to solve your organization's integration dilemma once and for all, book and attend a meeting at merge.dev/lenny and receive a $50 Amazon gift card. That's merge.dev/lenny.

(00:44:08):
This is a good circle back to something you touched on earlier that I wanted to come back to, which is a lot of companies, in your opinion, put too much weight on the power of brand, and rebranding, and how much a brand can fix their problems. Can you just again share your perspective on just how this might be an issue for people where they almost overemphasize the power of brand? [inaudible 00:44:32]

Jessica Hische (00:44:31):
Yeah. Well, there's different companies. There's companies where brand is literally everything, where they're doing something that's not crazy innovative in the first place and the brand is the thing that is the whole company, and that's fine. That's a completely valid way to do stuff. It's like people that can take in information and recommunicate it in a way to another audience or whatever that they hit that audience in a way that the original information couldn't do. Think about all of the people who write books on psychology, and medicine, and all kinds of stuff that write it for a broader popular audience. They're the ones reading the medical papers, they're the ones digesting all of this really huge complicated data, and turning it into something that normal people can read. I think that there are companies that are doing that. They're taking a thing that is not innovative or isn't like they're not the only ones doing it, but they're repackaging it in a way that takes that and makes it so accessible to so many people.

(00:45:34):
In that case, brand can matter immensely, where the brand really is the thing that shows people that the thing that you're doing has value. But for a lot of people, the brand should be somewhat invisible so that the thing itself becomes the star. If we think about the experiences that we have using products, sometimes there's products where there's a ton of fun and delight built into how you use it, and that can happen through brand through design choices and things like that. Sometimes the delight is the fact that nothing is getting in your way as you're using that product. You just figure out what's your ethos of your company. Is the whole thing about doing a thing well, doing it simply, and making sure that everything gets out of the way of that experience, or is it like we're trying to generate this delightful thing or we're trying to open it up to a new audience or whatever? Depending on whatever that goal is, brand can have a different place in that equation.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:42):
I think some of this unique perspective on the power brand and the need for it in tech companies comes from you're not like a tech person. You work with tech people, you work with tech companies. Do you feel like that has an impact on the way you think and the value that you bring to companies to give them this very outside perspective?

Jessica Hische (00:47:01):
I mean, most of the folks that I know that work in brand or traditional graphic design, print design, they don't necessarily have a lot of insight into how building companies works. They're not friends with a ton of startup founders and things like that. I've just had been in this very fun position being like everyone's token creative person in The Bay for a while, and this been for a long time. I remember speaking at a Silicon Valley event that was women in Silicon Valley in 2009 or 2010, something like that. It's interesting to be a person that has never actually, themselves, worked at a tech company but felt so involved and understanding about how all of that works. My partner, the reason why we're in The Bay is because he got hired by Facebook back in 2011. We were olds at the time. Take that with a grain of salt, don't judge me.

(00:48:02):
Because we were 28, 29 coming over to work at Facebook and everybody there was 23, 24, and so all the people that we ended up meeting in The Bay were more people our age that were moving on to start companies and things like that. We just got to see that perspective so clearly of what it is to branch out on your own, to fundraise, to do all this stuff, to pivot, to do little experimental apps and see where that goes to get acquired as a team versus getting acquired as a technology or whatever. I've been able to see that in a way that I feel like a lot of people that do my job don't get to see. That makes me very sympathetic and towards what it is to want to build a brand as a founder. I understand that you have limited resources and those resources aren't necessarily going to get devoted to doing a $200,000 brand exploration, because when you have $500,000 of money at all for a year to try to get things going, you certainly should not spend half of that money on branding.

(00:49:12):
That's my opinion, but that's not to say that brand can't be important and can't come in at some level or can't be thought of as a partnership between you and someone else where... There's this whole idea of fractional leadership now, which I feel like hasn't really infiltrated my world as much, but I don't know why it hasn't, because most people don't have internal comms teams, internal brand teams, until the company is very mature. The idea that you could bring someone in who is a real expert in whatever it's that they do, just as you need them, and they just get consultant equity kind of thing, that should be more present because people don't necessarily need to have internal brand teams for the first six months to a year of when they're doing stuff unless they grow really significantly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:05):
Along these lines, you have a pretty unique way of pricing your work. For people that may want to explore this with you, share whatever you can about just how you think about pricing and ideally even an order magnitude of pricing so they're like, "Oh, okay. We should actually do this."

Jessica Hische (00:50:21):
To go back to the process how it's always about figuring out what people are trying to accomplish, so a lot of my process scales depending on how broad of an exploration that we're doing. The way that I treat it is I treat my branding work not dissimilarly to how I treat commercial lettering, which is atypical. Brand people, what they typically do is because the client has to own the assets outright at the end no matter what, they tend to do is bill everything that the client owns everything as you are moving along. It's all sort of work for hire, but the idea being that it's a buyout of everything that is being made. What that means is that when a branding agency is pricing stuff for you, they're taking the buyout rights and baking it into every round of work so that every round gets more expensive because you are owning all of the work.

(00:51:14):
What I do is I treat it much more like a commercial lettering project where I say, "You have to own the rights to this eventually, but hey, let's break that out and let's keep the creative process lighter and less expensive so then we have more room to explore. So then if some stakeholder comes in last minute and blows everything else up and we need to start over, you haven't already paid to own everything that we've created, you just pay to own the thing that we create in the end that gets chosen." I really like the idea of keeping the creation process more flexible and to try to scale to what people need versus having a really rigid way of approaching everything. Sometimes people will bring me on really early in the process, where if they have an internal team or if they're working with an external agency or something, they want me there from the get out.

(00:52:04):
Some people are like, "We have no money and we are going to try to do this as much as we can inside of our business, but then can we hire you at the end to make it look good? If we can get everybody bought in and get it 80% of the way there." Depending on what people's budgets are, I have different ways of working, or just depending on what their needs are. Because my whole thing too is I don't want to step on anybody's toes, because sometimes companies have these really amazing designers that are working in-house, and it sucks as a designer who started at a company and thinks that you might be able to get a chance to work on what is considered the most important asset in terms of the brand and they just farm it out to someone else instead of letting you touch it. To me, that's a recipe for anything that I create to be immediately killed, because someone inside is going to be like, "It's time to shine," and then they're just going to kill all my work.

(00:52:56):
I'm always like, "How do we collaborate? How do I make it so that I'm an asset to you? Not that I'm trying to step on your toes, not that I'm trying to take over what's the cool juicy work from the people who inside that are really excited to do it." I just want them to feel as bought in as I can be. But yeah, it becomes interesting. I feel like I get told by branding people that I'm too inexpensive because they're like, "Oh, for what you do, it should be 60 or $70,000 at a minimum to do all this kind of stuff." I'm like, I feel like the majority of the projects that I do end up being between 25 and 35, but depending on how you bring me in, it can be less if it's just as a consultant. It's not out of the realm of possibilities to hire a proper crazy expert at stuff. It's not like you're thinking about sinking half a million dollars into the brand. That's a very different experience.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:51):
Awesome. Thank you for sharing that. Before we get into other stuff that you do, because like you said at the top, there are many other things you do outside of this specific time of work, is there anything else you think might be helpful or important for people to know about working with you on a logo refresh or just thinking about logos and this whole space we talked about?

Jessica Hische (00:54:11):
The best thing is just seeing what's there and really being able to understand what's not working about it and what your goals are. Like I said with that reverse justification of intuition, I think if you know that the logo is not quite where you want it to be, just spend a couple days asking yourself why. "What is the thing about this that bothers me?" Don't get specific. Don't be like, "The way the R is," or whatever. Maybe that's the thing that we talk about down the line, but always think big picture before you think minutiae, because sometimes people think that... They'll throw a bunch of minutiae stuff at me, but it's because they haven't really stopped to think about what is the overall thing that's bothering them.

(00:54:59):
You just never get there if you're always trying to address detail before you address the big picture stuff. You have to just always start super top level, and really ask yourself very broad questions about why you think it's not working, and then go tighter, and tighter, and tighter, and be like... It really could be like, "This C has always bothered me," and then we can get real specific about that when I'm doing the refresh. But I think I also need to understand the overall reason why we're doing this, not just the little bugaboo that bothers you specifically but might not bother anybody else.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:35):
Yeah. When I was thinking about this, it feels like my whole feeling was this could be better. That's all it was for me initially, is just like I feel like it could be a lot better. I imagine that's enough for some people, just like, "I think this could be better," and then here's things [inaudible 00:55:50].

Jessica Hische (00:55:49):
Yeah. That's definitely enough for some people, because I think sometimes... I think you, specifically, had a very clear vibe going on with all of your brand stuff. Some people, it's totally like a mishmash grab bag of random trends and there's no real voice that's coming through. But I feel like you've been doing this for a while, and when you see everything together, there's definitely a very clear vision and vibe that you get from everything. I always tell people that having terrible vision can be your best asset when it comes to logo and brand, because it allows you...

(00:56:30):
Just take your glasses off if you have terrible vision, and look at it, and get the feeling when you can't see the detail. You have to be looking at it with blurred eyes. What is the overall look of this thing? Just trying to get as broad and noodly as you can with it instead of it being about those really specific one by one stuff. I think when you blur your eyes on your brand, there was a really clear cohesiveness to it already. It was just about massaging it into a more consistent professional-looking place.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:07):
Well, I can't look at the old logo anymore now that I've gotten this thing coming together, so I'm really excited for this to come out. Just a couple closing questions. One is you have a lot of other stuff going on that is not just typography and logo refreshes. You have children's books, you do lettering for classics, you have a store in Oakland. Talk about all these other things you got going on in case it might interest people.

Jessica Hische (00:57:32):
Sure. Yeah, of course. I'm based here in The Bay, as we've talked about, and I have a studio in Downtown Oakland. My studio is like Barbie's creative Dream house, where the top floor is my office, that's where I'm right now, and then the bottom floor on one side is a workshop. I do a lot of printmaking. I went to college at a school that was very focused on interdisciplinary work, and I feel like I bring a lot of manual analog processes into my work a lot. I find it really important to make physical things as a part of my creative process, so I do a lot of printmaking. On the other side downstairs is a brick and mortar store. I've always wanted to have a brick and mortar store because, as an artist, I think having people have a physical connection to your work can be really important.

(00:58:20):
I think one of the reasons why people hire me to do things for them is because one of the gifts of working with someone that is a real nerd professional about whatever it is that they do is that they bring you along the journey and give you the language to talk about the thing through their eyes and through their experience. To me, the funnest thing for me is actually telling clients and teaching them about all the things that we are doing along the way so then they go out into the world as a newly-minted type nerd and can communicate all of these things to other people. That connection is just really important. The connection to the work, the story behind it, I feel like that's one of the ways that we create lasting work, is understanding that the work exists because there's a story behind it. Things, if they're just created because of the aesthetics or they're just created quickly or whatever, it's really easy to discard them because there's not a story behind it.

(00:59:22):
But if you think about all the objects in your life that have followed you throughout your life, what's a thing that you've had since you were in fifth grade or whatever that is still magically in your possession in your house? You have that because the story of that thing is so important to you. I think that the work that we create, the design that we create, can have that. It can be imbued with so much story and meaning, that when we think about moving on from it, we're like, "Ugh, but this." I think that's one of the ways to build a lasting brand, is to just make sure that the story of creating it feels so real, and visceral, and important. The store is a way for people to have a physical connection to other work that I create, like the prints and things like that.

(01:00:07):
With the kids' book stuff, that's also about creating lasting stuff. I like creating physical things in the world. I like repackaging things that I've learned in therapy in a way that kids will appreciate and enjoy. I'm just always thinking about what's a way that I can say a thing that has been said before but hasn't been said in this way. If I can turn that into a physical object that people can have and appreciate, all the better. But yeah, I don't know. While, professionally, what I do is considered very niche, I feel like all the things that I do are quite diverse, because they tickle different parts of my brain. I have to use my hands in different ways and my mind in different ways. It's how I've been able to generally avoid feeling burnt out as a creative, is just being able to move on between different kinds of work and just feel excited about different things at different times.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:05):
For folks that want to maybe check out the store, how do they find it? It's called Jessica and Friends, is that right?

Jessica Hische (01:01:08):
Yes. It's called Jessica Hische and Friends.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:10):
Jessica Hische and Friends.

Jessica Hische (01:01:13):
You can just Google JH&F.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:14):
Google Maps, yeah. [inaudible 01:01:17]

Jessica Hische (01:01:18):
Yeah. I put JH&F on as a part of the Google Maps name so I don't have to spell my name to strangers, because I have a weird German spelling last name. I also have a second store called Drawling, which is drawing with an L thrown in there. That one is an all-ages art supply store that's sort of a kids' art supply store. That one grew out of JH&F as well. Those two stores exist. With my books, if you just look up my last name on any of your favorite booksellers, you'll find me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:49):
Last question. I'm just going to throw this out there in case something interesting comes up. We have a segment on this podcast called AI Corner, where I like to see how people have found ways to use AI in their work, in their life to be more productive, do cool things. Is there some way that you've found a way to use AI in the work that you do that makes you do more interesting stuff?

Jessica Hische (01:02:09):
A little bit. I am in this really interesting position in terms of AI where my partner works at Meta on GenAI stuff. He's a director on the GenAI team at Meta and is very bought into AI as a whole thing. I am a little [inaudible 01:02:28] about its impact on a lot of the things that we do. I think, overall, it will become a tool and be very useful, especially in a lot of different fields. But I think this timeframe in which it's more novelty is going to have not the best impact on things like illustration, but eventually, we'll all come out of it and it'll be fine. In terms of how I've been able to integrate it into my process, I did some work for Salesforce last year where the theme for Dreamforce was going to be very AI-driven. I felt like I needed to explore AI as a part of the generative process for creating that art.

(01:03:08):
I did have fun creating custom lettering and then trying to run it through stable diffusion to get stable diffusion to generate instances of my lettering in different styles. We were making these clouds. We ultimately didn't end up using it, but it was still really neat to see. I could see the validity of that in the creative iterative process. I think the biggest thing for me is that I find that the sloggy, slow dregs of work is very fulfilling to me, that a lot of the evangelists of AI are like, "Oh, imagine if you could spend all of your time high level thinking, and coming up with the concepts, and guiding the vision, and whatever, and then just get AI to do everything else that you don't care about." For me, that just sounds like not the most holistic approach to how I work, because the reason why I do all the things that I do and why my process is the way that it is because while I love thinking and I love coming up with conceptual stuff, I find it to be very cerebrally taxing.

(01:04:17):
I need a break from that by doing the more low-key production end of stuff. That's my favorite part of the process, is we know what we're doing, and now it's just about going in. When it comes to judging logos, for instance, the days that I spend knowing exactly what I'm going to do and all it is me just moving little Bezier handles around and getting it feeling right and whatever, those are pure therapeutic zen for me. I think I will always have that as a part of my work and will probably not have AI be outputting that part. But I have been able to have it be helpful in the iterative process a little bit, both through generating sketches with that project and then also through a lot of stuff with writing with my kids' books and things like that, is coming up with lists of words and concepts that are adjacent to each other, whatever.

(01:05:17):
I have found that Claude and ChatGPT are very good for things like that. I'm working on another kids' book now, and I'm trying to think of the directions that it can take. One of them is sort of illustrating different feelings and things like that. I could sit there and brainstorm what are the different emotions or whatever, or I can just ask Claude like, "List 50 emotions," and then I can cherry-pick the ones that come up that feel right. I do find it's really good for that early brainstorming stuff, and that's been really nice.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:50):
Is there anything else that you want to share or leave listeners with before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Jessica Hische (01:05:58):
Yes. Well, I do have a new kid's book coming out in October.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:02):
Oh, [inaudible 01:06:02].

Jessica Hische (01:06:02):
Aside from all the logo stuff, please do check out my kids' books. It's called My First Book of Fancy Letters, and it is like a new spin on an alphabet book, but instead of it being an alphabet book for brand new babies, which you could totally buy it for brand new babies because it is very simple, and fun, and they'll like the bright pictures, it's for the age where kids can recognize letters but can't necessarily read and write yet because they get so into seeing letters drawn in these different styles and imagining what other letters could be drawn in. Each of the letters is drawn to represent the word that it sounds like. Letters can be athletic, bubbly, or creepy, and then it's like, "Well, what does a creepy C look like?"

(01:06:49):
When kids are starting to understand letter sounds and recognizing letters, they can start thinking about what other words start with that letter sound, and then they start listing stuff out and become immediate over-the-shoulder art directors. It's been really fun showing it to other preschoolers, and TK, and kindergarten kids, because they're immediately like, "Well, R should be a river. It should be a river." I'm like, "Well, how do you draw a river?" It becomes this fun imagination exercise too, so definitely check that out. It's up for pre-order now and comes out October 22nd.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:21):
That is so delightful. I know you have multiple kids. Do you start to see the idea with one age of kid and then by the time the next kid reaches that age, it's ready and published? Does that work timing-wise?

Jessica Hische (01:07:31):
Yeah, the only thing is both of my... Well, my oldest child is a real super reader. She's always ahead of the game. The second that she could read, she was like, "Oh, picture books are for babies." Now she's reading, she goes into Pegasus books and is just like, "Where are your books for teenagers?" They're like, "You're nine. We're not going to show you that, but here are the middle grade books or whatever." There is a little bit of that. You are a parent, but you are a parent of a very young person. Kids don't want to buy anything you're selling as a parent. There's a little bit of that where I feel like I get so many wonderful letters from other families about how it's their favorite book, and they read it every night, and it's so important, and then my kids are like, "Yeah, yeah. It's just mom's book, whatever."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:23):
Yeah, that's bittersweet. Well, with that, Jessica, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Jessica Hische (01:08:30):
I'm ready.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:31):
Speaking of books, first question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Jessica Hische (01:08:36):
Rick Reuben's creativity book is so good. Definitely recommend that. I haven't listened to it on audiobook. I read the physical book, but I also heard the audiobook is very zen. I feel like it's just a very good palate cleanser in terms of being an artist and creating because it feels both high level but also very actionable, so really recommend that. In terms of learning about and understanding typography, there's this book called Inside Paragraphs by Cyrus Highsmith. It's very small and very digestible. You can read it in one bathroom visit, and it's illustrated really well. It has cool illustrations. If you want to learn about some basics of type and typography, it's a really great book, and incredibly accessible, and not like reading Bringhurst or something like that, so big ups to that book. Oh, what's another book?

(01:09:33):
I don't know. I feel like I'm just going to end up recommending all the books that I'm currently reading. This month, I read both Patti Smith's Just Kids, which I loved also and was also... I feel like I'm reading a lot of books about being an artist more so than being a designer. That book, I found really interesting, just hearing her story of moving to New York and having nothing. Just trying to be an artist, and make art, and having that be the thing that drove everything that she and Robert Mapplethorpe did. I don't know, I just feel like I'm looking for ways to get out of my very business-driven sensibilities around art making and get into a space that's more loose, and free, and driven by passions and feelings more so than necessarily career-based milestones and things like that. This is a wild card one too. I just finished The Emperor of All Maladies. I'm just a big fan of reading things about human biology and things like that and found it totally fascinating, so do read that one too.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:40):
I can't help but ask, how do you have time to read, raise children, work on so many projects, have a run a store? What is your secret?

Jessica Hische (01:10:50):
Well, you get pretty ruthless about your schedule when you're a parent, where when you're at the office, you are just heads in working, and so I think just trying to stay as focused as possible in that way. I do this thing where I bounce back and forth between projects a lot as I'm losing steam, and so having multiple things to work on keeps me motivated to keep working. I think it's kind of an ADHD thing, where I will start my day one way and then as soon as I start losing steam, I switch to a different thing, lose steam, switch to a different thing, lose steam, switch to a different thing. Rather than taking breaks, I just take a break by working on something that feels fresh. That can be super helpful.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:35):
That's an awesome tip.

Jessica Hische (01:11:36):
Yeah. I mean, it's incredible. I also would tell people when I had first started out, I had a full-time job and then was doing freelance in the evenings. People were like, "How do you not get burnt out, whatever?" It's because my day job was so different from my night job that it felt like I was doing two separate eight-hour shifts instead of one continual sixteen-hour shift. I think that's something to sort of think about, is that there's always going to be things that need to get done as a part of your work or things that you're interested in and passionate about. Just having enough diversity in what that means is going to allow you to maintain enthusiasm for doing all those different things for much longer. Actually, the more homogenous your life and career and job is, the faster you're going to burn out, so just making sure that you have enough variety and all the things that you do.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:27):
That was an awesome tip. I'm glad I went there. Okay, back on track to our lightning round. Is there a recent favorite movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Jessica Hische (01:12:34):
Severance was my favorite TV show I think I've ever watched.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:38):
The second season's coming out.

Jessica Hische (01:12:40):
I know. That came to mind because I knew the second season was coming out, so I'm just really excited about it, but I think that was probably tops for me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:48):
Is there a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love?

Jessica Hische (01:12:51):
Oh, yeah. Well, there's a few things. Well, there was one that's just a super random one that was just pure delight. There's a Japanese brand, Penco, and they make a lot of wonderful stuff. I carry a lot of their stuff in my store. One of the things I bought recently from them is a pen cup, a pencil cup. It's ceramic, but it looks like a paper bag, a lightly crumpled paper bag, and then it just has printed on it Penco, whatever. I just really like it when you take an existing object and give it a new form. I find that to be very delightful, and so that was, I think, one of the things that I really loved recently that I bought for the store.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:28):
Awesome. Pick two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often think about, come back to share with folks, find useful, and work your life?

Jessica Hische (01:13:38):
It's funny being a lettering artist because I'm not much of a quotes gal, all things considered. I should be because I could make a million dollars by just making "live, laugh, love" pillows or whatever, but I am not usually continually collecting quotes. But I was just at a conference up in Portland called XOXO, and one of the presenters showed a quote on the screen that resonated with me more than most things that I've seen in recent memory. I feel like this is my new... It was one of those quotes that I was like maybe I should get a tattoo of that. When it gets to that level where you're considering a tattoo, you're like, "Okay, that's official." It was "hope is a discipline". I just really loved that. It's by Mariame Kaba or Mariame Kaba.

(01:14:25):
The idea that we have to choose to create positivity, that it's like a choice, and that in order to dream of these things, you can actually create structure and discipline around it, and that it's not just something that is just inherent and comes, you have to actually have a practice around being hopeful and positive. I just really liked that as a concept because I feel that way just about navigating through life, that everything that we do is a choice and that we can choose to frame things one way or frame things another way. Understanding that you have power in that, I think, is really important, and so I just really loved that. Hope is a discipline.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:14):
I really love that. I love any quote that inspires you to not feel like a victim, and gives you agency, and reminds you that you have agency over.

Jessica Hische (01:15:23):
Exactly. That's, I think, was the biggest thing for me is just... Because I feel very well-resourced in being able to deal with hardship because I'm always able to recontextualize and reframe. I think part of that is doing so much intuition justification, which is what we talked about, is walking through things, being like, "Why is this? Why does that happen, la, la, la?" When something bad happens, it's understanding why it happened and then understanding the paths that it can take forward and the different attitudes that you can bring to it that can help you come out of it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:59):
That's beautiful. Okay, final question. I know that you recently remodeled your home. It's quite stunning. You share photos of it online. You worked with this amazing architect to help make it as amazing as it is. As a designer, here's the question, how do you find the balance between trusting someone, their own perspective and design approach, versus pushing into a direction you think that it should go? How do you find a balance as a designer?

Jessica Hische (01:16:28):
Well, I actually feel like it's quite easy for me to trust people to do their own thing, because as long as I go to them as being like, "I appreciate you and your vision and that's why I'm paying you," then the last thing that I want to do is micromanage them, because the reason why I'm paying them is because I don't have the bandwidth to do that myself. Because honestly, I'm one of those people that if I had nothing going on, if my job totally blew up or whatever, I would probably be one of those people that just specialize in a different thing every six months and would be like, "I'm going to build a house now from the ground up. I'm going to do this from now, whatever." I just feel very capable of doing anything that I want to do because I understand that I can find the resources for it.

(01:17:16):
When I hire people to help me do a thing, it's because there is this implicit trust in what they do and that that's why I want to work with them. With the house, I definitely had opinions about stuff. But in general, I'm just like, "Hey, this is your thing. You're the expert. What do you think? Let me give you the parameters and the things that we have to think about. Because you know more about wood resources, and you know more about the cabinet spacing, and whatever, you tell me what you think is going to work best based on all these things that I laid out for you." I found it to be quite easy. I only got really wigged out about a couple of different fine tune-y stuff.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:01):
I imagine architects and designers are like, "Oh no, it's going to be a designer I'm working with. They have opinions." I'm glad it wasn't that bad.

Jessica Hische (01:18:09):
I feel like my strength with the work that I do in general is just being incredibly decisive and understanding that there's 10 good answers to every one question. Some people are real maximalists about decision-making and need to look at every gray sofa that exists before they can choose the one gray sofa. Whereas I feel like I can look at 10 gray sofas and go, it feels like there's two or three categories of sofa here, and then within those categories, there's a couple of good options. Here's a brand that I recognize is known for being of high quality. That one's good enough. I can get to it really quickly, and I feel like not everybody can do that. And I think that that permeates through everything that I do in my life. It definitely is a huge part of the logo work, because you really can do anything when it comes to typography.

(01:18:57):
It can go in 50 million directions. It's just about having someone tell you, "Yes, we could take this anywhere, but these are the valid paths. If we go down this path, this is the most intuitive and most correct way to do it that is closest and most accessible to us. We can noodle on it until kingdom come, but do we have to? This is good." I don't know. I feel like there's some weird knowledge around understanding that nothing is ever 100% perfect, and the most you can aspire and get to is 99.8 or whatever. That last 0.2%, you could spend your whole life trying to do that, or you could move on and do other things and understand that it's nearly perfect.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:49):
That is really good advice and a freeing piece of advice. Jessica, it's been an honor to work with you on this logo. I am really excited for people to see it, for it to be the new look of everything I'm doing. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to learn more and potentially work with you, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Jessica Hische (01:20:07):
Oh, yeah. Of course. I have a website that I occasionally update. It is jessicahische.is/awesome. You'll notice I have a bunch of weird URLs on my website. That's a place to find me. Otherwise, I am on Instagram and Threads a lot. I was formerly a very active Twitter person, and now I'm not really there so much and I bop around with the Twitter clones, but I'm on Threads quite a bit. Instagram and Threads are good for social. Email, I'm easy, hello@jessicaHische.com. What your readers could do for me, I think it's the work that I do in terms of the logo refresh stuff. I feel like this audience is just totally my perfect audience for it because you guys are all a bunch of smart, awesome founders that want beautiful logos, but understand that sometimes you just got to get that first viable option out the door. Once you're ready, you come to me and I help you and it's great.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:12):
A match made in heaven. Jessica, thank you so much for being here.

Jessica Hische (01:21:17):
Happy to be here. Great convo.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:19):
So good. Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:00:00):
I often say to find your audience's cultural erogenous zones. So what it means is people have things that they either care about or don't, and you're not going to change that. So it's a huge lift to try to change someone's worldview or their passions. It's a light lift to take the thing you want to talk about and just shape it into, to fit into their worldview or their passions. There's not always a fit.

(00:00:33):
There's going to be people who are just not your natural audience, and you should know that and not waste your time. But if your natural audience cares about X and you're offering Y, then it's your job to create the API or to create the bridge from X to Y. With messaging, it's not build it and they will come. It is so hard and you'd have to be superhumanly gifted to the extent that I can't recall seeing in my entire life, where you create a message and a story so powerful that someone who didn't care at all before suddenly makes that their passion. It's so much easier to take what they're passionate about and understand it, and then convince them that if they care about that then they should care about your thing because of this connection.

Lenny (00:01:18):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard won experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today, my guest is Lulu Meservey. I met Lulu while she was head of comms at Substack, where she was infamous for taking big risks and bold stands, and as a result creating a lot of attention for Substack, and other companies she's represented. Lulu is definitely the most innovative and interesting comms person I've worked with.

(00:01:46):
She's currently executive vice president of corporate affairs and chief communications officer at Activision Blizzard. And she writes what I'd say is the best newsletter on PR and comms strategy, a newsletter called Flack. In our conversation we get tactical about how to make your idea spread, cultural erogenous zones, the growing importance of going direct versus relying on traditional media. The importance of taking risks in your comms and much more. Lulu is so insightful, I could have continued to explore the subject for hours. Enjoy this episode with Lulu Meservey after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:21):
This episode is brought to you by AssemblyAI. If you're looking to build AI powered features in your audio and video products then you need to know about AssemblyAI, which makes it easy to transcribe and understand speech at scale. What I love about AssemblyAI is you can use their simple API to access the latest AI breakthroughs from top tier research labs. They recently launched Conformer-1, the largest trained speech recognition model on the market which achieves state-of-the-art accuracy. All of AssemblyAI's models, which are accessed through their API are production ready.

(00:02:54):
So many PMs I know are considering or already building with AI, and AssemblyAI is the fastest way to build with AI for audio use cases. Now is the time to check out AssemblyAI with their new Conformer-1 model available today, which makes it even easier to bring the highest accuracy transcription to your customers just like Spotify, CallRail and Writer do for theirs. Visit assemblyai.com/lenny to try their API for free and start testing their models with their no code playground, that's assemblyai.com/lenny.

(00:03:28):
This episode is brought to you by Public.com who want to tell you about their new treasury accounts, which earn a 4.8% yield on your cash, that is higher than a high yield savings account while still being backed by the full faith and credit of the US government. Treasure yields are at a 15-year-high, but buying US treasuries is super complicated. If you go to a bank or navigate an ancient government website, or at least that was the case. Now you can move your cash into US treasuries with the flexibility of a bank account, and you can access your cash whenever you want even before your treasury bills hit maturity. There are no hold periods, no settlement days, just a safe place to park your cash and earn a reliable yield.

(00:04:10):
Public will automatically reinvest your treasury bills at maturity, so you don't have to do anything to continue growing your yield. And you can manage your treasuries alongside stocks, ETFs, crypto, and any alternative assets. Do all your investing in one place and earn 4.8%, a higher yield than a high yield savings account only with a treasury account at public.com/lenny. Lulu welcome to the podcast.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:04:39):
Thank you Lenny. Great to be here.

Lenny (00:04:41):
I am really excited to chat all things comms and PR. I've never met a founder or product leader who doesn't want to get better at spreading ideas and getting their product out there, and you're very good at this. We're going to talk about some of the things you've done in the space. But just to start maybe just broadly I'm curious to hear just what have you learned about what helps an idea spread?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:05:03):
So there's a few ways to make the idea spread, the overall principle is you have to make it memorable and you have to make people want to say it of their own volition. And so what doesn't make them want to say it is doing a favor for a corporation. What does make them want to say it is they want to bring joy to somebody else, they want to make somebody laugh, they want to appear interesting, or they want to project some part of their identity. And so a few things that you can do with an idea to make it spread better, you can make it into a joke, so you can turn it into a line that people will repeat. You can use an analogy, you can take something and just say it over and over, move fast and break things, don't be evil, build something people want.

(00:05:47):
You can create a mental image that is very colorful. So I have a mental image for people that I use a lot, which is put the pill in some cheese and we can talk about it later, it's about how to craft a story that will stick. But when I say put the pill in cheese, people tend to remember that and it's more easily repeatable. And then the last thing is use a story, use an anecdote instead of using adjectives because adjectives are so subjective, they're meaningless to people. So if you give them a story that's something they can repeat over the dinner table.

Lenny (00:06:17):
Do you have any examples of the frameworks you just shared? So you talked about maybe having an analogy or putting the pill in the cheese, which I think is referring to when you feed a dog a pill. You want to hide the pill in the cheese. Is there any stories or examples that come to mind of this in action either something you've done or other companies you've seen?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:06:34):
One example not for the better is binders of women. You remember when Mitt Romney said binders of women and it just absolutely caught on like wildfire, and it's because you can picture the binder, it's a hilarious mental image. You make lots of jokes about it. It's a very specific unusual phrasing that is very repeatable, and it lends itself so much to memeing. So it's not something that they wanted to have happen, which is a word of caution, this can backfire on you as well, but that's an example. I mentioned move fast and break things, software is eating the world, it's time to build. Those are these short phrases that take normal words and put them in an unusual order, and then especially if you repeat them a few times they just become very sticky.

Lenny (00:07:19):
These things sound really smart and wise after the fact, do you have any advice on just how to... So we're talking about coming up with a cool phrase that'll spread of how to do that. I don't know what have you seen work for coming up with move fast and break things, how would a founder approach that?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:07:35):
You want to make it something that a second-grader could understand. You want to minimize the cognitive burden on the recipient. So it should be something where they're not having to expend any extra energy understanding the thing, where it immediately paints a picture. Or if you were to make a joke, it has to be a joke that they immediately get, or it's a very widely understood reference. You don't want it to be this inside joke with yourself that other people might get if you explain it to them. So if you were to boil down the essence of let's say your company or your mission, get it to one sentence and then turn it into a sentence that you could explain to a second-grader, and then cleanse it of all cliches and common parlance. And if you can then turn that into an analogy or if you can make it into something that has imagery, then you're probably 80, 90% of the way there.

Lenny (00:08:36):
So you've definitely done this on Twitter. It might be fun just to share a tweet or something of yours that has done this that has spread like crazy. I noticed you delete your old tweets, which I think is really smart and I should probably do that. So I couldn't find any examples, but I remember just being like, "Holy shit, it's got a bazillion views." Is there there an example that comes to mind that you could share? Just share something you put out that just went crazy.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:09:00):
I actually have a negative example too. I think it's useful to share my mistakes or missteps in addition to what went right, because there's more mistakes and missteps than what goes right. In general, you try a bunch of things every once in a while they succeed. But I think it's useful to think about what didn't land. And so one of mine was when you might remember this because this was the Substack era, when we were taking a lot of incoming for not censoring enough, and we took a stand that we want to encourage free expression. I was actually on maternity leave, so I was a little bit out of the loop, but I wanted to jump in there and support the cause. And so I did a thread about why we're standing by this principle even when it's hard, and the thread was pretty well received, it traveled a lot.

(00:09:53):
I think it was 30 something thousand likes among people that we cared about, people who write on the internet. And then there was one tweet in the thread where I said something like, "Doing this isn't pleasant, but neither for that matter is the sea." Completely esoteric reference, it was fresh in my mind because it was from a New Yorker book review where in that context it was poetic and evocative and beautiful. And I did the thing you're not supposed to do, which is take an inside joke with yourself and release it into the world.

(00:10:33):
And that one tweet was a dud in the middle of the thread where you could see the likes drop off precipitously and people were like, "What are you talking about?" And then afterwards I looked at it with fresh eyes, "Yeah, this makes no sense whatsoever out of a context." And also I'm not a New York book reviewer, so that was a good don't. But the fact that it was such a colorful metaphor actually caught people's attention in an accidental way. I didn't mean for it too. I guess that's a don't, does that serve as an example?

Lenny (00:11:08):
Yeah, that'll work and we'll go through other examples. But that's a good segue to something I was going to save for later, but it may be a good time to chat about is just something that you're big on is this concept of taking risks as a comms person, I think you have the sense that comms people are just very conservative, and there's a big opportunity to get a little out there. And in this case maybe it didn't work out, other times you have and it has. So just talk about that philosophy you have around taking risks.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:11:34):
I think if you're a startup your enemy is the status quo. And when you don't take risks, when you minimize risk by doing nothing, the best way to minimize risk is to do nothing. You're letting the status quo win. You're letting your greatest enemy and rival and threat to your business win by default, because you're not even going to try to compete. And so I always encourage people to try to make mistakes of commission rather than omission. Because if you make a mistake of commission you can observe it, you can learn from it. You know right away that it's happened. You can move really quickly and adapt and become better.

(00:12:11):
Whereas if you make mistakes of omission you're letting status quo win, you're not observing, you're not learning, and you're maybe not even noticing opportunities slip by. So the example that I use, again, an analogy to make it more memorable, my analogy for this is if you are investing money in the market versus if you're just sitting in cash. If you're sitting in cash you won't lose your money and it feels safe. But over time the world moves and the market grows, and everybody else is getting richer and you're getting poorer in real terms. Whereas if you make an investment it'll go up and down, there'll be some volatility. It's not just going to go up every day, but over the long run you'll be much, much better off.

Lenny (00:12:54):
Is there an example of something you did that you took a risk and it worked out, or you saw someone else do this really well?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:13:00):
The stand for free speech thread would be a risk that worked out. It was a risk because it was a topic that a lot of people were already mad about, which will happen with every topic that matters. It felt a little risky for me because I was on leave, I wasn't really in the middle of things. I was addled already, so I had at least one thing in there that was nonsensical. So there was the execution risk of would I'd be able to do this well.

(00:13:29):
There was also the risk of you poke your head up and make a thing where there wasn't a thing, and if that were to go wrong and embarrass the company or if that had made Chris or Hamish or Jerraj upset, that would've been upsetting to me and obviously a failure of my job. So that was a risk that I took and we took and they were supportive, and it did work out because the people who were most likely to write on Substack generally appreciate that stance.

(00:14:00):
I actually have one more for you Lenny when you asked about what are things that help stick in people's memory, there was the fail example of the sea analogy. I think a useful example that works is I often say to find your audience's cultural erogenous zones, and it is something that you immediately know what I'm talking about. If I say know your audience's cultural erogenous zones, you know what it means, it's a shorthand that everybody understands. It's not an inside joke with myself, and it's something that is unusual and upraising that you're going to repeat it and hopefully remember it, so there's one for you.

Lenny (00:14:40):
You told me about that framework and I definitely wanted to hear more about it. What does that mean and is there something that you've seen someone do that's just like, "Wow, they really nailed this erogenous zone approach."

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:14:54):
Yeah, they really got it in the erogenous bull bullseye. So what it means is people have things that they either care about or don't, and you're not going to change that. So it's a huge lift to try to change someone's worldview or their passions. It's a light lift to take the thing you want to talk about and just shape it into, to fit into their worldview or their passions. There's not always a fit.

(00:15:26):
There's going to be people who are just not your natural audience, and you should know that and not waste your time. But if your natural audience cares about X and you're offering Y, then it's your job to create the API or to create the bridge from X to Y. With messaging, it's not build it and they will come. It is so hard and you'd have to be superhumanly gifted to the extent that I can't recall seeing in my entire life, where you create a message and a story so powerful that someone who didn't care at all before suddenly makes that their passion. It's so much easier to take what they're passionate about and understand it, and then convince them that if they care about that then they should care about your thing because of this connection.

Lenny (00:16:09):
This makes me think about one of the other tweets that I think went crazy, which is where you share the things you're muting on Twitter. Where it's like the threads thimble and the pointing down thing, and it feels like that's exactly that where people are just like, "Yep, this is me."

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:16:25):
Yeah, it is that. I have an example for you Lenny. The one that my mind goes to is when Kamala Harris was running for Senate. Put aside what anyone thinks of Kamala Harris as a politician or if you agree with her politics, it doesn't matter. When she was running for Senate, she had this example where not enough people care about K-12 education. It's not a sexy topic and only moms care about it, whereas people cared a lot and still do about national defense, national security.

(00:16:55):
And so she said the way to get their attention is you go to people who care about national security and you tell them, "Did you know that in order to enlist for the army you have to have a 10th grade reading level?" If you can't read at that level, you're not going to be able to read the army field manual. And so if you care about the future of national defense and being able to maintain a standing army, you need to care about middle grade reading standards. So that's a perfect example, and in fact it stuck with me such that many years later I'm still repeating it to you.

Lenny (00:17:28):
Something else that I think what you teach helps with is underdogs coming up against incumbent companies, giving them a chance to stand out. Like Substack I think is a good example where you just helped elevate Substack on the world stage in a lot of ways. What have you found works best for underdog startups and companies trying to get attention?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:17:49):
First, you have to acknowledge that you're the underdog, and you're not going to use the GE playbook from the 1980s or whatever. So acknowledging that means knowing that you're not going to play the game that requires you to have more resources, more and deeper relationships, and institutional backings, and to be able to draft off of the current narrative. So all of those things are going to be not in your favor. If you're a startup for example, by definition you're trying to disrupt something, you're trying to do something differently, you're fighting the status quo. And if that's the case then you can't rely on maybe the government, maybe mainstream media to support what you're doing. And so you should assume that you want to go with an approach that doesn't require a lot of money or people, that doesn't require that institutional backing and those relationships.

(00:18:40):
That means building your own distribution, which you can do starting from day one. You can start doing that before you even have the company. It means taking your story and winning hearts and minds. Number one, by making it a story that you shape to fit people's cultural erogenous zones of your audience. And number two, by finding the centers of gravity in society, like the influencers that are going to help spread it for you. Because you're not going to on day one call up the New York Times and get them to print the story that you want them to. So you need to figure out who are the influencers and the way to do that, I'll cut off the rabbit hole after this because you can just go deeper and deeper, but the way to do that is in concentric circles. There's a general who said if there's a problem I look for it in concentric circles going back to my own desk.

(00:19:33):
If you want to spread something you go out in concentric circles starting from your own desk. So you need to get first really clear with yourself about what your message is and just get really crisp with it. This is hard to do because you know too much, so out of the 1,000 facts in your head you're going to have to pick just between one and three. And then the next circle is going to be your co-founders, your executives, your employees, your investors, you go to your power users, and you go out from there, and it has to be in that sequence.

(00:20:06):
But once you get the sequence and you identify who the people are and you know who your audience is, and then you're able to hone in on what their cultural erogenous zones are, then you're able to craft the message, have the delivery mechanisms, and then know your target, and then you're off. But you just need to do that exercise upfront, so you don't have a lot of wasted motion.

Lenny (00:20:25):
I really like this concentric circle framework. I haven't heard this before. Just to make it a little more real is there something that you can share, something that comes to mind that illustrates that?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:20:36):
Well, you and I have talked a lot about Substack, so I'm speaking out of term now that I don't have the employee badge. But something that I thought the Substack founders have always done so well is propagate product updates out in concentric circles. So there's a lot of things where you're going to know about it. You, Lenny will know about it more than a new writer who just joined, because you're a power user of the product and they would want you... Now they would want to make sure that you love the thing, and that you feel maybe even a little bit invested in the thing. You've been telling people about recommendations for nearly a year. No one asked you to do that. We didn't pay you to do that. You've done it because you were brought on board early and it was something that the company made sure that you liked, and then you became the next circle out that spread it to your next circle out.

Lenny (00:21:33):
It's interesting because I didn't think of it as an intentional strategy to get news out, and it feels like there's a synergy with just talking to your power users. Getting feedback from your power users leads to this interesting second order effect where they also want to... they feel like they're on the inside of something, they want to share it and maybe talk about it and tell friends about, "Hey, Substack's working this cool thing." So that's kind of a cool-

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:21:53):
Well, early on Lenny you asked about how do you get a message to spread? And I said you give people incentives who want to spread it. So your incentive was you helping others, you like paying it forward and helping other writers and podcasters, and you genuinely enjoy the thing. And I think there's some value to your own project that you get to show social proof that a lot of people like this thing and it's growing, and that's what you got. If it had been like, "Hey, Lenny, can you do us a favor and tweet this thing?" You might've done it, but you would've done it once and stopped and it wouldn't have been something that you organically keep doing.

Lenny (00:22:30):
To make this even more real I'm trying to help people understand this concentric circle idea, so first Substack is an example. What would be the few layers of the concentric circle on the middle would be maybe the power writers. What would be the next couple layers?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:22:46):
It's the employees at the middle, almost always, and then it is depending on the company. So here it would be the power writers, it's youth, a lot of the original writers. Bill Bishop comes up a lot, he was Substacker number one, he's always really meaningful. And then it's fast growing writers. It is writer influencers. There are certain members of the media that cover media and writing, and so they matter a lot. And then investors are in there just to keep close to the fold.

(00:23:18):
But if you're a different kind of company that might be employees board, institutional investors, government and regulators then users, just depending on how much power each group has to influence your future. And the reason I say go out in concentric circles as opposed to just hit each of these groups kind of haphazardly is that's your way to control the message. Because each circle is going to assume that the inner circle knows better than them and they're going to follow the lead of the inner circle. So an example is if you and I have a company, Lenny and Lulu, this is a DTC startup.

Lenny (00:24:01):
That's a great name.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:24:02):
It is, we should do it.

Lenny (00:24:03):
We should do this.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:24:04):
If we had a company and we were trying to put out a message to the world that our new thing works, it's really revolutionary, our genes are the best genes. If employees are not saying that, then people are going to look at employees and say, "Well, they would know, they're closer to this than we are. So if they're not excited then why would we be excited?" And so that undermines everything that we're trying to do, you can't skip a circle is my point.

Lenny (00:24:32):
Super interesting. And I imagine the closer they are to the employees the more time you spend with them, and the more innately they're closer and also their perspective and what they share is more powerful because they're closer to what's happening.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:24:48):
And if it goes wrong the more damage they can do. So on the spectrum it's if they are not totally on board and they're not an effective messenger, versus they're just lukewarm and they're not really sure they believe it. All the way to they actively fell off the bandwagon and you lost them, and now they're out there proactively contradicting everything you say or even trying to destroy the company, that can happen. If an early employee, for example, feels disgruntled, which is easy to do and it's easy to do through a comms mistake. If you sell them on one thing and here's a vision, and now either that's changed or you miscommunicated. If they feel like there's a bait and switch they're going to be really mad. And now you've created someone who is incredibly credible and has the same social and professional circle as you and is trying to ruin you.

Lenny (00:25:44):
That's such a good point. For someone that's trying to do this maybe internally they're like, "Oh, cool, we got to create these circles for our startup." What do you recommend they do? Do they make a list of here's our inner circle, here's the next circle of people.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:25:56):
Yeah, you take out your one-page Google Doc. I feel like most comms problems can be solved with one-page Google Doc. So you go to your one-page Google Doc and you take your audiences, you list them, probably stop at five or six because past that it's like way, way first world problem. You'll have more than enough work to win over the five or six inner circles, and then you have to rank them. And you rank them by how much they're able to influence your success and how much credibility other groups assign them. So then you have your inner to outer circles.

(00:26:32):
And then for each of them you would think about what do they care about that's their cultural erogenous zones and where do they reside intellectually? So do they listen to podcasts, if so, which ones. Do they go to in-person conferences? Are they getting all of their news from Reddit? If so, which subreddits are they on Hacker News? Once you map that out, then again you have the people you're trying to reach, the ideas and messages that resonate the most with them, and then the ways to actually reach them.

Lenny (00:27:04):
This is becoming a real template we can start using. In the bucket of erogenous zones what are some examples of erogenous zones for people in this context?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:27:15):
We've talked about the free expression stand from last year. A lot of people care about first amendment, protecting press freedoms and free expression. Not a lot of people care that a journalist said something mean about Substack. And so there were a few times when we did have to push back publicly against a journalist saying something mean and unfair or untrue about Substack. So obviously my and our ulterior motive is to vindicate the company and show people that this isn't true. But if we had just done that, nobody would've cared or maybe a few diehards would've cared. There are people who care deeply about Substack, but not as many people and not as deeply as the people who care about their ability to express themselves freely or their right to build their own media platform without too many controls.

Lenny (00:28:20):
The way you described it earlier came back to me as you were talking, which is this idea that lights people up. What lights people up within this list of people that you're making? So that's really interesting. So the idea is create this list of people across circles further and further away from your employees. Think about what lights them up, what are their erogenous zones intellectually, and then think about where they spend their time intellectually, what are they listening to? What are they reading?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:28:44):
Yeah, that's it.

Lenny (00:28:46):
Amazing, this is super cool.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:28:47):
It's not easy, it's hard, you have to make very difficult tactical decisions every day when you're doing that, but it is simple.

Lenny (00:28:54):
Yeah, it seems pretty easy. Okay, this is great. Another framework that we haven't talked about yet, do you have this math formula for how ideas spread? Does that ring a bell?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:29:04):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:29:05):
Okay, let's get into that.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:29:06):
I think it's useful to try to bring as much discipline as possible to comms, because you're really just measuring vibes. In a world of OKRs and data and metrics it's hard to know if you're doing the right thing with comms. And so I think whenever you're able to establish a framework its useful, so this one is kind of a mathematical formula of comms for a purpose. It assumes that you have a business goal and as a business goal, not communications goal, it's not get this many impressions or go viral or blah. It is we're going to grow our revenue by X, or we're going to make this penetration into this user base. When you have your business goal you're going to need certain people to do certain things for that goal to come true. So for example, you're going to need this type of person in this quantity to buy these sneakers in order for you to meet your revenue goal.

(00:30:07):
So now you know who the people are and the action they need to take. The next step is what do they need to believe in order to take that action? So they need to believe that their feet are not comfortable now, and that it's possible for their feet to be more comfortable and that'll have a positive effect on their life, and that this new sneaker technology is real, so they need to believe these things. Then it's where do they reside intellectually? How do you deliver that message to them, and that's the who do they listen to? Which accounts do they follow? Which podcast do they... what trips do they take? What newspapers, et cetera. And when you have that then you have the equation of we need to deliver this message to these people through these mediums in order to get them to do this thing with this call to action. And that way you know that you're at least pushing forward and getting something done with your comms as opposed to just saying words into the ether.

Lenny (00:31:11):
I think you had something like there's pressure and force and area, is that part of this or is that a different framework?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:31:17):
Different framework.

Lenny (00:31:18):
Oh, okay, cool.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:31:20):
Oh yeah.

Lenny (00:31:21):
Okay, okay, let's talk about this other framework too.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:31:24):
I've got more frameworks, Lenny.

Lenny (00:31:25):
I love it, this is what this podcast is all about. Let's do it.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:31:29):
This is a useful one for early stage startups especially, or anybody who's just trying to be lean and efficient, which is anyone who's an underdog like we talked about earlier, that if you decrease the surface area than with the same amount of force you can apply more pressure. So the amount of pressure is the force divided by the surface area, this is a basic equation for physics, but it's also true of communications, which is if you decrease the surface area and don't try to appeal to everybody with everything. And you're targeting exactly whom you're talking to and you are sharpening your message to a point, to get them in the bullseye of the cultural erogenous zone. Then you're able to with the same amount of effort or expense or time, you're able to make more of an impact, you're able to apply more pressure.

(00:32:30):
So I think of it as there's a continuum between you can either hyper-target, so the extreme of the continuum is you are becoming the life partner of one person. That's the ultra hyper targeting. And then the other end of the spectrum is you're appealing to everybody. You're appealing to a larger number of people, but with a weaker message, in a weaker way. So you could say world peace is good, nobody disagrees with that practically, but also it doesn't stick and it's not meaningful to them. So you have to choose where you're going to be along that continuum. And for most startups I would choose towards the fewer people end of it, where you choose who's going to be your diehards and then you foster them and create really deep meaningful relationships with them. And the way to do that is to decrease the surface area and apply more pressure.

Lenny (00:33:23):
It feels like you did that with Substack where it was focused on people writing online, or I guess tell me is that how you thought about it Substack of here's our little focused area and we'll focus target message to that.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:33:37):
That was the goal and that's actually why I started spending time on Twitter. It was a very self-loathing exercise like Hamish doesn't like the Twitter model, nor do, we would talk about this a lot and I always felt a little bit fringe being on there. And before I worked at Substack I had a sleepy account of a couple hundred followers that didn't do very much. And I realized that the people that we were trying to speak to are heavy Twitter users, whether it's media people or online writers. And so I decided I'm going to spend some time and try to build an audience and then that audience became leverage, for better or worse. I don't think we should measure people by their Twitter following, but the fact is that if you have more then journalists and writers take you a bit more seriously. And so if I was going to try to carry a message on behalf of the company, I felt like it would be more effective if I had more people.

Lenny (00:34:38):
And it worked. This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate growth. If your business stores any data in the cloud, then you've likely been asked or you're going to be asked about your SOC 2 compliance. SOC 2 is a way to prove your company is taking proper security measures to protect customer data, and builds trust with customers and partners, especially those with serious security requirements. Also, if you want to sell to the enterprise, proving security is essential. SOC 2 can either open the door for bigger and better deals or it can put your business on hold. If you don't have a SOC 2, there's a good chance you won't even get a seat at the table.

(00:35:18):
Beginning a SOC 2 report can be a huge burden, especially for startups, it's time consuming, tedious and expensive. Enter Vanta. Over 3,000 fast growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2. Vanta can get you ready for security audits in weeks instead of months, less than a third of the time that it usually takes. For a limited time Lenny's Podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Just go to vanta.com/lenny, that's vanta.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discount. Get started today.

(00:35:56):
Going back to this formula, pressure equals force divided by area. Basically, to increase the effectiveness of your message you can either increase the force and what is in this context force? Is it like the amount of messaging or is it the success of your message?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:36:11):
It's the amount of effort you put into it. So it's how much you are spending on this campaign or you have a limited amount of hours in the day and dollars in the bank. And so anytime you're doing something with comms, you're either paying the dollars or you're paying the time. Sometimes you're drawing down on credibility too, you have a certain amount of credibility and there are times when you just have to say, "Please trust me." You can spend that more efficiently if you focus. So instead of if you just take a simple ad campaign, instead of spending a million dollars to reach a million people, maybe you spend a $100 to reach the hundred most important people. And focus that message exactly to them so that when they see your ad they're actually going to click on it and they're actually going to forward it, and that's a much better return. And then you might end up with a million dollars worth of return, because those people were so passionate that they then became their own messengers without you even having to be involved anymore.

Lenny (00:37:12):
This is a really great framework, again, is your advice that for the smaller you are just basically reduce the area?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:37:21):
Yes.

Lenny (00:37:22):
And the larger you are increase that over time?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:37:24):
Yes. If you're just starting out, get 10 diehards and just spend all your time... You can't start out and try to win over the general public. You start out by creating a tiny, not the best analogy is one I can think of right now, a tiny monopoly. And it's the same like succeeding on Substack or creating anything on the internet. You choose what is going to be your tiny corner of the internet that you are going to just dominate entirely. And the smaller it is, the more you can dominate it and then these people that are in it become your true believers, your diehards, and they'll expand it out to the next circle and then you go from there. But if you try to win over everybody at the same time, it's a food coloring in the ocean kind of thing as opposed to food coloring in a cup.

Lenny (00:38:17):
Is there an example that comes to mind of someone that did this really well? I don't know. I know it's hard to think of just an example off the top of your head, but does anything come to mind?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:38:25):
Balaji did this really well with his book The Network State, that book was super successful. He didn't do a lot of the traditional book tour New York Times stuff. He went his own route, and I think that was really smart if you're going to put it in the setting of this framework, it's he created his own distribution channels. He didn't try to compete with the roster of Harper Collins on their turf, and when he created his own distribution channels he focuses on who are the diehards and the truth fans, and these are people that he fosters. He goes on podcasts that reach these people. He doesn't deviate from messaging to try to appeal to everybody. There are people who just will never like that guy and he is totally fine with it. So he's not watering down who he is to appeal to people who will never like him, which it's tempting for companies to do.

(00:39:17):
You hate when people are mad at you, so you try to appeal to them and then your true fans lose their passion because the thing that made you so special has now gone milk toast. So Balaji fosters his true fans and then when the book launched they propelled him to the top of the Amazon list, because they were out there evangelizing, proselytizing. You probably saw all these tweets about his book. He didn't pay anybody as far as I know. He didn't pay anybody to do that. He just shared it with the people and they wanted to show that they were into this.

Lenny (00:39:46):
That's a great example. I know that founders often worry focusing too narrowly limits their market, and it's never going to grow into anything large. In your experience do you find that that's just often not true, that there's often a much bigger opportunity than they think? Or is that just a good way to start and then you expand from there?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:40:03):
It's both. If you're writing online or doing something online, the denominator is the size of the internet. You don't need to capture 80% of it. If you capture 0.01% of it, that is a great business and then you can go from there. Once you've won that then you can decide to go from there and the world is a big place. So now that everything's digital the denominator's so large that I wouldn't worry too much about the numerator. But it is also true that if you start off trying to peel to too many people, you have to water down your stuff so much that you'll never stand out. And you've written about this Lenny with how to be viral, how to be noticed, and one of the things is be remarkable. And you can't be remarkable if you're trying to appeal to so many people that you have to become the average of 500,000 people's tastes.

Lenny (00:40:57):
This is a good way to think about I think when something's not working, when you're trying to get a bunch of attention for your product and no one cares. Feels like this is one reason is just you're going too wide.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:41:09):
Yeah, I think that's probably the most common reason.

Lenny (00:41:14):
Maybe just thinking about diagnosing why your comms may not be working. This may be too big of a question, but just what other explanations could there be for why no one cares about what you're trying to put out?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:41:25):
You're doing it as a corporation instead of a person. This is another super common mistake is you're letting yourself speak like a faceless corporation because it feels like that's what you should do now. Okay, now you're a real company and now you got to do real company stuff, that means you have to issue decrees on behalf of the C corp and you don't. And it doesn't work because people don't trust institutions. People don't like corporations or at least are not passionate about them. People care about people and trust and like people, and so there's a sense of wanting to cosplay an executive and it doesn't work, it doesn't resonate. A good example of this would be Ryan Peterson at Flexport. His company, even after it got huge, he never became the generic corporate chief. He always was a person. And there are people, many, many people who became interested in Flexport because Ryan's an interesting guy. And it's not like they had a passion for logistics and freight and shipping, but he's doing something interesting. And then he became the human gateway drug for people to become interested in his company.

Lenny (00:42:40):
Yeah, absolutely. He had that crazy viral tweet about the ports and that's a really good example. Man, I was going to go in a different direction, but maybe we go to this idea of going direct. You're a big fan and Balaji is a really big fan of this too, speaking of just the importance of going direct. So maybe just talk about what does that mean and why is that important these days?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:42:58):
Well, Balaji is more go direct than me. He thinks that I'm soft in this area because I think that there's still a place for engaging with media and that it's just another tool. He's for just straight-up go direct undistilled. But I think that for everybody a 100% of the time you want going direct to be a part of what you're doing, whether it's all you're doing, or whether you're doing something else, you can't not have a direct channel. So what that actually looks like, and people say this all the time go direct. What does that actually look like to go direct? It means that the founder or executive for some very senior person has to be speaking from themselves. First person, may be first person plural, and speaking in a human voice authentically. You see them make mistakes, you see them be vulnerable, and they have to become an ambassador to the community.

(00:43:55):
If you don't have that, then you don't have a direct channel even if you have a Twitter or a Substack or whatever, it's not direct if not connected to a person because if the other side of it is a corporation there's no direct connection. And then the second thing is start building your own audience as soon as possible. You can do this alongside engaging with the media or doing traditional things. To the point of focusing your energy and decreasing the surface area, for startups I would not recommend trying to do an Instagram, a Twitter, LinkedIn, YouTube, and TikTok. I would choose the thing that that person is the best at. So if your spokesman is going to be your CEO, which is a good default, they're going to have a dominant communication style where they're the best at being themselves. And that's important because if somebody else is ghost-writing all their stuff, it shows.

(00:44:53):
So some CEOs are better at writing long form. Some CEOs are better at doing videos. Some do better with audio or podcasts, some are better with short form. The way that Elon Musk communicates on Twitter, he's born to do Twitter. You can't picture him writing long thoughtful blog posts, it's not a thing that he does. Whereas Brian Armstrong or Hamish or Chris, they write great blog posts that are sincere and effective, and that's better than them just trying to do it only through tweets. So pick the thing that your spokesperson is the best at and then invest everything into that channel, and then build it up to a decent amount and then expand outward. Because if you try to build six or seven channels at once you're just not going to get anywhere.

Lenny (00:45:47):
I think that's such a important point. I feel like me choosing a newsletter was actually a really good choice. As much as you may not believe this I'm not a performer person, I just want to hide behind the computer and just type stuff. And the newsletters, especially during COIVD, I was like, "I just sit at home and share stuff and edit and think about it where it's like, 'Hello everyone.'" And it took me a while to get to this point of like, "Oh, I can maybe do a podcast because I've built up a little more confidence that this is useful." So I so agree with that and that's what I tell a lot of people. Just pick the platform that is most natural to you. Maybe you like talking, maybe you performing on video, maybe you just want to sit and type.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:46:24):
And that's a good point too, Lenny, because it changes over time. Just because you pick one thing doesn't mean that you're stuck with only that forever. Over time you might choose different things and I've seen founders become a lot more comfortable in front of the camera, for example, once they've done a few reps. And the other reason to know that you can just change it over time is otherwise it feels like a deterrent to getting started. Sometimes there's paralysis if I don't know which thing to choose, and so I'm either going to do a bunch of them or none of them. Go with your gut pick one and you're not wed to that forever, you can always change it down the road.

Lenny (00:46:58):
Do you think every founder needs to be on Twitter? I get this a lot from founders. Do I need to be on Twitter? I hate Twitter. What's your take?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:47:04):
No, I think a lot of founders do. If they are super mission driven, for example, that's one way that you're going to find other people that resonate with your mission and that you're going to make the case for the mission. If you're mission driven there's also a good chance that you're doing something that some people love and some people hate. And so you're going to need to be out there fighting the fight in a way. I don't mean in a pugilistic antagonistic way, but you have to defend your thing. And so I think it's important if you're mission driven. I also think it's important if your charisma is a big part of recruiting for the company. There are some companies where the founder's charisma is a big part of why people want to go work there. So Palmer Lucky and Anduril, he is magnetic to a lot of engineers and they want to go work with that guy, specifically. Whereas there are companies where people want to go work for the company and it's less important that the founder is vocal.

Lenny (00:48:02):
What's interesting I found recently is I get more traffic to my newsletter from LinkedIn than Twitter. Is that something you think about at all? Going to LinkedIn instead of Twitter feels so wrong to say, but what's your take there?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:48:14):
Yes, if you are career related, LinkedIn will be a lot better. One, it's better because it's not such a cesspool where anything immediately becomes controversial and people fight over it in their mentions. Two, because LinkedIn is really underutilized and founders should know this, PMs should know this. LinkedIn is super underutilized because it gets a ton of eyeballs in time, but most of the content sucks. 95% of the content this is not scientific-

Lenny (00:48:49):
Seems right, seems right.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:48:50):
This is my might estimate. 95% of the content is people congratulating each other on work anniversaries or people saying, "I'm so proud of my team for this thing they did." And then people react out of a sense of friendship and affection or support, but actually genuinely interesting and useful content on LinkedIn is very rare. So the ratio of your competitive set of interesting content versus how much time and attention people spend on there is excellent.

Lenny (00:49:24):
That is really good advice. I'm going to throw a fishing line into the pool of examples. You talked about people doing this well, going direct. Balaji talking about Ryan Peterson and Elon obviously. Is there anyone else that's just like here check out what they're doing and could be a good model to learn from?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:49:41):
I think it's really interesting to see what Mike Solana is doing with Pirate Wires. Here's an example of why it clearly makes sense to have the founder be very active on Twitter because he is his own recruiter and spokesperson. So I think the makeup industry actually is at the forefront of this. The makeup industry is smarter than all of us in how they use social media and influencers, because they caught on very early on that people don't buy makeup to subscribe to makeup brands, that they do it because a certain celebrity or influencer or Kardashian has this nice looking eyelid and they want their eyelid to look that way.

(00:50:25):
And so going back years before the rest of us were talking about going direct, there are makeup companies that would spend $0 on marketing, and minimal efforts on press and pour all of it decreasing the surface area. Pour all of it into fostering a small roster of influencers and having them spread the message. And so I think watch makeup companies, watch consumer companies, they're doing it right, they speak with a human voice, they speak through human beings and they're fast. If there's a trend the same day they will have hopped on the trend... within an hour they're on the trend, as opposed to other industries or more traditional companies that take a few days and they route through approvals and then the opportunity's gone.

Lenny (00:51:11):
What are some makeup companies for people to check out to see what they're doing?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:51:14):
So NYX, N-Y-X, it's a division of L'Oreal. NYX is wanted the makeup companies that has, as far as I know $0 spent on marketing and all of their dollars and all of their effort spent on paying influencers. And they really out punched their weight in terms of using humans to deliver a message that contains a call to action and then selling out product. And the product will be like a normal black eyeliner. It's the most fungible thing you could possibly imagine, and that one eyeliner will be sold out at CBS's across the country for a couple weeks, because they did something right with their social media using a person.

Lenny (00:51:57):
Just a couple more questions around this going direct concept. I don't know if you actually talked about why that's important because I think we talk about this a lot, and I think people may not recognize why people find this so important these days. What's the motivation behind that with Balaji and other founders?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:52:14):
There's two reasons it's important, there's the offense and the defense of it. The defense of it is going back to having the underdog, the insurgency mentality. If you're trying to do something different that goes against the grain, people are going to attack you. Not everyone's going to like it. And the point is that not everyone should like it, but you need a way to stand up for yourself because you don't have the big institutions and power structures that are going to do that work for you because you're going against the grain. So if you're going to stand up for yourself there's only one way to do it, which is you do it. And so building the audience and the channels and you have to prime the market. By which I mean if you're a public company, you're priming the market by getting them used to how you convey information to them.

(00:52:58):
If you're a small startup or a founder, you're priming the market by making your audience aware of how you normally communicate, so that when you do something it's not weird. If you never post and then suddenly you start posting, people are going to think you're having a crisis or something like what is going on? They're going to try to read into it. So you have to already have the cadence and the relationships set up so that when you need to draw on them if you're under attack then you can, that's the defense of it. The offense of it is if you're doing something new and if you're mission driven, and if what you're doing is truly unique and innovative, no one else will be to tell that as well as you. The most friendly, sympathetic reporter on Earth could not tell that as well as you because they don't understand it as well as you, and so the onus just falls on you to do it.

Lenny (00:53:52):
If someone listening is like, "Yep, okay, I fully agree, time to do this." What do you suggest as a next step to starting to build an audience and going direct broadly.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:54:03):
Step one would be assessing what are you good at and what do you enjoy? So that's where you decide, do I like long form writing, or do I enjoy podcasting, or what are my mediums? Step two is setting up your account on those channels. So if you enjoy long form writing then you're going to have to choose, do you do a Substack, do you do Medium or whatever else? There's a objectively right answer on that one. But if you are doing short videos you're going to choose are you going to invest in Instagram, or you're going to invest in TikTok, you set that up. And then you start building your audience. And when you start if you're actually starting from zero, get some pipeline of talent ready. Sorry, not pipeline or talent, pipeline of content. Get it ready, it's the same way as if you're launching a Substack.

(00:54:54):
If you're launching a Substack you want to get a week or two of posts ready to go, so that out the gate you can build a lot of momentum. With different social networks it actually helps the algorithm if you come out the gate strong and are really regular. So TikTok, for example, if you're starting at TikTok with zero followers, you want to get a week or two of solid data just in the pipeline so you can hit it, hit it because the algorithm favors you right as you're starting out because they want you to keep going, so you want to ride that as much as possible. So that's step two is just get yourself ready for launch. Don't do one post and wait, get a bunch of posts ready and then boom, boom, boom. And then three is to have an ongoing content strategy, you know who you're going to reach, you know what they care about.

(00:55:42):
So you have to plan out, "Here's the cadence with which I'm going to talk to them. Here's how I'm going to do community management and respond to people, and here are the ways where I'm going to do announcements." And you get into a cadence because it's the same as growing a newsletter. The regularity and the consistency is a big part of growing. And so it's the same with audience. A mistake that people make I think is just every once in a while trying to go viral as opposed to just being consistent. And then some posts do better than others organically, but that's the way to do it. I don't live that. I'm not a good example because I'm so self-loathing about being on Twitter I will go away for one or two weeks and do nothing, and then I'll come in with a bunch of posts in one day. It's not a best practice. It's not the way you're supposed to do it. Ideally, you're just there every day saying something and then it builds over time.

Lenny (00:56:36):
I'm actually an example of trying to focus on consistent non-viral content and it's worked out.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:56:44):
It has worked out.

Lenny (00:56:46):
It's worked out. It's worked out so far, but it's interesting to see how different people act and how it's like I'm trying to go viral every tweet, every post and that is hard. And it's also just like people can tell you're just trying to create some viral thing and no one cares.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:57:00):
And it's very obvious when you're just trying to go viral for the sake of it and you don't have a real message. It's like the post when people screenshot the iPhone six digit security code and they say best feature apple's ever built. A few people did that, and now I've seen it probably dozens of times. And it doesn't even help to get you followers because that's not something where people say, "Only this person could uniquely give me this kind of content in the future." If you're going to get followers with a one-off joke, it has to be an incredibly hilarious one-off joke where they say, "This person is going to keep entertaining me." But with these kind of viral baits, I don't think it's even that effective.

Lenny (00:57:41):
And also what I find if something does go viral, whatever the correct term is and then life goes on, nothing's going to significantly... that's just one thing, and then you have to do it again and again. That's where people don't realize like, "Oh, I went viral. I'm done. My life is good now." Nothing's going to really change most often, and you have to do it again and again.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:58:03):
I think that's true. One thing that I've noticed about your audience, Lenny, is that it's the right audience. It's the people who find value in what you do, and they're in the right place and there's a match. Sometimes in the effort to just gain followers for the sake of it or a go viral for the sake of it, you end up with a mismatch of the audience. You had this viral hamster tweet, and now they're all here expecting hamster content, and they're not engaging with you, you're not bringing value to them. It's just making the number go up, which is not that meaningful. So one example of this is there's all these threads about how to just grow on Twitter for no reason, just grow for the sake of growing.

(00:58:48):
And it's a lot of generic advice of make sure that you bullet point out the 10 things. But it's always pablum of make sure that you value your relationships, and make time for yourself. And things that are not enriching people's lives they get a lot of likes that are low value likes from random people about the internet. But I don't think that they're deepening a relationship with a meaningful audience, and I don't think that they're really capturing the respect and admiration of their peers. So I think it's just important to consider what trade-offs people make in their efforts to grow.

Lenny (00:59:28):
Well, with that we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got five questions for you. Are you ready?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:59:35):
Ready.

Lenny (00:59:35):
First question. Great. What are two or three books you've recommended most to other people?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (00:59:41):
I recommend Gates of Fire, it comes off the Marine Commandants Reading List, it's on there perennially. It is about the Battle of Thermopylae, it's the 300 Spartans, but it's the whole backstory. And if you get into it's about leadership, it's about courage, it's about creativity, and it's really well-written, so that's one that I recommend a lot.

Lenny (01:00:00):
What's a favorite recent movie or TV show?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (01:00:03):
I've been watching The Last Of Us, like everybody on Earth. I've been watching it both for entertainment and for work, because it's really interesting to see how the show drives sales of the video games, and how you can use that to make the whole of the sales greater than the sum of its parts. So I'm watching that really carefully.

Lenny (01:00:24):
Interesting. We have a drinking game now. Every time someone says Last of us that's a new thing because it's starting to come up a lot, so everyone enjoy your drink. Favorite interview question you like to ask?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (01:00:36):
I like to ask people what they've been reading too. It's a good way to get good book recommendations. It's also a good way to see where their head's at when they're not working.

Lenny (01:00:45):
Favorite SaaS products that you use day-to-day and bonus points for something that is new or interesting that you've recently discovered?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (01:00:52):
I don't know that this is new or novel because I use Notion for almost everything, and I really like the new AI that they've built into it. I also have been using Lex, which is Nathan Baschez startup, where it's like the AI writing editor that you've probably seen. I'm trying to think if there's anything that I use that other people don't. I don't think I'm terribly original in that sense. I use a lot of Microsoft Excel, which I think is controversial.

Lenny (01:01:21):
That is, wow, that's cool, but I get it. That's when you know you're doing serious work, you got to accelerate.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (01:01:27):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny (01:01:28):
Final question, best tip for someone trying to get attention for their product, take away tip, best takeaway tip.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (01:01:37):
Give it away for free to the right people. If you can choose the people who are going to love it, look at the Venn diagram of people who are going to be obsessed with this product. And people who have a large following among the other people that you want to get to, whoever falls into that sliver of the Venn diagram shower them with free product.

Lenny (01:01:58):
Amazing. Lulu, I think this conversation is going to lead to a lot more people going direct, taking risks and ideas spreading. Thank you for being here. Two final questions where can folks find you online if they want to learn more and reach out and how can listeners be useful to you?

Lulu Cheng Meservey (01:02:13):
People can find me at getflack.com, that's where I write down my ideas, hopefully more frequently in the future than in the past. But that's where they can find some of this stuff if they're interested. How can listeners be helpful to me is to give me feedback. I'm learning on the job. I don't think that there's anyone alive who's an expert in communicating in this crazy environment that we have now. I think we're all crossing the river by feeling the stones, and so your listeners have gone through this in many different ways. And I hope that if they have new ideas of feedback or objections, that they'll email me through that website or on Twitter and let me know what they think.

Lenny (01:02:54):
Amazing and its get flack.com.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (01:02:55):
Yes.

Lenny (01:02:55):
We'll link to it in the show notes.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (01:02:55):
Thank you.

Lenny (01:02:57):
Lulu, thank you for being here and sharing your wisdom with us.

Lulu Cheng Meservey (01:03:00):
Thank you, Lenny, appreciate it.

Lenny (01:03:03):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Matt Abrahams (00:00:00):
Visualization is a really useful technique and you see yourself not just in the moment of speaking, but getting up to the stage, seeing it being well received, thinking about how you step off the stage. We see athletes do this kind of thing all the time, and there's good research to say that this desensitizes people.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:16):
Most of the public speaking we do is on the spot. It's not often you give a prepared talk.

Matt Abrahams (00:00:20):
You actually have to prepare to be spontaneous. And that's counterintuitive, but when you think about it in athletics or jazz music, it's like of course you would prepare and practice.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:28):
Are there any other techniques that you love that you find people find really helpful in calming their anxiety?

Matt Abrahams (00:00:34):
Strive for connection over perfection by daring to be dull. Just answer the question. Just give the feedback. Just be engaged in the small talk. By doing that, you dial down the volume of self-evaluation, freeing up resources that can be used to really help you succeed.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:54):
Today my guest is Matt Abrahams. Matt is a professor at Stanford University's Graduate School of Business where he teaches a very popular class on communication and public speaking. He's also the host of the incredibly popular podcast, Think Fast, Talk Smart; and the author of the very popular book, Think Faster and Talk Smarter. Matt also coaches people one-on-one on public speaking and communication skills. And in our conversation we focus on the two areas that people most need help with. One, reducing their anxiety before and during any form of public speaking, and getting better at speaking on the spot, including giving better toasts, giving feedback, doing Q&A, and even apologizing.

(00:01:36):
Like we talk about in the actual conversation, speaking well is a superpower in your career for interviewing, for being great in meetings, for pitching your manager on ideas, to leading teams. And the skill becomes even more important as you grow in your career. The good news is that you can get better at it with a bit of help. I've worked on this a lot over the course of my career and I still get really nervous before big talks and even before every podcast episode, but many of these techniques I actually put into practice and I share that in our conversation. If you pick just a couple things from this episode to put into practice, you'll become a better communicator, you'll be less nervous, and you'll get better at dealing with on-the-spot moments.

(00:02:14):
If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing feature episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Matt Abrahams after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:29):
Let me tell you about a product called Sprig. Next-gen product teams like Figma and Notion rely on Sprig to build products that people love. Sprig is an AI-powered platform that enables you to collect relevant product experience insights from the right users so you can make product decisions quickly and confidently.

(00:02:48):
Here's how it works. It all starts with Sprig's precise targeting, which allows you to trigger in-app studies based on users' characteristics and actions taken in product. Then Sprig's AI is layered on top of all studies to instantly surface your product's biggest learnings. Sprig Surveys enables you to target specific users to get relevant and timely feedback. Sprig Replays enables you to capture targeted session clips to see your product experience firsthand. Sprig's AI is a game changer for product teams. They're the only platform with product-level AI, meaning it analyzes data across all of your studies to centralize the most important product opportunities, trends, and correlations in one real-time feed. Visit sprig.com/lenny to learn more and get 10% off. That's S-P-R-I-G.com/lenny.

(00:03:40):
This episode is brought to you by Dovetail, the customer insights hub for product teams. Are you working in a feature factory building filler that nobody wants? Probably, because the sad truth is that most SaaS features are rarely or never used, costing the industry billions every year. Let's change that. Product managers, Dovetail is holding their first industry conference, it's called Insight Out, and they want you to come. Over one day in San Francisco, the product community is coming together to learn how to better leverage customer insights and build products that people actually love to use. It's on April 11, and you can hear from product leaders from Uber, Twitch, Meta and Netflix, as they share their strategies for driving innovation, thriving in uncertainty, and balancing customer-centered work with business needs. And here's the kicker, it's absolutely free for online tickets. Just go to dovetail.com/lenny to register. This is thanks to Dovetail, the best way for product teams to get the most out of customer insights. Check it out at dovetail.com/lenny.

(00:04:50):
Matt, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Matt Abrahams (00:04:54):
Lenny, I am excited for our conversation and thank you for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:57):
Thank you for being here. I'm even more excited for the conversation. So what I want to do with our time today is there's two areas I want to focus. One is talking about techniques to help people manage anxiety when public speaking. And two is helping people get better at speaking on the spot, which you wrote a whole book about. And if you think about it, I think that's like most of the public speaking we do is on the spot. It's not often you give a prepared talk. It's usually like you said, Q&A or a or toast someone wants to give you or ask for feedback or things like that. So I'm excited to dig into those things. How do that sound broadly?

Matt Abrahams (00:05:33):
Absolutely, I look forward to that and those are topics I'm very excited to talk about, have done a lot of research in and look forward to sharing more.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:41):
I suspected as much. Okay, so let's talk about anxiety. You have a bunch of really novel techniques in your book and your podcast for calming your body down, calming your mind down when you're planning to give a talk, when you're actually about to give a talk, when you're giving a talk. And a lot of these I haven't actually seen anywhere else and I've used a few of them and they are really great. So what I was thinking we'd do is let me go through the ones that I found most useful and interesting and just share your advice on those and then see if there's any I missed and then maybe add those at the end. How's that?

Matt Abrahams (00:06:15):
That sounds great. That sounds great. I love that you've applied some of these techniques and found value from them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:19):
I'll talk about this, I'll talk about this. Okay, first of all, just to catch on this, you're not a fan of the picture people in your audience naked approach, correct?

Matt Abrahams (00:06:27):
The Brady Bunch advice is not good advice. I don't know about you and I don't know anybody who could imagine seeing a bunch of people in their underwear and feel more comfortable with that. And I think if you do, there are other issues you need to be dealing with than beyond speaking anxiety.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:42):
Yeah, it feels like highly inappropriate now, just that idea, trying to picture everyone-

Matt Abrahams (00:06:46):
No, but underlying that if you'll give me a moment, there is some value. This notion of visualization as a tool of desensitization actually can be very helpful, but you're not visualizing the audience half naked. What you're doing is you're visualizing yourself in that space. You're visualizing the audience responding to you and what you're saying. So just like a pilot might do a flight simulator, having a visualization can actually really help you feel more comfortable and confident. It literally puts you in the room even though you're not there. And there's some tools and I'm fascinated by these tools that are virtual reality tools that can also serve to desensitize you. So this notion of seeing your audience in advance of actually speaking can actually impact your level of comfort. It's let's keep everybody clothed and let's keep them all focused on your topic.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:36):
Well, let's actually talk about this one while we're on it because I think this is a really powerful technique. An idea just to kind of summarize, you picture ahead of time, what it's going to look like and feel like. You talking, looking at the audience. You talk about that and just how to go about using that technique.

Matt Abrahams (00:07:50):
Yeah, absolutely. And this is some of the oldest research on public speaking anxiety. It was research done in the '80s from the University of Oregon. So visualization, what it does is it allows you to see the event in a way that you have much more control over it so you can think about it. So a good visualization involves some deep breathing to calm yourself. Either you close your eyes or you just look at a picture. Maybe you can get a picture of the environment you're speaking in. I often recommend speakers see the room even if they're not physically present, but get a picture online or some way envision yourself in the room, envision yourself in the room with the people you'll be speaking to. Often we know the individuals or some of them. We can also go online and figure out who they are.

(00:08:39):
So visualization is a really useful technique and you see yourself not just in the moment of speaking but getting up to the stage, delivering the presentation, seeing it being well received, thinking about how you step off the stage. And by taking yourself through that you in essence are a dress rehearsal even though you're not physically in the room. And there's good research to say that this desensitizes people. We see athletes do this kind of thing all the time where they'll do visualization to help them and it really does work. And like I said, there are virtual tools now that can help you do this where you can actually program it to have a certain size audience. You can even program some of these to have a responsive audience or a distracted audience. All of this in service of just preparing you for what you're really going to see.

(00:09:25):
And the bottom line is this, what you're doing for yourself is making sure it's not new and novel. It's something been there, done that, even though if it was virtual or visualized in your mind, to help you feel better about the circumstance. It gives you a sense of agency.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:42):
I've done this myself actually. I gave a TEDx talk once and it was probably the scariest talk I've ever given and I spent a lot of time doing this and it doesn't actually have to take that much time. It could be like a five-minute thing where you sit down, calm yourself, and then just picture the stuff. And ideally you do it a couple times, I imagine.

Matt Abrahams (00:09:57):
That's right. Good for you. And congratulations on giving a TEDx talk. That is a high-stakes talk.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:01):
Thank you. That was before TEDx became super uncool. It was still pretty early. It's out there in the internet in case people want to find it.

Matt Abrahams (00:10:09):
Don't say they're uncool. I'm doing one in two weeks.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:11):
They're so cool. That is, they are cool.

Matt Abrahams (00:10:13):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:17):
They're incredible. I'm impressed.

Matt Abrahams (00:10:17):
I've done a number of them and I've coached many people and I think that there's a lot of value that they can provide people.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:21):
There is. There is. I think they've just become slightly less cool because now there's a lot of them, but they're still incredibly cool, I'm very proud.

Matt Abrahams (00:10:29):
Okay, thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:31):
So on the visualization piece, I think we have a lot of techniques, but just on this one, part of it is continue to calm yourself as you're doing it. I think that's really important because you want to help your body not connect to the stress that you're feeling like you're going to experience.

Matt Abrahams (00:10:46):
That's correct. Any distance you can give yourself from the anxiety that you're feeling is helpful and there are lots of techniques that help give you a little bit of distance and visualization is one of those.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:57):
One of my favorite techniques that it might be in this bucket, it might be on the spot advice bucket, but I think it works great here is what you call dare to be dull. Can you talk about that because I love that?

Matt Abrahams (00:11:09):
Yeah. I really leaned into this with the spontaneous speaking work that I've been doing as of late, but it applies to anybody speaking. This is a notion that comes from the world of improvisation and when people hear improv, they often think of standup comedy, having to be funny. And that's not what improv is all about. Improv is all about being present, being collaborative, being open, and it's a wonderful tool just to help you get present oriented. Think of it as like meditation in action, but also it teaches lots of valuable skills for communication.

(00:11:42):
When we communicate, especially spontaneously, we want to do it really well. We want to answer the question with the best answer, we want to give the right feedback, we want to be the most interesting in small talk and that puts a lot of pressure on ourselves. And you can think of it this way, it's really taxing our cognitive bandwidth.

(00:12:04):
Your brain in many ways is like a CPU, a computer. It's not a perfect analogy, but it works. And if I am constantly judging and evaluating everything I am saying against some standard of perfection, whatever that is, it means I have a limited amount of bandwidth to focus on what I'm actually saying and connecting to my audience. If you have a laptop or a phone that has lots of windows and apps open, each one of those is performing less well because of the other ones being open. So I often say strive for connection over perfection by daring to be dull. Just get the task done, just answer the question, just give the feedback, just be engaged in the small talk. And by doing that you dial down the volume of self-evaluation, freeing up resources that can be used to really help you succeed. So dare to be dull is all about giving yourself permission to just be present and do what's needed. And when you do that you find that you actually do quite a good job at it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:03):
The last point I think is really important, you talk about this in your book. Is when you start with, "Okay, I'm just going to say something, it'll be fine." Without that pressure, you end up saying something better and more interesting and more insightful because you're less nervous about it.

Matt Abrahams (00:13:16):
That's exactly right. We are often our biggest impediments to good communication because of the anxiety we bring to the party.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:23):
That's awesome. And I think this can apply to prepared talks too. When you're preparing a deck, don't put this pressure on yourself, "This has to be the best talk ever." Just like, "I'm going to do my best. Let me just start with something that's good enough." People learn something and then from that, their editing ends up leading to something great in my experience.

Matt Abrahams (00:13:39):
Right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:40):
Awesome. Okay, let's go to the next technique, and this is another one I've practiced and another guest on the podcast actually suggested this and these two remind me of using this one, which is to tell yourself when you're going to be giving a talk. "I'm excited. This is going to be a lot of fun. I'm so excited to give this talk." And reframe it from, "I'm nervous," to like, "No, I'm excited. This is going to be amazing." Can you talk about that technique?

Matt Abrahams (00:14:04):
Absolutely. So this is one of many cognitive reframing techniques. It is often attributed to my friend and colleague, Alison Wood Brooks, she's at Harvard Business School who did some research into this. And what she found is...

(00:14:18):
Well, first take a step back. When you get physically aroused by anxiety, you're under that fight or flight threat response. It turns out that same response happens to your body when you're excited. The human body has pretty much just one arousal response. Our heart beats faster, we breathe more shallow, we get a little shaky, but the big difference is how we label that. So if I say, "Hey Lenny, guess what? Your colleague couldn't show up today and you need to go teach the class or you need to go give that presentation." You might feel your heart rate go up, get a little shaky, sweat on your brow and you're seeing that as negative. But if I said, "Hey Lenny, guess what? You just won the lottery." Same physiological response would happen, but you would see that likely as more positive.

(00:15:06):
So how we label the arousal matters and what Alison's research and others have followed up with suggests is that when we feel those symptoms of anxiety, rather than seeing it as negative, say, "This is exciting. I get to share my point of view. I get to demonstrate my value." And in so doing by seeing it as more positive, it causes us by definition to relax. And her research fascinatingly found that people actually were perceived as communicating better. And again that's because that pressure was taken off of them. So I challenge everybody to think about what are the exciting elements of the communication opportunities you have and really lean into those. And when you feel those anxiety symptoms, remind yourself these are signs of excitement. This is me being excited about sharing this information and it can really help.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:56):
This is another one I've done and it super works. It sounds so trivial and so like, "Why would this do anything?" But I find you just say that just like, "I'm going to have so much fun. This is going to be exciting." It does make an impact. So another one to try, even though it sounds really trivial.

(00:16:12):
Kind of along these lines, there's another technique you recommend which is a mantra, having a mantra that you repeat to yourself. I don't know if it's kind of the same general idea, but you have a couple mantras that you recommend to people like "I have value to add" and things like that. What advice do you have there?

Matt Abrahams (00:16:27):
Yes, thank you. And that's mine. The one that you shared is, "I have value to add." So if we were to really listen to the voice in our heads when it comes to communication, we say a lot of negative things to ourselves. We say things like, "I'm not prepared. I'm not going to be as good as this person. I'm an imposter." We carry around with us a lot of this chatter that actually sets us up to not do well or to be more nervous. So if we can actually change that talk track, it can help us.

(00:17:01):
I'm not saying you have to go to an extreme and say, "I'm going to be the best communicator ever." Rather you can simply say as I do and as you alluded to. What I'll say right before I speak is, "I have value to bring."

(00:17:12):
Often when we are in communicative situations, especially at work, people want to hear from us. We've been invited to speak, we're on the agenda for the meeting. There is value people can take from our communication and we just have to remind ourselves of that. So having some little mantra that you can say that's not over the top but just makes sense. It could be as simple as you've got this, or I'm prepared, or I know my stuff. And I actually encourage people to write it on a post-it note if you're old school, sometimes people put it into their phones as a reminder. So like a minute or two minutes before they're set to give the presentation or participate in the meeting, it flashes up. We just have to turn off or turn down the noise of that internal negative self-talk.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:58):
What are some other mantras that you found helpful or that people use?

Matt Abrahams (00:18:03):
They're very personal to different people. I was just coaching a senior leader the other day who his mantra was, "Last time this went well." He's a leader, he does a lot of the same presentations and just by saying last time this went well, reminds him that it's likely to go well this time. We are very susceptible to catastrophizing when we're very nervous about things, especially when we're exposed in front of people. Not in the Brady Bunch exposure we talked about earlier, but when we're out there speaking or communicating and simply reminding ourselves that often they go very well is helpful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:36):
Yeah. There's another one that I think you shared which is, "It's not about me, it's about my content."

Matt Abrahams (00:18:41):
Yes, exactly. That's another one. That's a great one. It can be very helpful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:45):
The one you shared about, "I've got this," reminds me, my wife took a course with the Artist's Way writer, Julia Cameron I think is her name. And she has this piece of advice where you name your critic, your inner critic that's always telling you to stop doing stuff. You name him or her. So I name mine Jim. And then when he or she is giving you things you don't want to hear, you're just like, "Jim, I got this. Jim, I don't need this advice."

Matt Abrahams (00:19:11):
There is a lot of evidence on personifying the things that challenge us and then having conversations with it. It's a way of rationalizing some of the things that we do that are quite negative. So something there for sure to be thinking about.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:30):
There we go. Bonus advice. That was-

Matt Abrahams (00:19:32):
Bonus advice, yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:33):
I didn't expect that.

Matt Abrahams (00:19:34):
And the cool thing that what you're highlighting is there is a lot of advice out there on how to manage anxiety. Many of us feel like we're the only people who feel this nervous because we see our colleagues, our friends or Ted talks as you were talking about, and we see these people communicating just so effortlessly. Often a lot of work went into that and we don't see that work. And sometimes just knowing that others experience it makes us feel better.

(00:19:58):
If you'll allow me, I'll tell this very quick story. I was in the San Francisco Airport, this was several years ago after my Speaking Up Without Freaking Out book came out, and my name was called over the PA system at the airport counter. The seat that I was supposed to sit in was broken and they wanted to talk to me about it. So when I came away from that, somebody came up to me and said, "Hey, you're the guy that wrote that book on speaking anxiety." I said, "Yes." And I said, "What do you know about it?" He goes, "Oh, I bought the book." I said, "Oh, was it helpful?" He says, "Incredibly helpful, but I didn't read it." I'm like, "This is weird. So you're telling me the book was helpful and you didn't read it?" And so I said, "Tell me more." And he said, "Just knowing that a book like that existed made me feel better because I don't know you and I know you certainly didn't write the book for me. So it implies that lots of people have this issue."

(00:20:44):
And just by normalizing the anxiety, which by the way is the normal condition. Those of us who study this believe it is innate to being human to feel nervous communicating in front of others. So sometimes just reminding yourself that you're not alone and that others have it can actually help reduce the pressure that we feel.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:01):
This is such an important point that I am kicking myself for not starting with this also because I think this is something people don't realize. They see all their execs at their company speaking incredibly well, so confidently, so articulately and just like, "Oh my God, how will I ever be someone like that?" Is there anything more you can share of just like you have tons of students that go through your class, you see these issues, they're more transparent, you think about their challenges, I imagine. Is there anything more you could share there to help people feel better? Like this is most people, even when you see someone amazing at speaking, they are also probably nervous.

Matt Abrahams (00:21:36):
With regard to that, I think we just need to talk about it more. We need to share about it. I mean, I always will share that I still have anxiety in speaking in certain situations and it's something that's taken me a long time to work on. I also help people understand that it's not a light switch. It's not like you either have it or you don't. It's a process. And so the idea is over time, we will feel less nervous if we apply some of these principles you and I are talking about.

(00:22:01):
A great technique to help people that often isn't talked about is many of us feel much more comfortable in conversation than we do in presenting. And conversation is a back and forth. So you can actually set up a lot of your communication situations, a presentation, a meeting, et cetera, as conversations. And you don't even have to have a conversation with the audience. You can simply have it with yourself. For example, what would it be like if you were to start a presentation by saying, "Today I have three questions I'd like to answer. Question number one is..." And you state the question and then you answer it. I am actually having a conversation with myself in that moment where I am asking myself a question. I happen to know the answer, I give the answer. This again, just like the reframing as excitement versus anxiety, this is a reframe. I'm not presenting, I'm having a conversation. And in so doing it ratchets down that anxiety.

(00:22:53):
So we need to talk about it. We need to share our experiences with developing anxiety management plans. We realize it's not binary, it's not I have it or I don't. And we start seeing where we feel more comfortable and how can we bring that comfort level into the types of situations that make us nervous, like simply having a conversation with yourself.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:13):
You have another technique I think that's different, maybe it's exactly the same, which is to ask a question of somebody else as you're talking, which is I think deflects attention from you. Can you talk about that?

Matt Abrahams (00:23:22):
Yeah. So we talked about the way we desensitize through visualization. The other thing we can do is distract.

(00:23:30):
I coached a very senior leader at Google who got very nervous when he was up in front of people, and what we did is we distract his audience. So he would start every single presentation saying these words, "Good morning, let's watch this video." And he'd show a 30-second video that was on topic about something they were going to talk about in the meeting. And when the video stopped, he would then facilitate a discussion of what that video was about and then he would ease into his content. So he went from being a presenter to being a facilitator or somebody who was having a conversation with the audience. That made him feel so much better.

(00:24:05):
And so all of us can do things that can distract our audience. Now when I say distract, I don't mean take them on a tangent that's not relevant to what you're saying, but maybe you ask them a question, maybe you tell them a story, maybe you show them a video or ask them to read something. So there are lots of things that you can do that will help get the attention off you for just a little bit so that you can then focus on what works for you or take that deep breath that'll help calm you down. All of these are very useful techniques.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:35):
Yeah, it's interesting once you start talking, it's okay usually. It's the beginning part that you need [inaudible 00:24:40].

Matt Abrahams (00:24:40):
Yeah, most people are most nervous one minute before speaking and the first minute of speaking. And if you can find ways to get yourself through that, then it becomes much easier for most people. There are some people who that's not true for, but for most people that's the way it works.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:54):
Awesome. Okay, next technique that actually another guest mentioned, and we spent a bunch of time on this, a guest named Johnny Miller, which is a breathing technique. And just to give a little context from what he taught us is that 80% of our neurons go from our body to our brain versus 20% is our brain telling our body what to feel. And so this research shows that what our body's feeling is what our brain's going to think. So if our body's acting nervous, we're going to think, oh, we're nervous. And if you change the state of your body, your mind feels different.

Matt Abrahams (00:25:23):
I love this stuff. This research, embodied cognition is what it's called, is fascinating to me. I'll share one of my most favorite studies in this. There was a researcher at Duke, I think it was Duke, who... The only experimental variation that he did is he had people hold something that was cold in their hand, like an iced coffee versus a warm coffee. And then he asked the participants to make ratings of people. And if you were holding something cold, you saw the person as a colder person, as more aloof and more distant, and if you were holding something warm, you saw them as more collaborative and embracing. I find this stuff fascinating. What our body feels, our minds think.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:03):
Awesome. So along those lines, there's a technique that you recommend that he recommended, but I think it's a great reminder of the double exhale where you breathe in and then you exhale twice as long. Can you talk about that and tell people about it?

Matt Abrahams (00:26:13):
Yeah. Breathing is very helpful in managing so many of our anxiety symptoms. It slows down the heart rate, makes our voice sound more normal because when we get nervous, we breathe shallow and that changes... Our voice is a wind instrument, it changes the way we sound, can reduce some of the shakiness. So deep belly breathing, the kind you do if you've ever done yoga or tai chi, qigong, really important to do and there are a whole bunch of variations on it. The one you're talking about is the double inhalation where you're taking an inhale in until you feel completely full and then you sneak in a little extra air and then you take a long exhale. People call it box breathing and other types of breathing.

(00:26:54):
The bottom line is this, what's critical to the relaxation response is the exhale. Lots of ways to inhale, lots of ways to exhale. You want your exhale to be longer than the inhale. The magic of the relaxation happens during the exhale. So I have a rule of thumb, I jokingly call it a rule of lung. You want your exhale to be twice as long as your inhale. So if you take a three count in, even if you sneak in a little extra air as we were talking about, take a six count out. And it is that way that you will feel... Not only will your body physiologically feel less stress, you'll be more focused in a present moment and not catastrophizing about all the things that might happen in the future.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:36):
Great. Yeah, so it's like another example of this sounds so trivial and why would breathing differently do have any impact on my nervousness? But one, there's all this research that shows that it does, and two, if you try it, and this is another one I use, is it actually works very quickly and you do it a few times and like, wow, I feel really different.

Matt Abrahams (00:27:54):
Absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:55):
It is interesting you put these together. From the way I've seen it, these are two different techniques, but I've never tried them together. One is... I think Huberman is big on this one. All his clips are always talking about this. One of you inhale fully and then you inhale a little bit more and there's some capillaries or something in your lungs that fill up that-

Matt Abrahams (00:28:12):
[inaudible 00:28:12]. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:13):
And then there's the 4, 4, 8 is the way this other guest shared is like breathe in four seconds, hold it four seconds, breathe out for eight seconds. But I'm going to try both. Wow. That's going to double up my calmness.

Matt Abrahams (00:28:27):
You'll be so mellow, nothing will bother you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:29):
So mellow. Okay. Are there any other techniques that you love that you find people find really helpful in calming their anxiety?

Matt Abrahams (00:28:39):
Well, so the first book had 50 techniques and not all 50 techniques work for everybody. One that I personally think is a lot of fun is getting present oriented because when I'm in the present, by definition I'm not worried about the future. And many of our anxiety comes from our fear of a potential negative future outcome like, "I'm not going to achieve my goal." So if I can do anything to be in the present moment, that helps me out a lot.

(00:29:02):
Something I do as part of my personal anxiety management plan is I say tongue twisters. Tongue twisters for me are a great way to get present oriented. You can't say it right if you don't say the tongue twister if you're not focused on the present moment. And it also warms up your voice. A lot of nervous speakers get so inside their head that they don't warm up their voice. And we all know if you've ever done any exercise or competed in any sports, you should warm up first. We have this mistaken notion that we can go from silence to brilliance without warming up. And I like saying tongue twisters out loud to get present oriented and to warm up my voice. So that's one that I often recommend. People think it's silly, but I have people who are like, that really works. It really helps me to get centered and to warm up. And so I like that one a lot.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:46):
Well, let's share a couple of tongue twisters. What are some recommendations?

Matt Abrahams (00:29:50):
I will only share my tongue twister, I say Lenny, if you promise to say it after me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:53):
Absolutely. I'm so ready.

Matt Abrahams (00:29:55):
This is my favorite tongue twister. It takes five seconds to say, it's three phrases long. And if you say it wrong, you say a naughty word. So I'm going to be listening as for all your listeners. So are you prepared? So it goes as follows, I slit a sheet.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:10):
I slit a sheet.

Matt Abrahams (00:30:11):
A sheet I slit

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:13):
A sheet I slit.

Matt Abrahams (00:30:14):
And on that slitted sheet I sit.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:18):
And on that slitted sheet I sit.

Matt Abrahams (00:30:20):
Very good. You didn't say that naughty word. I'm sure you can imagine what it would've been.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:25):
A lot of danger, a lot of [inaudible 00:30:26].

Matt Abrahams (00:30:26):
A lot of danger. But in that moment you weren't thinking about, what's the next question I'm going to ask Matt? Or how much longer do we have in the podcast? No, you were simply focused on what we were saying and trying to say it without saying a naughty word. So that's that [inaudible 00:30:39]-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:38):
And not have to censor this podcast.

Matt Abrahams (00:30:42):
I've only had to bleep one guest in all my years of doing this.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:46):
Okay, cool. We're going to link to that. Is there any other ones you want to share before we move on to getting better at speaking on the spot?

Matt Abrahams (00:30:52):
Well, the last one I'll say is, and this one is another one that falls in the kind of funny category, but there's research that says that when you swear, curse, it actually helps you reduce anxiety. When you curse, you release a flood of neurochemicals that blunt out the neurochemicals associated with anxiety, cortisol being a big one. So you get a big dopamine hit, for example, serotonin when you swear. So I'm not saying get up on stage and drop an F-bomb, but my students love this. I mean, it's like, "Matt's giving me permission to swear." And no, that's not what I'm doing, but it's an interesting technique that seems to help some people is to curse not necessarily in front of people, but that can help. And it also has an analgesic effect. It actually reduces pain as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:44):
That's interesting. I could see during birth women screaming curse words.

Matt Abrahams (00:31:48):
Yeah. Well, I'm not going to say what I heard when my kids were born, but...

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:54):
But again, this could double up with the tongue twister where you just go for it and say-

Matt Abrahams (00:31:58):
Yeah, every tongue twister has to start with Nantucket and then we're good.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:05):
This episode is brought to you by Coda, and I mean that literally. I use Coda every day to help me plan each episode of this very podcast. It's where I keep my content calendar, my guest research, and also the questions that I plan to ask each guest. Also, during the recording itself, I have a Coda page up to remind myself what I want to talk about. Coda is an all-in-one platform that combines the best of documents, spreadsheets and apps to help you and your team get more done. Now is the perfect time to get started with Coda, especially its extensive planning capabilities. With Coda, you can stay aligned and ship faster by managing your planning cycles in one location. You can set and measure OKRs with full visibility across teams and stakeholders. You can map dependencies, create progress visualizations, and identify risk areas. Plus you can access hundreds of pressure-tested templates for everything from roadmap strategy to final decision-making to PRDs.

(00:33:01):
If you want a platform that empowers your team to strategize, plan and track goals together, you can get started with Coda today for free. And if you want to see for yourself why product teams at high-growth companies like Pinterest, Figma and Qualtrics run on Coda, take advantage of the special limited-time offer just for startups. Head over to coda.io/lenny to sign up and get $1,000 in credit. That's C-O-D-A.io/lenny to sign up and get $1,000 in credit. Coda.io/lenny.

(00:33:34):
Okay, let's shift to talking about talking on the spot.

Matt Abrahams (00:33:39):
I see you said shift very carefully. I appreciate that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:44):
Now we're going to be so, so careful, I don't want this podcast flagged and for adults only. Okay, shift to a new topic. You have a whole book about how to get better speaking on the spot. And I think why this is important is again, what I said at the beginning that I think most of our "public speaking" is not planned public speaking. There's people asking for feedback in a meeting, people wanting you to give a toast, Q&A as we talked about. So what I want to do is you have advice for broadly getting better at these things and then you have advice for very specifically how to get better at giving better toast, doing better Q&A, getting better at small talk and things like that. So I want to start with the broad advice and then get into each of these. That sound good?

Matt Abrahams (00:34:27):
Absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:28):
How about you share your favorite techniques for broadly getting better at speaking on the spot, and then we'll see where that goes?

Matt Abrahams (00:34:37):
Sure. So the first thing in helping yourself feel better, speaking spontaneously, which is the vast majority of our communication, the plan presenting, the practiced pitch, the meeting with agenda pale in comparison to the times that we are spontaneously speaking. And the first thing that is important for everybody to know is we can all get better at it. That's the fundamental bottom line. Many of us feel like we're either born with the gift of gab or we're not. And so the first thing we have to realize is we can get better at it.

(00:35:08):
The second big point to make is you actually have to prepare to be spontaneous. And that's counterintuitive, but it is through preparation that we get better at it. And if you think about it, if you think about an athlete, when an athlete is doing their sport, they are being spontaneous, they are responding to the conditions that present themselves to them. What helps them do well is all the preparation and practice that they've done. So there are lots of analogs to this, but when we think about it in of communication, it seems foreign, but when you think about it in athletics or jazz music, it's like of course you would prepare and practice. Those are the two big underlying principles to helping people get better.

(00:35:48):
The next level has to do with we have to attack both mindset and approach and the actual messaging itself. The only way I have found to help people get better at this is to look at how we approach it, our mindset, and then how we actually craft the messages through structure and focus that help us be better. So that's the gradual process from the broadest level about how we have to go about making this better for ourselves.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:14):
Maybe let's dig into the structure.

Matt Abrahams (00:36:17):
Sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:17):
What is your advice for how to think about structuring if you're on the spot, like, "Oh, shit, how do I share something smart [inaudible 00:36:22]?"

Matt Abrahams (00:36:22):
See, the bad word came out, so you're ready for my tongue twister. So structure is critical. In spontaneous speaking, most of us, because we feel the intense pressure, the anxiety we just talked about, we just spew out information, we list and itemize information. We take our audience on the journey of our own discovery of what we want to say as we're saying it, and our brains are not wired for lists of information. In fact, Lenny, how many items do you need to buy from the grocery store before you actually have to physically write it down? For me it's four. Anything over four, I'm going to forget something. Our brains aren't wired for lists, right?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:03):
Yeah.

Matt Abrahams (00:37:03):
And so-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:04):
I text myself.

Matt Abrahams (00:37:05):
Yeah, right, exactly. Yeah, no, I'm old school. I actually put it on a piece of paper, but the point is that we're not wired that way. Our brains are actually wired for story, for connection, a logical connection of ideas. So it's about connecting those pieces together. So a structure is nothing more than a beginning, a middle, and an end. A package of information. The structure that almost everybody listening in is familiar with is one that comes from the world of advertising. Most advertisements are set up as problem, solution, benefit. There's some problem in the world, here's how we solve it with our product or service, and here's how you benefit from it. That's a structure. It's a logical beginning, middle, and end. These items have a connection. So by finding a structure that you can rely on when put on the spot, it halves your burden.

(00:37:54):
When you're put on the spot, you have to think about what to say and how to say it. The structure tells you how to say it, and then you just have to think about what to put into it. So it's like having a recipe. If I have a recipe and I have good ingredients, I can cook a good meal. So there are lots of structures.

(00:38:10):
The whole second part of the book Think Faster, Talk Smarter is specific structures for specific situations, introducing yourself, making an apology, giving feedback. And I'm not saying every time you give an apology or give feedback that you have to follow these structures. It just gives you a place to go when you're in that moment where you're like, "Where do I go? How do I start?"

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:33):
Cool. So we're going to talk about those examples. One of the structures that I liked that I wrote down is called prep, which is make your point, give a reason for making that point, give an example. And then what's the last one point again?

Matt Abrahams (00:38:47):
Yeah, restate your point. Review it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:48):
Restate your point. That feels like something that say in product teams can come up a lot is just like, here's what I think, here's why. Here's an example and then let me just remind you again what the point I'm making.

Matt Abrahams (00:38:57):
That's right. Yes. I love prep and the structure I really like is a three-question structure: What? So what? Now what? And people on product teams I think could benefit so much from this. What is your product, your service, your offering, your update, your feedback? It's the what of why you're speaking. The so what is why is this important and relevant to the people you're talking to or to your company or to prospective clients? And then the now what is what comes next. So on a product team, if you're describing a feature, here's what the feature is, here's why it's important, and here's what we're doing about it. If you're giving an update in an update meeting, a standup that you're having, here's what I'm working on, here's why it's important, here's what I'm doing next.

(00:39:41):
By packaging the information up in what, so what, now what, it becomes much more digestible, much more memorable. Just like prep. Prep works really well for a point you're making. What, so what, now what works really well for a broader presentation, update, feedback session that you're giving. So having a whole series of these tools in your toolkit can really make a difference.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:05):
So we've talked about three structures so far. What, so what, now what; prep, which is make the point, give a reason example, and then restate the point; and then problem, solution benefit. So people listening to this it's like, "Oh, amazing, all these structures are great." Do you have any advice on how to remember these? You're like, "Oh, Matt, what do you think of this design?" Like, "Oh, shit, which one should I go with?"

Matt Abrahams (00:40:28):
I try to give each structure a catchy name. What, so what, now what rolls off the tongue. There's a structure in the book for giving feedback called 4Is for Apologizing AAA. So part of it is just coming up with a mnemonic that works for you and you can name them whatever you want, but really the way to get familiar with them and to have them at the ready is to use them.

(00:40:48):
When I coach people on what, so what, now what, I encourage them at the end of a podcast they listen to or something they read, take a moment and say, "What was it about? Why is it important to me and what can I do with that information?" And if you do that, not only do you get better and more comfortable deploying that structure, but you also remember the material better because there's a whole bunch of research that says when we interrogate the material that we listen to or read, we digest it and remember it more. So in 30 seconds you're really helping yourself at least in two ways by getting the structure down and remembering more. So you have to put it into practice.

(00:41:24):
The other way to do it in which we do a lot in my classroom is we have people dissect communication. So you listen to somebody or you see it and you say, what structure did they use? So it's about awareness building and then actually getting the reps. The only way you get better at communication, spontaneous or planned, is the way you get better at anything. Repetition, reflection, and feedback. You got to practice, you got to think about what worked or what didn't, and then you have to get feedback from others. We are not always the best judges of our communication. And in so doing, repetition, reflection and feedback takes your communication to the next level.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:00):
That's a lot of work, Matt. That's a lot of work.

Matt Abrahams (00:42:02):
It is work. There is no shortcut.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:04):
Got you.

Matt Abrahams (00:42:05):
But that's true with most things in life that are really important. There's no shortcut.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:09):
That's right. That's right. As people are thinking about this and listening to this, there's your course, obviously that you teach at Stanford and only Stanford students can take that. There's your book obviously. Is there anything else? If there's nothing, that's totally fine, that you point people to to actually practice these outside of the workplace? Are there courses that anyone can take that you recommend? Anything else you can point people to?

Matt Abrahams (00:42:31):
Absolutely. There are a lot of resources out there. One, I'm a huge proponent and a former member of Toastmasters. I think Toastmasters is a wonderful organization designed primarily to give you the reps. They do some teaching, but it's really to give you the reps. So I highly recommend Toastmasters.

(00:42:48):
Improvisation is another way to get comfortable with these skills. When people hear improv, they think, "Oh, I got to be funny and it's about performing," and it's not. Improv is really just about being more comfortable, being present, and really focusing on collaborating with others.

(00:43:04):
And then there are courses. You mentioned obviously that people have to be MBA students to take my MBA class, but Stanford and other institutions have continuing studies classes or extension classes that are open to the community. So I, every quarter teach a class that's open to anybody who registers all over the world. It's virtual. I have students this very quarter who take a class on a Monday night Pacific Time, 7:00 PM. I've got somebody in Egypt, I have somebody in China. So there are ways to take advantage of things happening at universities without being an enrolled student. So I would point people to all of those. And then clearly listening to podcasts, reading books, checking out blogs and videos can be really helpful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:44):
I think to your point, it's like you can read about this and listen to podcasts all you want, but you're not going to actually get that much better. And with your course, I imagine there's practice you're doing as a part of the course.

Matt Abrahams (00:43:53):
Everything is applied. The only way to get better at communication is to do communication, to watch communication. And that's why in the books I write, I have this, try this. It's literally put the book down, go do this and then come back because that's how you learn communication. And so yes, any avenue to help you get the reps is going to be helpful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:13):
I'll be honest, I did none of the try this. I'm just like, that's too much work. So I think that's why it's important to take something where you have to do it because it's too easy just like, yeah, yeah.

Matt Abrahams (00:44:24):
Yeah. You're not the first person to say that they don't take the time to do that. There are others who say they really appreciate that. And for people such as yourself, at the very end of my book, I have a QR code that takes you to a bunch of videos. So if you don't want to do it yourself, you can actually watch people do it or watch me do it. And so that's at least better than not doing any of it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:46):
Awesome. I'll also give a shout-out to Toastmasters. I did Toastmasters for a while and two things there. One is there's a special focus on the spot speaking that's a part of the sequence.

Matt Abrahams (00:44:56):
They call them table topics.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:58):
Table topics, yeah. And that's like a 60-second, someone gets up and just has to talk on something. So it's a big part of that method. Also, I did it for a long time and all I did was I was the counter or the timer. You can do it without having to give any talks for as long as you want. And it's very cheap and they're everywhere. There's a local chapter wherever you are.

Matt Abrahams (00:45:17):
Absolutely. And many companies sponsor their own Toastmasters groups, so that's great. And they are very good at easing people into it. You're not forced to do anything. And the same is with improv. A good improv teacher never forces anybody to do anything.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:31):
Great. We went way off-topic, but let's get back to the agenda at hand, which is let's talk about specific situations and advice you have for getting better at these. So maybe we start with small talk and there's one that I love and I find so important and so subtle, which is have comparable levels of disclosure. And the question basically is how do we get better at small talk? And here's one technique.

Matt Abrahams (00:45:55):
Yeah, so let me get to that point in a second because that's a more refined point than some general principles. When it comes to small talk, many people dread small talk, they feel really awkward about it. I think small talk has a bad reputation, needs to be rebranded. I think a lot of big things happen in small talk. We learn about ourselves and others. We form and foster relationships. I challenge everybody listening to think about some of their friends, our closest friends. How did you meet them? Probably some component of small talk played a role, especially early in those relationships. So it does good things for us.

(00:46:32):
The best advice I have ever heard for small talk came from a guest on my podcast. Her name's Rachel Greenwald. She's an interesting person. She's an academic and a matchmaker, really fascinating. And her advice was this: Be interested, not interesting. Many of us go into small talk thinking we have to be super interesting. We have to spike the ball over the net every time. When in fact small talk is more like playing the game of Hacky Sack, where it's simply just set the other person up to be successful and get the ball back to you. So if we go in with that mindset, it makes it easier.

(00:47:06):
Now there's some rules that we can follow. One rule is the one that you shared that in small talk there should be a balance of disclosure or depth of disclosure over time. So if you're telling me about the first time your first pet died, and I'm telling you my favorite color is blue, there's a discrepancy in disclosure there. Clearly you've revealed a lot more than I have. And we have this notion of reciprocity that if you share something that is appropriate but is more disclosive, that I should at some point match that level or come close. And if we don't, then it feels very awkward and we feel like we're not jiving in that way.

(00:47:49):
I don't want everybody sitting with a little card that they're checking off, but having that general notion in mind can help. And the trick here is not to be too disclosive too quickly. So if we start small talk and we're talking about the I meeting that we're at, and you immediately jump into the fight you had with your significant other that might lead to divorce, that's a deep and big step that might feel a little inappropriate. But over time, if we continue to disclose, it might be perfectly natural for you to share that. So there's sort of expectations and we just have to be mindful of those.

(00:48:24):
Another thing we need to be mindful of that I think is really important is this distinction between shifting and supporting responses. In a conversation, I can be supportive. That is, you might say, "Hey Matt, I just got back from Costa Rica." I could say, "Oh great, did you spend time in San Jose? Did you get to any of the beaches?" Those are supporting responses. I'm asking you to keep telling me more. A shifting response would be like, "Oh, you went to Costa Rica. I went to Hawaii." And the goal in a good conversation is to have more supporting responses than shifting, but to have some shifting responses. Because if all I do is continually support you, it looks like I don't want to share. I'm not being disclosive at all. So there are these subtle things that we can be aware of to help the conversation go and to breed that intimacy and immediacy that we feel, but it takes a congruence, a balancing of doing that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:16):
This is awesome. I feel like everyone needs this class to just like, how do I talk to people? What's the right way to talk?

Matt Abrahams (00:49:24):
Well, right. The point that you're bringing up there, Lenny, is we're never taught this stuff and yet we have to do it all the time. And that's why focusing on it I think really matters. And it can really, as you said, superpower, it can be a superpower because so many people don't do this or spend the time getting better at it. We all operate under this notion of... the definition of insanity, doing the same thing over and over again, expecting different results. And that's not good for small talk and other communication situations.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:53):
I love this balance you just shared of... So the primary piece of advice for small talk is be interested, not interesting, ask person questions, get excited about what they're telling you. There's a classic book, How to Win Friends and Influence People, which is very much about this. Highly recommend it. It's like very old school now, but there's so much good advice there. There's no better sound to someone's ears than their name. So just saying their name, they're like, "Yeah, I love that." And then just smiling. There's all these very simple things that that book shares. It sounds like you recommend and you're fan of that book, and it's something you've read, right?

Matt Abrahams (00:50:27):
I know the book. Some of that stuff has been true for a long time. Some of the stuff. I'm not a big fan of ingratiation and manipulation. I like authenticity and some of the advice in books like that can sound like smile, nod your head. And all of that can sound a little manipulative and inauthentic, but I think some of those principles are important. And if you can in an authentic, true, appropriate way, leverage some of that, I think it would help you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:57):
Yeah, somebody once shared a story with their kid... Then they're 13. They read that book and it just effed them up for a while because they just started putting these into practice way too young.

Matt Abrahams (00:51:06):
Well, one thing... I mean, all of a sudden you're focusing on... You can get so wrapped up in doing these things that you're actually not connecting. It's like people who travel on a vacation and all they do is take pictures of where they are instead of experiencing where they are. And that's not where we want to be with this advice.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:23):
But I love this other component of... Because a lot of people hear this advice, ask questions, be interested, be excited, this version of it, but you need to have somewhat equal levels of disclosure is really important. Because I fall into this sometimes where like, "I don't care about myself. I just want to ask you questions. And this is going great, I'm just going to keep asking." And if you're not sharing anything by yourself, it gets really strange. Even when they ask you, you're like, "No, no, let's keep talking about you." You think they want that, but they don't. They actually want to hear about you.

Matt Abrahams (00:51:50):
Yeah, absolutely. And you do such a lovely job as a podcast... I mean, so podcast host is a great job for you if you like asking questions, but I bet you have found, because I have found this for me as being a host of Think Fast, Talk Smart is that sharing a little bit about your own experience actually makes the conversations go better. And so I think that's a lesson for all of us, and you don't have to have your own podcast to learn that lesson.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:16):
Yeah, I read this book on podcasting interviewing when I first started, and one of the big piece of advice is if you share more about yourself, you'll hear more stories that they can share. They're more vulnerable. Not that I think about that, but that's in my head sometimes.

Matt Abrahams (00:52:29):
Yeah. Well, you do a good job of it, even if it's just intuitive.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:33):
Appreciate it.

(00:52:33):
Let's talk about another version of on-the-spot talking, which is giving feedback. Oftentimes people listening to this podcast, they're asked, what do you think of this design? What do you think of this roadmap? What do you think of the strategy? What are some tips for getting better at on-the-spot feedback?

Matt Abrahams (00:52:48):
First and foremost, we need to look at and define feedback. Feedback to me is an opportunity to problem solve. Certainly there are some behaviors that we absolutely have to shut down. It's inappropriate, it's inexcusable, we have to shut it down. But often feedback is really an opportunity to problem solve. And if you take it as an opportunity to problem solve, then what you're looking for is collaboration with the other person, which means that we have to invite them to join us as we do this. So it's not me bestowing upon you my opinion, it's me inviting you to together work on whatever this issue challenge is that we have. And I am a huge disciple of Kim Scott, Radical Candor. I really like her approach to it. Kim's a friend. She's actually a neighbor.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:33):
Well, she's been on the podcast, by the way.

Matt Abrahams (00:53:35):
Oh, great. So you know Kim and your listeners know Kim. Yeah, she's great. Where I think I can add a little value to what Kim talks about, and she does talk about structure, but I think having the structure to package up the information to make it easier to digest by your audience, the person or people you're talking to, but also to formulate your thoughts can help. And we've already talked about one mechanism, one structure for feedback. It's what, so what, now what?

(00:53:59):
So imagine, Lenny, you and I come out of a meeting and you say, "Hey, Matt, how'd that go?" I could say, "I thought the meeting went really well, Lenny, except when you talked about the implementation plan. You spoke a little quicker than you did with the other parts and you didn't go into the same level of detail." That's my what. "When you speak quickly without a lot of detail, people might think you're not as prepared or you're really concerned about this part." That's the so what. "Next time I suggest you slow down and you include these two or three bits of data so that people see you really are knowledgeable on this area." So that's the now what.

(00:54:32):
So that what, so what, now what helps me very quickly structure information and package it in a way that helps me as the giver of the feedback, think through what are the things I need to say? I need to think through what's bothering me, what the consequences are of that behavior, and then what I think you should do.

(00:54:51):
There's a more robust structure I talk about in the book called The 4 Is, and each I stands for something starting with the letter I. But four eyes also like glasses. It helps you see more clearly. So in the 4 I structure, the first I is information. You're just setting the playing field so the person knows what you're giving the feedback about. The second is impact, and this is impact on you, the feedback giver. The third is the invitation that you make, and then the final is the implications or consequences.

(00:55:19):
So imagine I have an employee who doesn't show up to the meetings on time and prepared. I might say, "This is the third time that you have showed up late to this meeting. I feel you're not prioritizing this meeting the same way others of us are. What can we do to help make sure you show up prepared for the next meeting? Because if you do, we're going to finish the project on time and get a new cool project." So information, impact, invitation, and implications. Now, certainly I can vary the tone and the directness of some of those responses so it sounds very differently, but thinking through it in my mind, I have to level set what we're talking about. I have to share why it's important to me at least, make the invitation, and talk about the benefits or consequences. Makes a lot of sense. So there are lots of structures and lots of ways to communicate, especially in feedback. Find one or two that work for you so when you're put on the spot, you can default to it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:13):
Maybe a big takeaway here is pick one of these structures that you want to use when somebody asks you for feedback. And the two you shared are what? So what? Now what? Or these four Is. Give information, show the impact that it had on you, invitation and then implications.

Matt Abrahams (00:56:30):
That's correct, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:32):
Okay. Let's talk about another category, which is not a work category, but I suck at toasts and I am always trying to get better at this. And you have a bunch of awesome advice for how to give better toasts. Can you share some stuff?

Matt Abrahams (00:56:45):
Yeah. We have all been victimized by bad toasts. The toast that goes on too long, the toast that's more about the person giving the toast than the event or the person. And when I say toast, I don't just mean at weddings, bar mitzvahs, quinceaneras. We give tributes at work all the time. Congratulations to the team or somebody's anniversary or somebody's retirement. So we give toasts and tributes all the time. In fact, I heard a statistic once that it is the most frequent public speaking event across people is giving toasts and tributes. So we should learn how to do these well.

(00:57:16):
So I have an acronym. It works. It's called WHAT. W-H-A-T. The W stands for why are we here? Now, if I'm at a wedding, I don't have to tell the audience why we're here. We get it. But if we're doing an all hands and I'm called up to speak, it might be in my best interest to share with everybody, I'm here to celebrate the release of this product that that team put out. So you might have to say, why are we here?

(00:57:42):
The H is how are you connected to the event? So if I'm at a wedding, people might not know who I am. I could say, "Hey, I've known the groom for 25 years." And people are like, "Oh, okay. Now that makes sense." If you're giving a tribute at work, you don't have to say, "And I'm the boss." Everybody knows your position. So again, these are choices you make. So why are we here? How are you connected?

(00:58:02):
The A stands for anecdote. Tell a story or a quick example that is relevant and accessible to everybody. There's no insider knowledge and keep it concise.

(00:58:16):
And then ultimately the last part is the gratitude, the thank you. So express gratitude, express some kind of thanks. In a toast at a celebratory event, you might say cheers or whatever's appropriate for the culture you come from to signal closure. But again, why are we here? How are you connected? Anecdote or two, and then the gratitude or thanking at the end. And if you follow that structure, it can navigate, just like a GPS, your way through the toast.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:45):
This is such an easy structure to remember. There's so much of it that I love. What I want to understand is where do you put the actual content of the tribute and the toast? Is it the anecdote expands into, "Here's what I want to say?" Like there's an example or story and then it's like-

Matt Abrahams (00:58:59):
Exactly. So it is typically part of that. You might do it as part of the why we're all here. "We're here to really celebrate the Herculean effort of this particular team to get this product launched. I'm so honored to have supported it. I'm the manager of the team. Here's a story about how Lenny worked overtime to get this done. Let's raise our glasses and give them a salute." So yes, you could do it in the why are we here or through the anecdotes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:29):
Okay. And then one of your other piece of advice, which connects to what you just said is be brief.

Matt Abrahams (00:59:33):
Yes, yes. So nobody has ever complained about a toast that's too brief. I'm sure it's possible, but the majority of complaints are the toast went on forever.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:46):
Do you find that it would ever make sense to give a couple anecdotes or make a couple points in a toast?

Matt Abrahams (00:59:51):
Yeah, and it depends. Toasts are opportunities for teaching and learning as well, especially in a work environment. So it might make sense to tell a couple anecdotes. I'm a huge fan... I mean, your listeners know, you know minimally viable product design, agile development, really critical. What is it about? It's about understanding your audience, your users, and it's about rapidly prototyping and iterating. I believe in minimally viable communication, trademark pending, where it's the same principles. Know your audience, put together a rough draft of what you want to say, test it out. So if you're going to give a big toast in front of a company all hands, run it by a few people and say, "Is it too many anecdotes? Would it benefit from having another story?" Get people's feedback. We are not the best judges of our communication. So the answer is yes, but test it out.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:45):
Another element of a great toast that you recommend is to be emotional. Can you touch on that?

Matt Abrahams (01:00:50):
Well, so emotion connects with people, and as long as it's genuine and authentic, it's really important. I've been thinking a lot about emotion and communication. My father recently passed away and everybody in my family said, "Well, Matt's going to do the eulogy." It was like, I had no choice. What do I do? I'm the guy who teaches communication. So I felt added pressure not only to honor my father's life, but everybody's like, "This is the way you do a eulogy." And so I wanted to do some research on what's all the advice out there on eulogies, and there wasn't a lot. So I actually wrote an article on my experience, and hopefully it'll help people. But the point is, in those circumstances where there's a lot of emotion, it's important because it connects to the audience, it makes it human, but sometimes the emotion can get in the way for you as a communicator. I mean, I was very concerned that my emotion would cover up or overshadow the honoring I was trying to do of my father. But the same thing can happen in any kind of toast situation.

(01:01:48):
So think about emotion. Emotion is a tool to use. The best way to convey emotion in a toast is through the anecdotes you use. The anecdotes reveal the emotion. It's one thing to say, "I am so sad." It's another thing to tell a story that is sad.

(01:02:02):
I was very fortunate to interview for my podcast coming up soon, a one-panel cartoonist. So she has to create everything in one panel. And her advice is: Don't tell, show. In that don't tell somebody you're angry, show that you're angry in the panel she writes. So showing the emotion through story and anecdote is the way to do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:22):
Have you had Matthew Dix on your podcast?

Matt Abrahams (01:02:26):
So it is so funny. I have not, and I want to. His name comes up more than anybody else's. And I know of his work and his advice, so I might ask you to connect me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:35):
Absolutely. I thought of him as you were talking because he helps people create their eulogy ahead of time before somebody passes away, before you get really emotional and you have to rush it. So that's one of his services is he helps to write eulogies for people.

Matt Abrahams (01:02:50):
Yeah, yeah. No, I'd love an introduction. His work is very influential.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:53):
Absolutely. He's amazing. We'll link his episode about storytelling.

(01:02:57):
Okay, let me talk about a couple more. Q&A, getting better at question, answer at the end of a talk, whether it's on the spot or not.

Matt Abrahams (01:03:05):
Again, I always start with approach. Many of us see Q&A as threatening or challenging, and in fact, we need to see Q&A as an opportunity. It's an opportunity to extend, expand, connect, learn. Even in the most hostile of situations where people are really coming at you with a lot of spice or hot and heavy, you can get a lot of value out of it. So we have to come to the approaches. These questions are opportunities. We have to make sure that we take the question in without interrupting or over-validating the question.

(01:03:36):
I have two pet peeves about Q&A sessions. One is saying good question to every question. And two, at the end of answering the question saying, "Does that make sense?" Because in both cases, you're trying to validate the asker when you say good question. You're also trying to buy yourself time. And there are other ways to do that. And at the end when you say, "Does that make sense," you've got a laudable goal in mind, which is, "Did I answer your question?" But I'd much rather you say, "Did I answer your question? Can I tell you more? Do you have a follow-up question?"" Because if you keep saying, "does that make sense, does that make sense," people are going to start thinking, "Maybe he doesn't make sense because he is always asking." So some pet peeves there.

(01:04:15):
Once the question comes in and you have to answer it, I have yet another structure. This structure is related to the what, so what, now what structure. It's called ADD for adding value. You answer the question cleanly and concisely. You then give an example to reinforce the answer, and then you explain the relevance or significance of the answer so people know it. Would you mind role-playing an example of this with me, Lenny?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:43):
Absolutely.

Matt Abrahams (01:04:44):
Okay. Imagine you're hiring me. You're a hiring manager, and I'm interviewing to be what I do for my day job. I'm a lecturer at Stanford's Business School, teach strategic communication. You so happen to have a position open for a strategic communication lecturer. I show up. What is a reasonable question you would ask that doesn't just have a yes no answer?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:07):
Wait, so you're interviewing for a role to be a lecturer in my school and [inaudible 01:05:11] communication.

Matt Abrahams (01:05:11):
Yes. You're the dean. You get to hire me. What's a reasonable question? I mean, you could ask a super hard one, but I want people to hear how ADD works.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:19):
This might be too simple, but just how many students have you worked with and taught over the years?

Matt Abrahams (01:05:23):
Okay, so I'm going to morph that question because I could just say thousands, which is true, but I'm going to turn it into a question about experience, because really what you're asking me is what's my experience? So because that I can give an ADD answer too. If it's just a numeric answer, just give a number. So I might say, "I've been doing this for 25 years and I have taught over thousands of students. I've taught both in the academic world, but also in the corporate world. What this means is I can tailor my material to be relevant and useful to your students."

(01:05:56):
So I answered the question. The question was, what's your experience? 25 years, thousands of students. I then give an example. I've done this in the corporate world, I've done this in the academic world. So I ground it in something tangible. And then I show the relevance. What this means for you as a dean hiring me, is that I'm going to be able to tailor my experience. We often assume that people can connect the dots. If I give my answer, you're going to see, "Oh, that's why this is relevant and important." But we need to actually connect those dots for our audience.

(01:06:24):
I had a psychology professor once who said, the funny thing about common sense is it's not so common, and we often make the assumption that people will connect the dots. So answer the question, give a detailed example, and then explain the relevance. And if you do that, it will help. And I challenge every one of your listeners working in companies that have FAQs, frequently asked questions, go back to those FAQs and put them in this structure. Not only will it help you digest and get familiar and comfortable with the structure, anybody looking at those answers begins to see that this is a way to give a complete answer. This is how our organization answers questions. And that can be so helpful to building consistency and helping yourself answer better.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:06):
Just to clarify, the acronym is ADD?

Matt Abrahams (01:07:09):
ADD. Answer, detailed example, describe the relevance.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:12):
Describe the relevance. I see how you snuck that D in there.

Matt Abrahams (01:07:16):
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you can come up with whatever acronym you want that helps you remember. ADD because it adds value.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:24):
Awesome. Okay. And maybe one last quick one, apologizing. What's a couple tips for getting better at apologizing on the spot?

Matt Abrahams (01:07:33):
First and foremost, we need to take the time to apologize. Many of us don't. And when we apologize, we need to make sure that we apologize for the transgression and not for how we made people feel. So often people will simply say, "I'm sorry that you feel bad." Well, that's not an apology. You're not assuming responsibility. So we need to first start by talking about the issue that we are addressing or the problem that we caused somebody. So we need to think about apologies in that way. So an apology to me, I have a AAA, like roadside repair service here in the United States, AAA. It's three steps, acknowledge, appreciate, and amends. So I have to acknowledge what I did.

(01:08:23):
So imagine we're in a meeting and I interrupted you. You were in the midst of speaking and I interrupted you. So I might say, "I'm very sorry for interrupting what you were saying. I over-spoke when you were talking." I'm acknowledging what I did.

(01:08:36):
Then I appreciate. "I can imagine my doing that made you feel bad and you feel that you didn't get your fair share of sharing your point of view." So that's the appreciation.

(01:08:46):
The amends part is, "I will work not to do this. In fact, I will wait till you're done, and I will actually paraphrase what you said before I contribute my point." So I'm signaling I understand it, and here's the very specific thing I'm going to do to try to remedy it, which of course you can comment on. You can say, no, I don't think that's enough. I think you whatever, or thank you, I think that's even more than is needed, whatever. So you acknowledge the actual behavior and offense, not how you made the person feel right away. You then express appreciation for the difficulty you might've caused, and then you make amends. And the AAA approach, I think can really be helpful to people to be better at in-the-moment apologies.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:29):
Amazing. Matt, I think we've packed this episode with so many tactical golden nuggets to help people become better communicators, especially on the spot. Is there anything else you want to share or leave listeners with before I ask you how they can find you online and things like that?

Matt Abrahams (01:09:45):
Again, I want to go back to how we started the second part about spontaneous speaking. Everybody can get better at communication. And I encourage, I challenge people to take the steps that they need to take to do it. So it starts with initiative. It's followed by grace and a lot of compassion, it takes time. But in so doing, you can improve your communication and help others. It's not just about you finding your voice, it's about you sharing that voice with others. So taking the time to work on your communication is critically important, and I encourage everybody to do so.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:18):
All right. I'm hoping people will follow that advice. And if not, think back to what we talked about at the beginning of just how much impact these have and how many people are also going through the same challenges you're probably feeling speaking and being on the spot. All right, where can folks find your podcast, your book, and also how can listeners be useful to you?

Matt Abrahams (01:10:37):
Oh, I love that last question. So mattabrahams.com, great place to go to to find things. So at mattabrahams.com you'll find a whole bunch of resources. My own and others. I've curated a bunch of resources. You can find Think Fast, Talk Smart wherever you get podcasts and on YouTube. And then the book Think Faster, Talk Smarter is available everywhere. I'm a huge user of LinkedIn. And to answer that last question you asked, I invite people to connect on LinkedIn. I'd love to hear their stories and find ways to collaborate.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:06):
Awesome. And your podcast is ranked higher than this podcast. You're in a different category, which is a very competitive category. The business category. I've moved myself to the technology category, which feels more natural to me, but your podcast is killing it, so congrats.

Matt Abrahams (01:11:06):
Thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:21):
Thank you for sharing your wisdom with us. That's it. Matt, thank you again for being here.

Matt Abrahams (01:11:27):
Great pleasure to have the conversation with you, Lenny. I enjoyed it thoroughly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:30):
Same. Bye everyone.

(01:11:34):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Matthew Dicks (00:00:00):
Everyone loves the word storytelling in business. It's a huge buzzword. They love to think of themselves as storytellers, but when they come to me, they don't really want to be storytellers. Because to be a storyteller means you have to separate yourself from the herd, and in their mind, that risks them getting picked off, right? Getting picked off by some predator. But the alternative is you're in the herd, which means you're forgettable. I mean, how many times have you gone to a conference, listened to someone speak, and by the time you're pulling into the driveway, you really can't remember anything that they said? Because that's what happens if we don't speak in story. Our minds are not designed to remember a pie chart or facts or statistics or platitudes or ideas that are not attached to imagery. So the risk you take if you're not telling stories is that you will be forgotten. 100%. You will be forgotten.

Lenny (00:00:54):
Today my guest is Matthew Dicks. Matthew is the author of my All-Time favorite book on storytelling Storyworthy, which a previous guest of the podcast recommended to me and I couldn't put it down. So I reached out to Matthew and got him on the podcast. Matthew is a 59-time Moth Story Slam winner, and nine-time Grand Slam champ. He's also the author of nine other books, including fictions, rock operas, even a comic book.

(00:01:20):
In his day job, he is an elementary school teacher and on the side teaches both individuals and teams at companies like Slack, Amazon, Lego, and Salesforce. The skill of storytelling and public speaking through his company speak up. In our conversation, we get very tactical about how to tell better stories both in life and in work, how to feel more comfortable speaking on stage, how to come up with story ideas that you can deploy when the need arises. Why every good story is centered around one five-second moment of transformation and so much more. Matt is an incredible human being and I am excited to spread his message more widely. If you're interested in this topic, definitely pick up his book, Storyworthy. It'll change your life. With that, I bring you Matthew Dicks, after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:09):
Today's episode is brought to you by OneSchema, the embeddable CSV importer for SaaS. Customers always seem to want to give you their data in the messiest possible CSV file. And building a spreadsheet importer becomes a never-ending sink for your engineering and support resources. You keep adding features to your spreadsheet importer, but customers keep running into issues. Six months later, you're fixing yet another date, conversion edge case bug. Most tools aren't built for handling messy data, but OneSchema is companies like ScaleAI and Pave are using OneSchema to make it fast and easy to launch delightful spreadsheet import experiences. From embeddable, CSV import to importing CSVs from an SFTP folder on a recurring basis. Spreadsheet import is such an awful experience in so many products. Customers get frustrated by useless messages like error on line 53, and never end up getting started with your product. OneSchema intelligently corrects messy data so that your customers don't have to spend hours in Excel just to get started with your product. For listeners of this podcast, Oneschema is offering a $1,000 discount. Learn more at Oneschema.co/lenny.

(00:03:15):
This episode is brought to you by Maui Nui Venison, a mission-based food company, bringing the healthiest red meat on the planet directly to your door. I actually joined Maui Nui Venison earlier this year after hearing their ad on the Tim Ferriss podcast, and I'm excited to be spreading the message further. Not only does this company provide the most nutrient-dense and protein-dense red meat available. Their operation produces the only stress-free 100% wild-harvested red meat on the market. That is the only one of its kind in the world. Actively managing Maui's invasive access to your populations, helping to restore balance to vulnerable ecosystems, food systems, and communities in Hawaii.

(00:03:52):
Also, it is seriously delicious. Not at all gamey and easy to cook. My wife and I made stew and steaks and all kinds of grilled goodies with the meat. We also feel great about it as a protein from an ethical standpoint. I highly recommend trying their all-natural venison jerky sticks for an optimal protein snack, as well as a wide variety of fresh cuts all available in their online butcher shop. There are limited memberships available, but you can sign up and get 20% off your first order at mauinuivenison.com/lenny. That's MauiNuiVenison.com/Lenny.

(00:04:28):
Matt, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Matthew Dicks (00:04:31):
It's my pleasure. I'm excited to be here.

Lenny (00:04:33):
I'm even more excited to have you on. The way I found out about you is a previous guest mentioned your book as a book that really transformed the way they think about storytelling and even marketing. And I completely agree. It's the most tactical, practical, also just entertaining book on just how to tell better stories. And when I was reading, I was just like, "Hey, what if I reach out to the author of this book and see if he'd come on?" And here we are.

Matthew Dicks (00:04:55):
I'm thrilled to be here, and I appreciate what you had to say. I tried to make my book as actionable as possible. I think the only reason I'm successful in what I do is that I've been a teacher for 25 years and I'm a storyteller. So the two of those things come together pretty well for me.

Lenny (00:05:12):
Okay, so I thought it'd be fun to start with maybe the most mind-expanding takeaway I got from this book, is this idea that all good stories are rooted in this five second moment of someone's life. Can you just talk about this insight and maybe share an example or two to make this real?

Matthew Dicks (00:05:28):
Sure. Well, that is true what you just said, which is essentially every story is about a singular moment. I call it five seconds. It can be one second honestly. It's a moment of either transformation, meaning I'm telling you a story about how I once used to be one kind of person and now I'm a new kind of person. Or more common is realization. Which is I used to think something and then some stuff happened and now I think a new thing. And those changes they take place overtime. Or really what happens is it's an accumulation of events and feelings and thoughts that ultimately result in a singular moment where that flip actually happens. And I think that's true for almost everyone. It feels like it took a long time, but there really was one second when you thought one thing and then the next second when you thought the new thing.

(00:06:19):
And the purpose of a story is essentially to bring that moment to the greatest clarity possible to the audience. So that the audience can, in a way experience that flip that transformation or realization along with the storyteller. So 98% of the story is the context to bring that singular moment into fruition. And that is true for stories that we tell out loud, stories we tell on the page, novels that I write, movies that I watch, television shows that I watch, all of the stories of the world that are worth hearing and truly just about every story told that qualifies as a story has one of those moments.

Lenny (00:06:58):
That's a big statement. Is there an example too, you could share of either stories we know or just tell a short story, whatever is easier to give people like, oh wow, you're totally right?

Matthew Dicks (00:07:06):
Sure. Well, I'll tell you one that happened actually today. How about that?

Lenny (00:07:09):
Amazing.

Matthew Dicks (00:07:10):
So I'm teaching math today. I'm an elementary school teacher and I'm teaching math, and I have a student in my class, her name is Eileen, and she's one of those kids that I worry about a little bit because she's got some anxiety. So she's not the most confident person in the world. And in September I was aware of this. So I've been working really hard at building confidence with her. And so today we're doing some math and I'm calling kids to the board, and I'm looking at Eileen and wondering, is today the day? Am I going to call Eileen to the board? Because doing so, there's a risk, there's inherent risk that she could be upset, she could embarrass herself in front of the class in a way that means something to her.

(00:07:52):
And I just wasn't sure. So I didn't call her to the board. And so at the end of the math lesson, I wandered over to her desk and I said, "So Eileen, I was thinking about calling you to the board today, but I just wasn't sure if you're there yet. What do you think?" And she said to me, "First of all, I don't like that cheeky smile of yours." And that is all I needed to hear. That was my five-second moment. That was the moment of realization where I understood that Eileen trusted me, felt confident enough in my classroom that she could be herself, that she could fire off a quip at a teacher, sort of take a shot at me. I knew at that point that now I can call her to the board, that she's going to be okay. So essentially it is a very brief story that I could actually expand into something much more meaningful.

(00:08:39):
I could make that into a five or six minute story about my journey with this student. Which would include, in the longer version of it, the steps that I took to discover who she was, the steps I took to help her reach the point she's at now. I would probably pull in some backstory about students who I was not so successful with. Some of my failures before I learned how to be a better teacher. And then I'd bring it to the moment where she says, first of all, I don't like that cheeky smile, and that's all I need to hear. So that is essentially a five-second moment for me. That is the same though as any other five-second moment. If you think about a movie like Star Wars, the first Star Wars that came out that is a movie essentially about religion, which people don't always see, but it is true.

(00:09:23):
There's a boy on a planet and he wants to go to space someday and fly a spaceship and use blasters to defeat the Empire. And along the way, he meets a religious figure to Obi-Wan Kenobi, and he introduces him to a religion called The Force. And when the final moment comes for Luke Skywalker to defeat the Empire, his vision of using technology, a spaceship and a blaster to destroy the Empire, all of that goes away, and he turns off his technology in his spaceship. Instead, he uses The Force to guide his weapon to defeat the enemy.

(00:09:56):
And that is a story about a boy who once had no religion, and then some stuff happened and he had religion in the end. And that's why a story like that resonates with us in a way that another story might not, because we all understand what it's like to not believe in something and then find belief in something. Whether that is religious belief or I used to think cheeseburgers didn't taste good, and now I believe that they taste good. Either way, we understand that process and we can connect with Luke Skywalker in a meaningful way. So every story essentially has those moments, including, "I don't like that cheeky smile."

Lenny (00:10:29):
With this moment, what's also interesting is you talk about how knowing that moment of change also tells you how the story will end. So as a storyteller, you'll know how it ends based on knowing what this moment is, which then also tells you how it's going to start roughly. Can you just talk about that realization? Because, to me, every time I watch a movie now I'm like, wow, I know exactly how it's going to turn out just from the beginning.

Matthew Dicks (00:10:53):
So we start as storytellers at the end. Well, we start at the end if we are telling true stories about ourselves or our companies or our products, things that we know. I'm also a fiction writer. So when I start my novels, that's much more self-discovery. I really don't know the end of it. But in the storytelling that we're talking about, you have to know the end because you've lived the moment, and the end forms everything. So you know what you're going to say. You found a moment worth speaking to, that five-second moment. And then whatever that moment is, in my case, I discover that Eileen has more confidence than I realized and is ready to take a big step forward. What's the opposite of me realizing Eileen has confidence and is ready to step forward? It is, Eileen does not have confidence, and I need to help her find that confidence.

(00:11:39):
So that's the opposites that will work in a story. Essentially, a story is about these two moments in time, a beginning and an end, and they're operating in opposition to each other. Sometimes more so than others, sometimes exactly an opposition. But you're right. If you watch a movie and you'll pay attention to the first 10 to 15 minutes of a movie, you will ultimately know how that movie's going to end. You'll see a character, you'll discover what that character needs or their flaw or their desire, and you know that that's going to be at the end. The easiest one is a romantic comedy. Two people are not in love at the beginning of the movie. You know they're going to be in love at the end of the movie. Even knowing it doesn't mean the story's ruined. We can get there in a very entertaining way. When Harry Met Sally, that movie, when it begins, Harry and Sally actually say they hate each other at the very beginning of the movie, "I Hate You, Harry," right?

(00:12:32):
I hate that man so much. We know they're going to end up together, and the journey is well worth the fact that we know what's going to happen at the end. So it ruins a little bit of storytelling for people who think like me and go, "Oh, well, I know where this is going." But you have to do it in an entertaining way filled with all the other things we talk about in storytelling. But yeah, every story should be essentially a beginning and an end and opposition to each other, and you should start at the end, that guarantees that you have something important to say rather than what most people do, which is they simply report on their lives. They just tell you stuff that happened over the course of time in some chronological way that ultimately doesn't lead to anything. You want to always be saying something of import. So we start at the end with that moment of import.

Lenny (00:13:21):
It's funny, as I was thinking of when Harry met Sally exactly as you were talking as an example, my wife wants to watch that movie basically every night. It's like the one movie she could just watch a billion times.

Matthew Dicks (00:13:31):
Well, that's the power of story. I tell people this all the time. Why are we telling stories? You've never asked to see a PowerPoint presentation a second time. You've never gone to bed and dreamt about a PowerPoint presentation. You've never heard someone give a keynote and thought, I hope I get to watch that keynote again tomorrow. But movies, you'll watch a movie a hundred times, because it's a story, and our minds are wired to enjoy story over and over and over again. You have a small child, right? Eventually you're going to be reading to that child when your baby's old enough and you're going to discover kids want to read the same book 50 times. They're really no different than adults except kid books are so small, you can read them endlessly. A movie takes two hours, so you don't get to read it as often as you might want or watch it as often as you might want. But Harry Met Sally comes on and you're halfway through. You're probably in. Even though every scene you can probably do the dialogue. We're wired for story. That's why it's so important.

Lenny (00:14:28):
Why is something changing so important? Why is that so critical to a good story, someone having a change or transforming?

Matthew Dicks (00:14:35):
Well, I think that actual moment of transformation lends importance to the story and allows the audience to connect to it. If I report it on my day to you, my day teaching in a classroom, I am unlikely to connect with you unless you are also a teacher and you experienced things similar to me. My wife is a kindergarten teacher. I'm a fifth grade teacher. If both of us report on our day, oddly, we will not really connect very often. She is teaching them how to write the letter C, and I am teaching them how to use the standard algorithm in multiplication. They could not be further apart.

(00:15:11):
So reporting on the moments that you have experienced in the day is not a way to connect to people. But when we talk about change, change has a great universal appeal. So you might not be a teacher who's trying to teach someone to find confidence in their life, but you might be a person who once lacked confidence and then found confidence in the way Eileen did. Or you might be a parent or the boss of someone who is trying to bring confidence to your child or your employee, your salesperson, whatever it is. When we do change, when we're focused in on that change, we increase exponentially the universal appeal to the story and our ability to connect to an audience. Even though the content we're speaking about has nothing to do with them, the actual emotional appeal will cause people to connect to us.

Lenny (00:16:00):
Fascinating. So building on that same thread of change, you also have this kind of checklist for what makes a good story. What is a good story, and I think it's only a three point checklist. One is there's a change that happens. Can you talk about the other two? I think there's only other two.

Matthew Dicks (00:16:16):
Well, the dinner test is probably one that you're thinking of.

Lenny (00:16:19):
Yeah, that's right.

Matthew Dicks (00:16:20):
So the dinner test is the idea that when you're telling a story in a formal way, if you're performing on a stage or delivering a keynote or even delivering a pitch to entrepreneurs or a sales pitch, essentially the story that you're telling should be very closely related to the story you would tell someone if you were having dinner. So there should be no performance art included within your story or within your talk. So weird things that people do should not be done. Like opening a story with unattributed dialogue. So you're standing on stage and you open your story with, "Jim, it's time to come in for dinner." My wife said, that's just weird. We don't talk like that as regular people, so you should not speak like that ever. In the history of the world, you should never speak like that. But people do it all the time.

(00:17:12):
It's this weird appendage from childhood when bad writing teachers thought that this was a good idea, or you start with a sound, which is very popular in first grade. You teach kids to start with sound, mostly because teachers are not writers, so they don't understand what writing actually is. And so they open with stories, with things like, bang, the door opened. But if you and I were having dinner and you said, "Hey, how was your day, Matt?" And I said, "Well, let me tell you Lenny. Bang, the door opened." You would not have dinner with me again.

(00:17:41):
So you have to be thinking that this is a slightly elevated version of the dinner story. Meaning you're probably not going to be interrupted in the middle of your story. And you want to have a little more shape to it, and you want to avoid some of the verbal detritus that tends to fill our lives. You don't want to be saying, you know, and like I said, all of that nonsense should get pushed to the side, but essentially people should feel like you're kind of speaking in a very natural way. So the dinner test is pretty important in that regard.

Lenny (00:18:09):
Awesome. Yeah, so the lesson there is when you're telling a story, make it sure that it's something that you could potentially tell at a dinner party. Slightly elevated is the way you put it.

Matthew Dicks (00:18:18):
Slightly elevated. Exactly.

Lenny (00:18:19):
I think the third point you make is that it has to be your story. You can't be telling a story on behalf of someone else. Maybe chat about that briefly?

Matthew Dicks (00:18:25):
So if you're telling a story about someone else, essentially, you might as well be telling fiction. Because that person's not in the room, and to the audience, they don't really exist. If they can't see them, that person is just another human being who supposedly lives somewhere in the world or once lived in the world. And because of that, you are almost unable to express any vulnerability in your story. You can't reveal anything about yourself. And one of the key parts of storytelling is to be vulnerable with your audience. Meaning I'm going to say stuff in a meaningful way. I might say stuff that most people are unwilling to share in a public way, but I'm at least going to offer up a little bit of my heart and mind. If I offer up the heart and mind of someone else that doesn't really require any vulnerability.

(00:19:09):
The only vulnerability is I have to stand in front of people and talk, which I know is challenging for some people, but that doesn't mean anything to the audience. We don't care if you're having a hard time presenting, if it's making you nervous. That doesn't mean much to an audience. What we really want is someone to open up their hearts and minds. So stories have to be about you in some way. There's tricks where you can tell stories about other people by taking that story and centering on yourself.

(00:19:36):
One of the examples, I work with the children and grandchildren of Holocaust survivors, and in the past, what they would do is they would just tell the story of the Holocaust survivor who has often at this point passed away, and it really does feel like fiction. A long time ago in a place that wasn't this a terrible thing happened. And there's a certain level of empathy and sympathy that you might feel. But what I teach them to do is to tell stories about themselves. And then at some point in the story about themselves, they're going to talk about how the experience of their parent or grandparent during the Holocaust has informed or changed their own life too. So they get to dip into some history, but that history is relevant to the storyteller. So it's no longer history. It's now something changed in me because something terrible happened to my parent or grandparent.

Lenny (00:20:24):
Just as a tangent, you also have this funny, useful checklist for how to tell vacation stories?

Matthew Dicks (00:20:30):
Well, first try not to, right?

Lenny (00:20:32):
I think that's step one. Do not tell vacation stories.

Matthew Dicks (00:20:34):
Most vacation stories are just simply a recounting of your vacation at the expense of another person. So unless something happened on that vacation where you experienced one of these five second fundamental moments of change, nobody cares about your vacation. And if something did happen, only be talking about the moment when it happened. So if I had a moment of change that took place on a Thursday night at dinner, that story is now going to take place on the Thursday night at dinner, and it's irrelevant that I'm in Aruba.

(00:21:07):
The fact that I am on vacation is almost completely irrelevant to the story, other than I may want to offer my location. But I'm not going to talk about the beach the day before or the scuba diving or the plane. All of that goes away. We're telling moments in our lives, and it doesn't matter where they happen. If your location is paramount to your story because you want people to know you were in Aruba, then you have to understand, no one actually cares that you were in Aruba and you're just a terrible person for trying to dump that on someone and use up their time so you can relive your vacation and perhaps humble brag about how much fun you had.

Lenny (00:21:46):
This will be a good segment for people to send their friends if they want to tell them their vacation stories. And here's a tip for how to do this better.

Matthew Dicks (00:21:51):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:21:52):
And just understand why it needs to be on a Thursday in that dinner, is the advice there? Keep it very focused and small, unless there's some really essential reason to share the context around the dinner.

Matthew Dicks (00:22:03):
Yeah, exactly. The shortest version of every story is the best version of every story. Starting as close to the end of a story is always the best place to begin. So if I had a moment of realization during dessert in a restaurant in Aruba, I may never tell them I'm in Aruba. I might start my story with, the dessert hits the table, and my wife says something that causes me to begin thinking, and that would be the beginning of the story. The fact that I'm on an island in the Caribbean may never come up in the entire story because it doesn't turn out to be relevant to the story.

Lenny (00:22:39):
There's a lesson that another guest shared, West Cow about... She calls it, When The Bear Starts Eating Your Tent, or something like that. Jump to when the bear is eating your tent. Don't do this whole introduction to why or how you got to this tent. It's just like the bear is eating our tent. That's where the story should start.

Matthew Dicks (00:22:54):
Yes, Kurt Vonnegut said that. Kurt Vonnegut said, "Start as close to the end as possible." He was talking about short stories written on the page, but it is a true notion in oral storytelling too. And it is, of all the things I help people with their stories, the most frequent suggestion that I make for revision is you've started your story in the wrong place.

Lenny (00:23:16):
I want to shift to business context advice. But before we do that, there's another really important element of storytelling, which is having stakes and having important stakes. So could you just talk about what is a stake and why is it important to have stakes? And then just what are examples of adding stakes to your story to make them more encouraging?

Matthew Dicks (00:23:32):
Sure. So stakes are essentially what your audience should be worried about, what they should be wanting for you, what they should be concerned about, what they should be wondering about. If your audience isn't wondering what you're about to say, they're no longer listening to you. And you have to internalize that in a deep and fundamental way. When I work with people in business, they are constantly under this misconception that people want to hear what they have to say. Some vice president of marketing thinks that because they're a vice president of marketing and everyone is sitting in a chair and looking at them, that they automatically have that audience's attention. I assume all the time, 100% of the time, that no one wants to hear anything I have to say. And so I am relentless in my attempt to get the audience to be constantly wondering what the next sentence is.

(00:24:17):
And stakes are a big part of that. Stakes are, I wonder what's going to happen next. I'm worried about this guy. Will he get what he wants? Will he get his comeuppance? Because he seems like a kind of a jerk in this story. All of those things are stakes. What is at stake for the storyteller, the company, the product, whatever it is, and therefore what the audience is worried about as well.

(00:24:39):
It's why Star Wars opens with a big spaceship shooting at a small spaceship. We don't even know who's on it yet, but we're already on the small spaceship side. We're already worried that a small spaceship is being shot at by a big spaceship, right? That's why stories start this way. Alfred Hitchcock has a movie where it opens with a police officer is chasing a man across a roof. We don't know who to root for, but something is at stake here. And now we're wondering what's going to happen next. We have to do the same thing with our ordinary true life everyday stories. We have to put stakes into stories.

Lenny (00:25:12):
There's something that you teach around surprise and the power of surprise as a part of stakes. I forget exactly what that is, but does that ring a bell?

Matthew Dicks (00:25:19):
Well, I'll separate them really. So with stakes, there's lots of ways to insert stakes. I always say you should have, what I call an elephant at the beginning of the story, which is actually a big spaceship shooting at a little spaceship or a police officer chasing a guy across a roof. We have to immediately know that something is at stakes. We have to be worried about something. In my little Eileen story that I told you, I said, I'm teaching math and I've got this student and I'm worried about her, because I want to call her to the board, but I know she might lack some confidence. Right away, I have to make it clear what kind of story we're at. In a movie, you get a trailer. You don't often go to a movie and not have any awareness about what's about to happen. But when you open your mouth to begin telling a story, nobody knows what you're going to say. You need to land something immediately that...

Matthew Dicks (00:26:00):
Nobody knows what you're going to say. You need to land something immediately that causes an audience to go, "Oh, okay, well what's going to happen here?" So that's an elephant. That's like plant some big thing in the beginning of a story. It doesn't actually have to be what the story's about either. Sometimes it takes a little time to get to what the story's about, but you plant something there to at least get the audience to be worried, and then you can use some other tricks. I call something called a backpack, which is, you tell the audience what your plan is before you carry out your plan so that they sort of have your hopes and dreams packed up with them as well. If you watch an Ocean's 11 movie, you know what the plan is before they go into the casino. So as the plan goes awry, you can go, "Oh no," because you know what the plan is.

(00:26:42):
If you didn't know what the plan was, you would not be able to go, "Oh no." So that's loading your audience with your hopes and dreams so that they can feel those stakes. They can actually be hoping for you as well. There's things like breadcrumbs where you offer a little bit of what's going on, but not the complete idea, sort of drop a hint. The classic one is sort of the gun. There's a gun in the room, and there's a gun in the room, and it seems like it's not going to be relevant, but if you have a gun in the room, it's going to eventually go off. There's something going on there. That's like a bread crumb. Eventually we're going to get to that gun. Don't worry, it's going to happen. There's hourglasses, which is when you get to the moment where everyone is about to discover what's going to happen. That's the moment to slow time down.

(00:27:28):
You load your story with details because suddenly you know have the audience on the edge of their seat, and you want to leave them on the edge of their seat as long as possible. When I know my audience wants to hear the next sentence, that is when I prolong the arrival of the next sentence by I say turning over an hourglass and letting the sand run for a while, and making them wait for it. There's crystal balls where you can predict a future. You don't have to predict an accurate future. You can just predict any future. So I could have said something in the Eileen story like, "If I get this wrong, Eileen is going to begin to cry. She's going to cry in front of 22 kids, 22 kids who for the rest of the year will continue to stare at this girl, and remember the moment she cried." That's a crystal ball.

(00:28:10):
That's me predicting a terrible future. Because I put that terrible future in the audience's mind, now they're worried. So that is a stake. I have planted a false stake, a false future, but they're going to be worried about it because it's also a realistic future. So all of those things are used to continue to get the audience to wonder what's going to happen next, which is a little different than surprise. Surprise is just that beautiful, delightful, amazing moment where the audience didn't see something coming, and then it was almost like it was inevitable. Surprise happens, and they understand why it happened. I think it's the best thing you can ever offer an audience, is a moment of surprise. And every story has a surprise, at least one. Because whenever we suddenly realize something for the first time, I hate the word suddenly, but what happens is we used to not think something, and then we think a new thing, and that's often a surprise for us if we make it a surprise for the audience too, that's a delightful thing. So surprise is so powerful, and wonderful, and always ruined by storytellers.

Lenny (00:29:11):
I was just listening to an interview with, I think his name is David Mamet, and he made this point that endings of books and movies always has to be both inevitable, and also complete surprise.

Matthew Dicks (00:29:21):
Yes, both of those things. So inevitable means there has to be enough information placed earlier in the story so that when the surprise happens, the audience goes, "Yes." But also you have to be clever enough to plant that information in such a way that the audience doesn't see the surprise coming. You build information into the audience's mind that will allow the surprise to land in an inevitable and yet surprising way. That is the best surprise you can offer someone.

Lenny (00:29:51):
Easier said than done.

Matthew Dicks (00:29:52):
Yes, well, there's lots of tricks to do that as well, but it takes some time. But essentially what you end up doing is, you're hiding the information that they need to know in a multitude of ways so that when it lands, they go, "Oh my gosh, ABCD." They don't connect it until the surprise hits, and then they go, "Of course, ABCD." So you place ABCD in a story, but you don't place it in such a way that they can connect the dots until you want them to connect the dots.

Lenny (00:30:20):
I feel that's a whole other hour of podcast conversation to figure that out.

Matthew Dicks (00:30:23):
That's like ninja level next level storytelling, which is very teachable. Everything I say is very, very teachable and doable by anybody, but yes, it's a trickier thing to accomplish.

Lenny (00:30:35):
Okay, that'll be for a second podcast episode. Just to summarize, you shared I think five ways add stakes. Just to summarize; one is crystal ball. You basically predict the bad thing that'll happen if you don't do this thing. Hourglass, which is when something is about to happen slow time down. I think of Pulp Fiction and Tarantino in this often of just like, you know some violence is about to happen, and they go next door, and like, "Let's just eat a cheeseburger," instead for a while. And then this backpack idea of they know exactly what you're trying to do, and it's on you and the entire movie. Breadcrumbs where you give them a little bit of information along the way. I think maybe that's it. Maybe there's one more.

Matthew Dicks (00:31:12):
And then the elephant at the beginning.

Lenny (00:31:14):
Oh, the elephant, just like the big ol', here's the steak. I wish-

Matthew Dicks (00:31:16):
You got to have something.

Lenny (00:31:18):
I heard some advice in either your book, a different book about adding stakes is just drop a dead body. Every new dead body is additional stakes that are added to the story. I don't know how often people can do that in random stories.

Matthew Dicks (00:31:30):
But what you can take from that is, so often people load the front end of a story with all of the stakes because they're worried that the audience will not pay attention to them. So they think I'm going to throw everything right in front, and that'll hold an audience for the rest of the story, and that's a mistake. What we want is stakes continually to build throughout a story. So dropping a dead body really means, drop a new steak, don't load it all, don't front load it, give us something to wonder about, and then gauge when we need the next thing to wonder about, and spread out those stakes. We need most of the stakes to occur within the first half of a story. Ideally, the second half of the story is now the rollercoaster to the end. So we might drop one in there at an appropriate time, or just through plot. Sometimes they just happen to need to be in a place. But so often I hear people front load stakes because they're worried about audience attention.

Lenny (00:32:21):
Just to give people something concrete to think about when they're thinking about this area. Is there a story of yours that's online that we can point people to see an example of really good stakes in action?

Matthew Dicks (00:32:31):
So the one that I reference in my book, which you can go watch online is, Charity Thief. It needs a lot of stakes because two thirds of the story nothing really happens. Two thirds of the story is explaining how I end up on a porch. So that's not super entertaining unless I build in lots of stakes along the way. I'm not inventing anything, I'm just presenting the actual events in a way that makes you wonder what's going to happen next. So there's an elephant at the beginning of that story, which is actually not what the story's about because I say the elephant can change colors along the way, but I give you something to wonder about along the way. I know I use a backpack, and I use a breadcrumb, and an hourglass, and a crystal ball. I do it all in that story mostly because it's not super entertaining.

(00:33:19):
Some stories you don't have to worry so much about. I perform as a stripper in the break room of a McDonald's restaurant when I'm 19 years old for a bachelorette party. There are stakes in that story, but I don't need to put any of them in because everybody wants to know what's going to happen already. Sometimes you just have a story that the stakes are already pre-built because the ridiculousness of the moment. But most of our stories are not like that. Most of them are far more benign, and we have to jack up the stakes by using some tricks to get people to the point we want them to be in.

Lenny (00:33:50):
That stripper story I've also watched, and I'll point to it, and I love, it's connected to another piece of advice you always shared. People just say yes to stuff, at the power of yes. I don't want to get into it yet, I want to come back to that.

Matthew Dicks (00:34:00):
True.

Lenny (00:34:00):
We'll leave that breadcrumb but I love that point. Okay, so let's transition to helping people in business learn all these skills, and translate them to becoming better in their work. And maybe actually to add some stakes, what benefits do people get/what problems do they run into if they aren't great at storytelling versus if they learn the skill, and can implement it at work? What happens, what good things come out of that?

Matthew Dicks (00:34:25):
Well, if you don't tell stories as part of your business, whether you're looking for investment, or speaking to your people, or speaking to customers, or clients, anything, if you're not telling stories, the good news is, you're just like everybody else. The bad news is, you're mediocre just like everybody else. You're in a lane that everyone else is in, which means that you're going to be forgettable. I often say most communication in business is round white and flavorless intentionally so because a lot of people are afraid to stand out. When I try to get people to tell stories, everyone loves the word storytelling in business. It's a huge buzzword. They love to think of themselves as storytellers, but when they come to me, they don't really want to be storytellers because to be a storyteller means you have to separate yourself from the herd, and in their mind that risks them getting picked off, getting picked off by some predator.

(00:35:18):
But the alternative is, you're in the herd, which means you're forgettable. How many times have you gone to a conference, listened to someone speak, and by the time you're pulling into the driveway you really can't remember anything that they said? My wife and I actually attended an educational conference recently. She's a teacher, I'm a teacher. There was a bunch of speakers. The first person came out with his childhood lunchbox, put it on a table, and told a story about how his parents had nothing while he was growing up. And yet they somehow kept him in new shoes, and a new backpack every year, and sent him to school with a lunch every day, and how much it meant to him, and how as an educator today he thinks about every single kid in his class like he was, a kid who had nothing except for all of his parents' hopes and dreams.

(00:36:04):
I'll never forget that story. It was a story. It was a story of vulnerability, and humor and meaning. There was another person who spoke, a sort of executive we'll say, and he did a great job in terms of being fluent, and presenting ideas, and speaking well, and speaking confidently. And 15 minutes after the conference I said to my wife who is a teacher and understands storytelling because we do it together.

(00:36:27):
I said, "What'd you think?" She said, "Well, I'm never going to forget that guy with the lunchbox." I said, "I will not either." I said, "What'd you think about the other guy?" And she goes, "He was great." I said, "So what did he say?" Five teen minutes after, and she went, "I actually can't tell you a single thing he said." This is a woman who's a teacher, and invested in storytelling and communication. Her impression was, he was fluent, he was amusing, he said some numbers, he said some things that seemed to mean something. But it was all forgotten because that's what happens if we don't speak in story. Our minds are not designed to remember a pie chart, or facts, or statistics, or platitudes, or ideas that are not attached to imagery. So the risk you take if you're not telling stories is that you will be forgotten, 100% you will be forgotten.

Lenny (00:37:18):
When people hear this, they may think, "Oh man, there's this guy at work, and he's always telling stories." And we're like, "Shut up." Just tell me what we need to do to make it a little more real of just what does storytelling look like where it's not annoying. It's not like, "Okay, everyone, gather around. Let me tell you the story of our vision." What are some simpler ways, and maybe non-annoying ways to think about what storytelling looks like in the workplace that's not just like a public speaking like, "Hey, everyone, I'm going to give you."

Matthew Dicks (00:37:43):
Let me give a couple of examples. I have a storytelling book coming out next year on business. So there's a couple of heroes in that story. One of them is named Boris. His name's Boris Levin, he is a factory owner here in Connecticut. He's the one who convinced me I could start working with businesses. I thought it was just a storyteller who spoke about himself on a stage. Boris one day saw me for some fundraiser and said, "Listen, I want you to come and help me." I said, "I can't do that. I just tell. I'm using stories about myself." He said, "No, no, you can help me." And it turns out he was totally right. So Boris has done it the right way. Boris has decided to become a storyteller who will then translate his stories into his business.

(00:38:19):
So a great example was, one of Boris's early stories, he came to me, and he said, "My son was at bat in the Little League Championship game. The bases were loaded, if my son got a hit, the team was going to win the championship. And if my son struck out, the team would lose the championship." It's a three and two count. It is like the ultimate baseball moment, and his son strikes out. He watches his son drag that bat back to the dugout. He's devastated. His son's devastated and Boris is devastated. So he is trying to collect himself so he can figure out the right thing to say to a boy who's just lost the championship for his team. By the time he makes it onto the other side of the field to catch up with his son, he sees his son running up a hill with his friends, and they're already laughing.

(00:39:09):
They're heading to the cars so they can go to ice cream, and they can enjoy themselves. So Boris is falling apart. He's still devastated, but his son has already moved past the failure. Boris takes that story, and he crafts it as a beautiful story that he could tell on a stage, and perform and make, an audience laugh and cry. Once the story's done, he says to me, "So what are we going to do with it? How are we going to apply this to business?" And ultimately what happens is this, he's got a sales team. And quite often salespeople do not land the big account they're hoping to land, and Boris knows that when his salespeople fail to achieve what they want to achieve, they will often sulk for days. They'll wander around the office, and be useless because they're still trying to get past the fact that they just lost the million dollar contract.

(00:39:56):
So he tells the story about his son, and he says, "Listen, there's nothing wrong with being sad, being upset with failure, but we cannot allow it to slow us down as much as we are right now. We have to think about my son. My son dragged his bat back to the dugout. He sat down, he sighed, his buddies patted him on the back, he collected himself, and he moved on. That's what we need to do. When we fail we're going to take a moment to collect ourselves, to think about the mistakes we made, to decide what we're going to do differently, and then we're going to move on." That becomes a really important moment in his company.

(00:40:32):
It's much better than him standing up in front of his people and saying, "Listen, every time you guys fail to land a big sale, you wander around this office like you're dead, and you're wasting our time. It ends today. Today from now on when you fail, you're going to move on." The story becomes something meaningful to everyone because it reveals something about Boris. He's a father, he's a father who cares about his son. He's the kind of father that most of us are in life. He shares of himself with his people, and he creates a tangible vision of what the sales team can do. He does that all the time. He comes to me, and he's not looking to solve problems through story. He's looking to develop stories that he can then deploy into his business. So I compare it, I say, band-aids versus bricks. If you're building bricks, you're a storyteller that's capturing stories and building bricks, then you can eventually deploy into business. If you're a band-aid person, which is fine, that happens. "I have a problem, Matt, and I need a story to solve it."

(00:41:34):
Essentially what I'm doing there is I'm putting a band-aid over a problem, but you're not becoming a better storyteller. You're just using me as a consultant to help you generate a story that will solve a problem. That's fine, but you're going to need me the next time too. You're going to keep needing me because you're not really becoming a storyteller. Boris is building bricks. He is building a vault of stories that he can then deploy into his business. He understands how to tell them, and how to connect them to business. So that's something that you can do very easily.

(00:42:02):
Another example, the other star of my book is a woman named Marsha Rakofsky. She used to be the director of corporate communications at Slack, and now she's sort of doing work on her own. But when she was with Slack, she and I were working closely together, and she had to create the narrative that was going to compete against Microsoft Teams. Essentially, Microsoft came along and said, "Hey, we copied your product and it's free, and everybody already has it."

(00:42:25):
So Slack had to find a way to combat that, and Marsha was the one in charge of doing it. That's why we connected. She found me and said, "I need to tell a good story. Please help me tell a good story." So she crafted a brilliant narrative that worked fantastically. We worked really closely together, and it came out great. The way she came up with that narrative was a Tuesday night. She had broken up with her boyfriend, she was alone. She was feeling pretty lonely. It was in the midst of the pandemic. She had two glasses of wine in her, sitting alone on a Tuesday night, she suddenly had an inspiration. She wrote three words down on a napkin, and those three words become the story that we develop that allows Slack to compete against Microsoft.

(00:43:04):
When it comes time to her present that narrative, I say, "You're going to include the Tuesday night and the two glasses of wine, and all that, right?" And she's like, "No, I'm not. That's not what we do in the corporate world. We do not insert ourselves into our narratives." And to her credit, she didn't put it in, and it still worked brilliantly. She was fine. But about a month later, she was presenting that same narrative to a smaller group, lower stakes. I said, "Let's just put it in, just try it this time." And to her everlasting credit, she did. She put in a 30-second anecdote about Tuesday night, two glasses of wine, feeling lonely in the middle of a pandemic.

(00:43:42):
She said to me later, "I can't believe the difference that that 30 second anecdote meant to the narrative. Because suddenly when I reached the end of the narrative, people wanted to talk to me. People came up to me, and the first thing they said was," "Oh God, I remember I was feeling the same way during the pandemic."

(00:43:59):
People connected to her because instead of being a corporate monolith, sort of like Slack spokesperson without personality, which is what we tend to be in business, she was an actual human being who had an inspiration on the Tuesday night, and then was bringing it forth in a meaningful way to an audience. And from that point on, she always has been doing those things in storytelling. She's always looking for a way in her narratives to insert herself, or if she's working with a client, let's find a way that we can work the client into the story as well. Because people don't want to hear spokespeople present information. They want to hear human beings connect with you, and then offer you something that perhaps will have value.

Lenny (00:44:41):
That is a really interesting lesson. So is your advice just when you're telling stories in business, try to find a way to make it personal about you as the person telling the story?

Matthew Dicks (00:44:50):
Yeah. I have this tool I use with corporate folks called, a personal interest inventory. It is a list of all the things that you should be saying about yourself in clever and strategic ways that I teach. Each one of them has an addressable market. So how many people could this potentially hit? And then the intensity of the connection. So for example, if you're married, you should always make it clear to people you're married, especially if you're a man. Because if you're a man, and you're married, you're safer in the world because men are inherently just dangerous human beings. We just are. If you hear that there was a shooting, you never think, "Oh, I wonder if that was a twenty-three- year-old blonde woman." You know who did the shooting almost all the time. So if you're married, what you're essentially saying to people is, someone has agreed to spend theoretically their life with me.

(00:45:41):
It's like a validation that I have, at least hygiene and some decency. Most people are in a committed relationship so that means that a total addressable market is large. If I say I'm married, you're either married also, or you're in a committed relationship. So the connection is going to be large. The total addressable market is large. The possible connection, probably moderate. I say it's like, "It's okay." But weird ones are like runners. I'm not a runner, and there's not a lot of runners in the world. But if you're a marathoner, your total addressable market is very small. There's not that many marathoners. But if you happen to find a marathoner, the intensity of that connection is enormous. Marathoners are almost automatically friends upon meeting what I've discovered. If you're just, "Oh, you ran a marathon? I ran a marathon." They're best friends already.

(00:46:32):
So if you've run a marathon, and you're in a room and you discover someone else's run a marathon, you have to find a way to bring that out because the possibility of that connection is incredibly intense. So as a person in the corporate world, you should not be seeking to be round, white and flavorless. You should be seeking to be full of color, and full of edge, and full of flavor. You want to be an individual that people remember as opposed to what most people are trying to be, which is, I am just operating this corporate, or this business sphere, and I'm not trying to stand out, which is just a foolish thing to want to do.

Lenny (00:47:07):
I could see why people wouldn't naturally do this. If I'm a head of comms for a company, the last thing I want is to make it about me. And what you're saying is, you actually should, because people will find it a lot more interesting.

Matthew Dicks (00:47:20):
Yeah, you don't want to make it all about you, but there's just little tricks. The easiest trick is, if someone asks you, "How are you doing today?" If you say, " I'm doing great," you've just really screwed it up. That's the stupidest answer you can offer. If you ask me, "How am I doing today," I'm immediately going to think to myself, elementary school teacher is probably my best personal interest inventory item. Because if I'm an elementary school teacher, everyone loves me. They think I'm doing God's work, even though they don't want to pay me a dime to do it. So if you say, "How are you doing today?" I will say to you, "Pretty good. My fifth graders were actually decent human beings today. They didn't try to kill me."

(00:48:01):
So in that way, I'm going to slip in the fact that I'm an elementary school teacher by answering your question, I'm going to demonstrate a bit of amusing content in the process, and maybe a little self deprecation. But whenever I'm asked a question, I am trying to include an item of my personality, my life, something that might be of interest to people while also answering the question. You don't want to walk into a situation and say, "Hi, I'm a married elementary school teacher with two kids and two cats." But that's what I want to do because I know that that's going to make people feel connected to me. So I have to find strategic ways to work it in. I teach people to do it all the time. But it starts with understanding what about you might mean something to other people, and how can I get it in there without me sounding like I'm only talking about myself?

Lenny (00:48:48):
What else? So we're basically talking about ways to become a better communicator and storyteller in business. You've shared a few tidbits here. One is, think of this personal inventory about yourself that makes you relatable. Try to share it in stories you tell, and presentations, and things like that. What else can people do to become better storytellers in business? I know this is a big question, but let's see where it goes.

Matthew Dicks (00:49:07):
Let's go back to the idea that in business, you have to accept the fact that nobody wants to hear anything you have to say, that is not accepted by most people, even after I say it. So once you understand that, and once you truly believe it, there's essentially four ways to keep people listening to you in any story really, but especially in business, because really no one wants to listen to you in business. So the first is stakes, which we've really talked about already. You have to have stakes. In every good product story and every good PowerPoint... Everything, there are stakes, and they're set out and exactly the way I've described. All five of the stakes that I've described to you that I use in that story, Charity Thief can also be used in every business story, every PowerPoint deck, every entrepreneur pitch, everything. So stakes is one of them.

(00:49:52):
Another one we've talked about is, surprise. I should absolutely be surprised in every talk that you give. Steve Jobs was a master of it. We could look at one of his talks, and I could show you how he planned it perfectly. Some others include suspense. So keeping an audience in suspense, and often suspense leads to surprise. So mastering the ability to be suspenseful. And then humor, daring to be funny, which no one in corporate America can do. Everyone wants to be funny. Every person I've ever met, who I've worked with, every business person in some way wanted to be funny, but that's really not actually what they want. They want to have been funny, because being funny means you must take a risk. You must say something that you believe is funny, and you expect an audience to also feel it's funny, and if it doesn't happen, that hurts.

(00:50:43):
So people oftentimes tell me they want to be funny, but when I tell them how they need to be funny, they say, "Well, I can't say that." And then I say, "Well, that's the part that's funny." So I was working with a guy, sort of an executive at a company that you interact with every day. He was delivering a talk at the Javits Center, and he was going to be funny. We built in a talk, lots of jokes. He was ready to go. He went to the Javits Center, and four hours later he called me, and I said, "How'd it go?" He said, "I pulled out all the jokes." I said, "Why did you pull out all the jokes?" He said, "The first two speakers weren't funny at all. I felt like if I went on stage and I was funny, I was going to stick out like a sore thumb."

(00:51:27):
I said, "No, you were going to rise from the ashes like a phoenix that everyone has been waiting to hear all day." It's the best thing in the world to follow two terrible people, and then go out there and land some jokes. But again, he thought, I have to stay within the confines of the herd rather than doing something different. But humor is a brilliant, and beautiful, and simple way to differentiate yourself from other people, but you have to be willing to try to do it. It's a scary thing for people. But I say it stakes, it's surprise, it's suspense, and it's humor. Those are the ways that you're going to.

Matthew Dicks (00:52:00):
Stakes, it's surprise, it's suspense, and it's humor. Those are the ways that you're going to hold people and keep them listening. And if you're not engaged in one of those four things while you're speaking, people are not listening to you anymore.

Lenny (00:52:12):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate your growth. Thousands of fast-growing companies like Gusto, Calm, Cora, and Modern Treasury trust Vanta to help build, scale, manage and demonstrate their security and compliance programs and get ready for audits in weeks, not months. By offering the most in-demand, security and privacy frameworks such as SOC 2, ISO 27001, GDPR, HIPAA, and many more. Vanta helps companies obtain the reports they need to accelerate growth, build efficient compliance processes, mitigate risks to their businesses, and build trust with external stakeholders. Over 5,000 fast-growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2 and these other frameworks. For a limited time, Lenny's Podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Go to vanta.com/lenny, that's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discounts. Get started today. To follow this thread on humor which I was going to ask, what do you tell people to become more funny? What are some tricks?

Matthew Dicks (00:53:17):
Well, I have currently 26 strategies to be funny. Some are better for business than others. I will give you two that we can use in business all the time. The first one you can use is nostalgia, because nostalgia is always funny. The fact that the first VCR I had was 22 pounds and had a remote control attached by a cord that was thick enough that I could trip my brother as he walked through the living room is funny. The fact that I grew up and no one was allergic to anything and we all ate bread, packed with gluten and baked in asbestos factories and no one ever wore a helmet while they rode their bike. All of these things can be made to be funny. And it's so easy in business because oftentimes you are rolling out a new product or a new service or you're updating a product or service in a way that allows you to speak nostalgically about the past.

(00:54:09):
I was working with this company and they failed me. They did not listen to my advice which was a mistake. They're like an Indeed company. They're helping find employees for companies they're one of these people. And I wanted to start their narrative with the idea of in 1983, the primary source of employment was a 16-year- old kid riding on the back of a Schwinn, throwing newspapers at doors. And in that newspaper, which was like a paper version of the internet, you would turn to the back page and on that page there was the help wanted ads. And that was essentially all you had to find a job in 1983. Everything was geographically based, meaning you only could look into three or four towns around you to find a job. And it had to be in the paper and you had to own a phone connected to a wall so you could call a company within business hours and hope to get an interview.

(00:55:03):
All of the power lived with the employers in 1983 and a 16-year-old who was dropping a newspaper off at your porch every day. That's funny. Again, I didn't even try to be funny with it. I just stated the facts. We could have punched that up and made it really funny. And then we flip the script again, the opposites in story. In the beginning, employers had all the power. Today, employees have all the power. Because today you can work in Singapore or Chattanooga, while you're living in Orlando. And today you don't have to wait for a 16-year-old to deliver the paper with all of your job opportunities. Every single job opportunity on the planet is now accessible to you on the internet. And you can work basically anywhere from anywhere. So that's why we need companies like Indeed or the company I was working for, because they have to actually gain some power for the employers.

(00:55:57):
So that was the narrative we were going to tell, and the beginning would've been funny. And the CEO of the company said, "I don't like it." He said, "Nobody cares about the 1980s." Which was the dumbest thing he could have said because Stranger Things was the biggest television show on television at the time, which was nothing. But in 1980s. And if he just looked around, he would see that 1980s fashion is coming back. 1980s music is being popularized again. We're remaking 1980s music all the time. Taylor Swift put out an album called 1989. Whether or not the 1980s are relevant or not, it's relevant to talk about the past as a company to demonstrate your expertise in your field. To understand that we know the market backwards and forwards for the last 50 years. We have expertise and we can demonstrate it by telling a story. So that's the power of nostalgia and we can use that all the time in business to make people laugh.

(00:56:50):
The other one I'll give you, again, there's a whole bunch, but a simple one is a game they used to play on Sesame Street, which is one of these things that's not like the other. Essentially it's three things. Two of them are expected and one is unexpected, and the unexpected one will be funny. So you can say like, well, my competitor, they have this. My hardware competitor, the guy down the street, he does sell shovels just like I do. That's true. And he does offer a wide selection of nails just like I do. But there's a nameless, faceless machine at the front of the store that you have to swipe your own stuff through and your credit card, there's not actually a human being in the store. And we can make that funny by showing that the third one is unlike the other two. So it's essentially a simple game once I've told it to you, you'll see every comic do it all the time. They just say thing that's expected, thing that's expected, unexpected thing, and you make it funny. So it's a simple trick that we use in business all the time.

Lenny (00:57:52):
This is awesome. This list you're talking about, is this going to be in your new book that you're writing?

Matthew Dicks (00:57:58):
Not all 26 of them because some are not the best business ones in the world, but a large number of them. I think I maybe have the top 12 that work best in business in terms of humor. But you can just take a humor class. I teach humor all the time. I teach all 26 strategies. It's something that can be practiced. The beautiful thing is so often many of the strategies that I offer in business, if it doesn't end up being funny, you're still telling a story. It's not a ba-bum-bum-ching joke. We're not telling those jokes. We're telling humor in the confines of a story so that if this joke doesn't land we're still telling a story. And oftentimes people don't even realize we were trying to be funny.

Lenny (00:58:44):
I'm going to come back to where story can help you in your work. So obviously giving a public talk is the classic way to use this, maybe giving a PowerPoint deck in a meeting. Is there any other maybe non-obvious places that you think this skill can help you in that's not just like, "Hey everyone welcome to my..."

Matthew Dicks (00:59:02):
Well, I've worked with a lot of scientists in biotech and places like that. I worked with a biotech company. Five of their scientists were going to a conference. And essentially it's a company that sells tubes. All of their competitors sell a tube for experiments and you have to retrofit the tube to fit your needs. The company I was working with, they sell 12 different versions of the tube. Better sized so you don't have to retrofit it, much more expensive, but the reliability of your experiments are improved by using their properly sized tubes. So I prepare all the scientists and they all do a good job. They all tell stories of some sort and they go off to their conference.

(00:59:43):
One guy though doesn't present any data whatsoever. He just tells a story. He tells a story about going to the grocery store and when he goes to the grocery store, his family is really annoying when it comes to apples. Because everyone likes a different apple. So he's got to go and he is got to buy three Honeycrisp for his wife and two Gala for his daughter. And they're baking a pie this week so they got to get some McIntosh and he likes Red Delicious. He said, "It's a nightmare buying these apples." So he tells that story about the nightmare of buying apples, and then he says, "That's what my company does." There are companies that say, "We offer McIntosh, make do with it. You're going to make your pies, you're, you're going to eat it. All of the things that you want to do with an apple, all you get is McIntosh. Good luck. We believe you should have access to all the apples. We believe that you have particular needs and specific requirements, and we're going to make sure you have it. Just like my family gets all the apples they want.

(01:00:42):
It's all he said. A longer version of it, but that's it. No data. He got more leads at the conference than the other four scientists combined. Now the vice president of marketing was not happy about this at all when I met I met with her. Because she's a scientist. She's 50 years old. For her entire life, she's been sending scientists to conferences and presenting data. And she said to me, "So what am I going to do? Send scientists to conferences now and not present data?" And I said, "Well, I mean maybe because it worked" And she said, "Well, what about the data?" I said, "Now that he has the leads, you don't think they're going to want the data?" He's going to get on the phone and they're going to say, tell us about the data. But now they've established a connection.

(01:01:22):
And the best thing about that story, the thing she didn't even understand was, every single time someone at that conference goes into a grocery store now and they're looking at apples, they're going to think about that company. And it's a positive feeling that they're going to have about that company. If they have forgotten to call, but they meant to call, when they're picking out a Honeycrisp at the grocery store, they're going to make a note. Oh, right, I got to call that company and look into the tubes that they sell. We create positive connections with items in the world related to our company by telling stories, and that means we've built advertising into people's lives without them even being aware that we've done it. So there's a billion ways to add storytelling into business. It's just another one.

Lenny (01:02:07):
You touched on this two-way approach. One is, you have a problem. Let me think of a story to help me solve this problem, versus I'm going to become a storyteller, come up with this whole brick wall of stories and then I'll deploy them. You said that the first approach is not something you'd recommend. I imagine most people are probably going to be in that bucket like I don't want to be a storyteller. I just want to solve my problems and stories can sometimes help me there. So maybe in that bucket, do you have any advice for how to find a story that somehow helps you with that problem on demand, or is it just like that is not going to work? You're not going to think of a story every time you have some problem?

Matthew Dicks (01:02:40):
I think sometimes you will. I have a company that calls me metaphor man. They call me essentially and say-

Lenny (01:02:45):
I get that.

Matthew Dicks (01:02:46):
"... we've added a boring feature to our boring platform and we need to make people understand what it does. Will you give us the metaphor we need?" They don't understand that I'm not really generating metaphors. I am just taking stories from my life, pulling myself out of the story. And if you take yourself out of a story, often what's left is a metaphor, a simile, an example. And then I just offer that to them. And I tell them, if you just use some of my storytelling generating techniques, you could do the same thing. But they're a bandaid company. They just want me to fix things. And I understand that. If you're trying to do it, the best way to tell a story about something that you want people to understand is to do what I call speaking with adjacency, which means we're not going to match content to content. Instead, we're going to match theme, meaning or message.

(01:03:33):
So that scientist, for example, he wasn't talking about tubes. He was talking about how people deserve to get what they want in life. His family deserves to get the apples they want, and you as a business deserves to get the tubes that you want. But so often in business what people think is content to content, well, I got to find a way to talk about these tubes to make people understand how important they are. And I say, well, let's not talk about the tubes. Let's talk about something else instead, and then we're going to move what we were talking about over two tubes. We are going to snap it in place. That snap when someone realizes, you were telling me about apples, but really you were telling me about tubes. That snap is so powerful. I use it with students all the time.

(01:04:21):
A student acts like a fool, gets in trouble sitting at my desk. I'm not talking about their behavior. I'm telling a story that they have no idea why I am telling them the story. They're like, "I'm in trouble. Why is he telling me about his dog? Why is he telling me a story about his dog when he was 12?" Because I'm going to snap it into place. Because I'm not talking about content, theme, meaning or message. So when they come to me and they say, "Here's what we've got." I'm not thinking about the thing. I'm thinking about, what is the theme they want to convey or the meaning that they want to convey or the message they want to convey. And what story do I have that will match that or what story can I get out of them?

(01:04:58):
The scientist did not come to me with the apple story. The scientist came to me with the tubes and I said, "Well, it sounds like you're a company that wants to give people what they need. Let's find a story in your life about a time when you have to give people something that they need." And we brainstormed it. And when we landed on apples, I knew we had it. Because he was going to be able to talk about, I'm a father. I'm a husband. I'm the husband who takes apple orders from his family before going to the grocery store. I'm going to be able to be funny, because befuddled husbands in grocery stores are always funny. So it wasn't that he came to me with a story. I came to him with the idea of let's look at theme, meaning and message and then snap it over to the tubes. That's what we want to do when we're putting a band-aid on. We don't want to think about what we're talking about. We want to think about the feelings we want people to have about what we're talking about.

Lenny (01:05:52):
Amazing. Okay. So the advice here essentially is you're trying to find a story to tell about something, to help you convince someone of something. You want to think about what is the theme of this problem that I have? What is the meaning behind it and what is the message?

Matthew Dicks (01:06:05):
Yeah. Usually one of those. Yeah.

Lenny (01:06:07):
And then you also touched back on make something in the story relate to something personal about you so that people are like, oh, I'm a runner too. I got to pay attention to this guy. Or I'm shopping. I shop all the time for apples.

Matthew Dicks (01:06:18):
Yes. See, so we're stacking strategies, which is a really good thing to do. So we're pulling in all of the things I've talked about and it really makes for a powerful moment for people and a memorable moment. Because the most important thing is that we're becoming memorable. We are in a conference amongst other scientists and we're actually the one who's being remembered.

Lenny (01:06:37):
So that was the band-aid approach. Then there's the way you recommend it was just build a bank of stories. I imagine this is where the Homework for Life framework you recommend comes from. So maybe let's transition talk about that. Because I think that has a lot of benefits beyond even just coming up with a bunch of story ideas.

Matthew Dicks (01:06:53):
Yeah. It's the most important thing that I teach. Whether or not you're ever going to speak in your life. If you plan on being a hermit and going off into the woods and never speaking to someone again, you should be doing Homework for Life regardless. It's a process I came up with maybe 15 years ago now. Essentially when I began telling stories on stages, I fell in love with it immediately, and I got worried that I was going to run out of stories. I saw a lot of storytellers on stages performing, and they would tell the same 6, 7, 8 stories every time, and I didn't want to be that guy. I wanted to have a brand new story every time I took the stage.

(01:07:25):
So in a fit of panic, I decided to assign myself homework being an elementary school teacher, it's natural for me to have that inclination. So I just decided every day before I go to bed, I'm going to look back on the day and find one moment that would've been worth telling as a story. Even if it wasn't really worth telling, I was going to write it down. Now I don't write the whole thing down. That's crazy. It's not doable. What I do is I took an Excel spreadsheet, two columns, the date, and then I stretched the B column across. And in that B column, essentially the length of the computer screen, that's where I write my story.

(01:07:59):
My goal was I find one new moment per month. 12 new stories per year. That would be amazing. Instead, something far more amazing happens. I discovered that my life is filled with more stories than I will ever have time to tell. And I'm not a unicorn. Thousands of people all over the world are doing the same thing right now and discovering that their lives are filled with stories. Moments like Eileen, which 20 years ago, I would've forgotten that moment within days, and now I've held onto it because it's going to be a Homework for Life moment.

(01:08:29):
So I start writing those moments down, and I discovered that I'm developing a lens for storytelling. I see the moments that I did not see before. In fact, I just did some analysis for my new book. In the first year I did Homework for Life I found 1.8 moments per day. So you can find more than one. Eventually I started recording more than one. So 1.8 moments per day. I now find 7.6 moments per day. It's not because my life is more interesting. It's because I have a better lens and I understand what to look for, what to see, and what is worth remembering. So I've become a person who has an endless number of stories like Boris.

(01:09:07):
Boris does Homework for Life. It's why whenever we meet, he's got three new stories to tell me. And then we work on the stories and then figure out the business applications for them. So it's so important because what we do is we throw our lives away. People say that time flies and it doesn't. What happens is it goes by unaccounted. If you can only remember 89 days of 365 in a year, of course time flies. Because you had 365 and you only remember 89. It's going to feel like it went by quickly. It's not going by quickly, you're just failing to account for each day. And each day has something worth remembering. Homework for Life is the acknowledgement that every single day should have something.

(01:09:48):
The prompt that I actually use for myself is this. I say, if someone kidnapped my family and said, "You can't have them back until you stand on a stage and tell a story about something that happened today, what would you tell?" That was what I would think in my head every night, and then I would write it down. To be honest, nowadays, I'm not sitting down at the end of the day and writing them all down. I'm recording them as the day goes on. My laptop is around me, my phone is around me. When I hear something. My son says a bit of dialogue I can't believe he just said. I see something for the first time or the last time, or a stray thought enters my mind. I have a new thought that I had not occurred before, all of those become moments for Homework for Life.

(01:10:28):
Not everyone becomes a story. I did some analysis on this too. About 10% of the things that I write down ultimately either become a story or a part of a story, but the other 90% it's just as valuable. Because I'm holding onto my days. And the other amazing thing that happens is once you start doing this, you'll crack open. And all of the stories that you've left from the past, the ones you've forgotten, they'll start to rise up. They'll bubble up. And I include those in my Homework for Life too as memories. Because once you start looking through the lens of storytelling, you see something like you see Eileen find confidence, and suddenly your brain connects to other students or moments in your life or moments in your children's life, where confidence was an issue and you think, oh, that's right. It's just like that kid.

(01:11:11):
And now I have another moment that I've recovered from the past. A day has returned to me. It enters my Homework for Life, and suddenly I have more stories than I ever have time to tell. And it's not just me. Like I said, thousands of people all over the world, my own children and my students do Homework for Life. And all of them will tell you it's the most valuable thing that you can do.

Lenny (01:11:31):
And I think you touched on this. It's not just to collect a bunch of stories. There's a therapeutic element to this too, that you talk about.

Matthew Dicks (01:11:37):
Yeah. Absolutely. Many therapeutic elements. First is you're recovering your time and slowing time down, which is beautiful. My kids are 14 and 11. Thank goodness I started Homework for Life just about when Clara was first born. Because they feel 14 and 11 to me. They don't feel like they were just born yesterday, which for a lot of parents, they do. Lots of parents say things like, "Oh, my God, you're not going to believe what my kids said. I got to write it down." But nobody writes it down. You're not going to believe what my kid said is in Homework for Life for me. So I'm holding onto the moments, stretching out time. You also start to do things like you start to see patterns in your life that you don't realize, unless you really think about your life. And I think you should. Storytellers tend to be slightly self-centered in a positive way, meaning we afford ourselves time to think about ourselves.

(01:12:22):
You start to see patterns if you start doing this. So I think what I talk about in my book is I always tell people, my wife and I never fight. We've never raised our voices to each other. We really don't ever argue. But I noticed in my Homework for Life a moment when she had asked me to put in the air conditioners before I had central air in the house, and I hated it. I hated it because we agreed to never buy a house without central air. And every year the air conditioners somehow get heavier. I don't understand the physics behind it, but every year it's worse.

(01:12:50):
And she always asks on the 98 degree day, "Hey, can you put the air conditioners in?" And there was a day when I was like, "No, I'm not going to do it. It's really hot." And she was like, "Okay, no problem." And then 10 minutes later, I'm in the basement pulling them out, complaining, grumbling, arguing. Only to myself banging them on purpose so she can hear. She's like, "What's going on?" I'm like, "I'm putting in the air conditioners." So that becomes a Homework for Life moment.

(01:13:13):
And then a month later, she asks me to mow the lawn, on a 98 degree day. And I said, "I'm not going to mow the lawn. I'm busy and it's really hot." And she goes, "Okay, no problem. Maybe tomorrow." And then I sit for a while and I stew. And then I'm mowing the lawn, but I'm doing it aggressively. I'm running and just angrily mowing the lawn. And when I see these patterns, I suddenly go, "Oh, I do fight with my wife, on my own." I fight in a way that she's not aware I'm doing it. I yell at her through chores and she's not aware that it's even happening. That becomes a story that couples love. They think it's hilarious.

(01:13:48):
You also start to see stories that you would've never seen. So it was a day last May when the neighbors to my left and the neighbors to my right came over to the house and had a cookout, the first one of the year. And that was a day when I didn't find anything in the day. I had one moment, which is very unusual for me. And I remember thinking, "Really, all you got is you had a cookout with the neighbors, that's the best you got?" It's not even really a story. But it was the best I had so I wrote it down and I moved on. About four months later, the neighbors to our left announced they were getting divorced. It devastated us. Because they have two kids. We've got this big communal backyard with the three houses. Three boys to the right, two kids to the left, friends. Couldn't believe it that they're getting divorced. Known each other since high school. We just never saw it coming.

(01:14:33):
One day later, neighbors to the right announced they're getting divorced. Left and right within a day of each other. And it becomes a story about how you never understand what's going on in a marriage unless you're in that house. But I don't have that moment in May when there were three couples on a porch, one of them was happy. I thought all three were happy. I don't get that moment unless I'm doing Homework for Life, and I write it down, and now I see a trajectory of a story. I have the opposite. Now I actually have an opposite moment which is I'm serving hot dogs to people I think are happy, but they're only pretending to be happy for our sake. And then they're returning to their homes, to discord and eventually to disillusion of a marriage. So Homework for Life gives you all of that that you don't normally have in life because we tend to live day by day, and we leave that last day behind.

Lenny (01:15:27):
I got tingles listening to that story. For someone that's now motivated to try this. I know there's a template that we'll link to in the show notes where you give people, it's very simple, but I think seeing it will be helpful. But what's something someone could do tonight to start on this process and maybe set a habit to do? How do you actually go about doing this?

Matthew Dicks (01:15:44):
Well, they have to start Homework for Life. And I have a TED talk about it that I go on for 17 minutes about. So I suggest watching it because you'll just get more than what I just told you and I think that's important. And you have to decide to do it every single day, even on the day when the best you have is a cookout. If that's all you got, that's what you got, and you write it down. You have to have some faith too, that it's going to happen over time. Remember, I started with 1.8 and now I'm up to 7.6. And that's over more than 12 years it takes for me to make that jump.

(01:16:12):
So in the beginning, you're not going to be very good at it. You're not going to see the right things, and that's just the way it is. If I go back to my original Homework for Life, I see myself looking for stories. And you're not really looking for stories. You're just looking for moments that touch your heart, touch your mind. That's all you're really hoping for. And some of those will become stories. So you've got to start Homework for Life right away. And then if you can just find some people who are willing to listen and begin telling some stories, that's really helpful because most people are unwilling to listen. There's not a lot of good listeners in the world. Everyone says they're a great listener, but active listening is a skill that most people do not possess in any way whatsoever. But if you find people who are willing to listen, you got to start telling stories. You got to start practicing in meaningful ways. And your first stories aren't going to be great. But the good news is most people's stories are terrible. Most storytelling in the world is not very good. So if you put a little thought into what you're about to say, you're going to be better. Because storytelling is not about facility with the language or your vocabulary. It's all about decision-making. That's all it is.

(01:17:14):
Storytellers are people who think before they speak. They make strategical tactical decisions before they speak. And ultimately, they make enough good decisions to entertain people. Ultimately, no matter what you're doing, whether I am teaching a fifth grader how to behave better, or presenting a new product for a large company, or helping someone deliver an all hands, the first and most important thing you have to be is entertaining. You have to entertain or people will not listen to you. So you got to practice, you got to get reps.

Lenny (01:17:47):
I want to talk about public speaking skills, but just to close the loop on that. So if someone was trying to do this Homework for Life exercises, the idea, would you recommend at night before they go to sleep, open up Google Sheets on their phone and just add something? Is there something else you'd recommend?

Matthew Dicks (01:18:00):
No. Yeah. That's what I would do. Although ideally, as you go through...

Matthew Dicks (01:18:00):
No. Yeah, that's what I would do. Although ideally, as you go through the day, things get forgotten quickly. Your son says something hilarious and by the end of the night you can't remember what it was. So if you can start sort of tracking it through the day a little bit, maybe you make it a habit where at lunchtime you're going to ask yourself what happened that morning? And when you get home from work, you're going to say what happened in the afternoon? And then in the evening you're going to say what happened since then? And then sort of take a whole view of the day and then be open to those memories, allow them to come back. I record them in my Homework for Life as memory, sort of a capital M-E-M-O-R-Y. Because what happens is you start to build up so many homework for life memories that you get confused.

(01:18:39):
You're like, what? When did I see a deer? And then I go, oh, that's a story from when I was 14. But you get confused because it's sitting on when you're 38 years old. So you mark them as memories. You hold onto them, you put them into spreadsheets because eventually you're going to want to move that data around and keep track of it in some meaningful way. But yeah, get started today because if you don't, you will lose today. Every day that you don't do homework for life is a day that is going to be lost to you forever.

Lenny (01:19:06):
And just very practically, you recommend like Google Sheets, I imagine is what you use?

Matthew Dicks (01:19:09):
I actually use old-fashioned Excel, but yes, Google Sheets would work too, because I started so long ago, right, Excel was the thing I used, and Excel is the thing I still use. I mean, it's backed up in 19 places because it's the most precious thing I have other than my wife and children, cats. But yeah, that's what I would suggest to use.

Lenny (01:19:26):
Awesome. Okay. Just a couple more questions before our very exciting lightning round. In your book, you say that you've only been nervous twice on stage giving a story. Most people, I don't know, is that [inaudible 01:19:36].

Matthew Dicks (01:19:26):
Yeah, that's true. I'm like,-

Lenny (01:19:26):
Okay.

Matthew Dicks (01:19:37):
I can remember the two times. It was yeah, it was PTSD related and Seth Meyers cost of ticket related.

Lenny (01:19:44):
Oh, I remember that story.

Matthew Dicks (01:19:44):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:19:46):
Okay. So most people are not like you. Most people are nervous, including me, every single time I get on stage, tell a story. What advice do you give people to help them get better with the nerves of getting on stage and telling a story? Classically, it's the thing people fear most in life.

Matthew Dicks (01:20:00):
Well, the first thing you have to understand is that 98% of your nervousness is actually before you begin speaking. Once you begin speaking, almost all of your nervousness falls away, and that is the experience of most people. So what you're really suffering is from pre-talk nervousness. And when you find that out, that's kind of a relief because if you do it enough. Someone just spoke in the Netherlands, and today I'm waiting to find out how it went. He spoke it for the Florida State Legislature, same topic, and he was really nervous about going into today. He was also really nervous speaking to a bunch of scientists in the Netherlands. But I told him, I said, "After you began speaking in the Netherlands, once the talk began, how nervous were you?" And he said, "Oh, actually, when I began speaking, I was pretty okay. I was incredibly nervous before the talk." And I said, "Well, that makes sense."

(01:20:49):
So if you own the fact or you believe the fact that, oh, most of my nervousness comes before the talk, but once I start speaking, I'm pretty good. That's really relieving for a lot of people because what we imagine is that we're nervous while we're talking, which is often not the case, particularly if you're kind of prepared, if you know what you're talking about. So be aware that most of your nervousness happens before you speak, and that's a normal thing, and you're just going to have to accept that until some day when perhaps it starts to go away through repetition, through continued performance on a stage. For some people, they're always nervous. I was performing with, I won't say her name, but someone who you have watched on television before, and we were both backstage and I was chatting up the room and she finally said to me, this very famous person, "Would you stop talking? Because the rest of us are trying to keep information in our head and stay calm." I'm a terrible person backstage because I'm always calm, I never care.

(01:21:45):
So I have to sort of sequester myself from these people because I torture them. But once she began speaking, all of her nerves fell away. So that's a good thing to know. The other thing to know that's really great is everyone's nervous, except for me. I'm the only monster in the world. So if you're feeling nervous, you're just like everyone else, including a very famous person who you see on TV all the time. That person was nervous, you're nervous, you're in the same camp, right, you're in the same boat. And then preparation is going to reduce your level of nervousness. One of the things that I tell people to do that is most helpful is it's good to practice your talk or practice your pitch, whatever you're doing, but one of the best ways to prepare for it is to record it and listen to it.

(01:22:26):
Listen to it passively, listen to it while your grocery shopping, listen to it while you're folding laundry, doing the dishes. What happens is, I really believe this, as you start to listen to it over and over again, it just sort of seeps into your soul, and so it becomes part of you. I have done this technique. I've told a story a decade ago, haven't told it since. Someone hears it on YouTube and says, "Hey, can you tell that story at our event?" I say, "Yes". I can listen to it once and it comes right out again because I allowed it to sort of sink into my memory in the same way that When Harry Met Sally has sunk into your wife's memory. She can replay that movie in her mind probably perfectly. If you listen to your talk enough, you will get to the point where you can retell it with ease.

(01:23:09):
The other thing you can do is some active listening with it. Most people don't forget their talk. They forget the transitions in their talk. So I'm talking about this, but then I got to transition to this, then I got to transition to this. So when I'm listening to my stories or a talk that I'm going to give, I'm playing a game with myself.

(01:23:26):
So I'm listening and I go, oh, okay, this is closing out and the next thing I have to talk about is this, and then the next thing I have to talk about is this. And if I don't know what I'm going to, if I'm like, Ooh, what am I going to next? That's where I go, oh, I got to create a mnemonic there. I got to create a bit of memorization there to train myself for that transition. Once you're in a new section of a talk, even if you're following it up a little, you're going to be okay because you're like, oh, I got to talk about the data related to the this or the that. And if it doesn't come out perfectly, you still know what you're talking about.

(01:23:55):
But what happens when you're done with the data related to this or that, you go, ah damn, what am I supposed to do next? Right. So we're working on building those transitions. Before a talk or before a story let's say I will do something like I'm going to start in the car and then I'm going to get out into the store, and then I'm going to head out to the parking lot, and then I'm going to be in the park, and then it's three weeks later. I don't tell myself the story. I'm just bouncing between the scenes because once I know the scenes and I know, okay, there's seven scenes, and here they are, and here's the transitions. Again, if I follow up each scene, that's okay because I'm going to get the information out. It might not come out as perfectly as I hoped. You also, if you can avoid memorizing, that'll save you a ton of suffering because memorizers, they're the most tortured souls in the world. So avoid that if all possible. Remember your talk without memorizing your talk.

Lenny (01:24:43):
Reminds me, a friend of mine gave a TED Talk and he shared that they give you this advice that people are different kind of learners. Some are audio learners, some are visual. So if you're like an audio learner, listening to it is the most helpful. Some it's seeing the script.

Matthew Dicks (01:24:55):
Yes.

Lenny (01:24:55):
And looking at it,-

Matthew Dicks (01:24:56):
And I'm very much an auditory learner. The other thing though about listening to it is you just get sick of practicing. It gets so frustrating to practice. So at some point you don't want to say it anymore. So rather than saying it, you start to listen to it. You listen to yourself, tell a story about yourself to yourself, which is the most narcissistic thing you could probably do in the world. But even if you're a visual learner, because it's so annoying to practice eventually, I think listening to it can be really helpful.

Lenny (01:25:26):
Okay. Last question is I want to talk about, I mentioned I bring this up, is the power of saying yes, something that you recommend people say yes to stuff versus no. It reminds me, David Sedaris in a, I don't know, Dave Masterclass video or something, said the same thing. He's just like, "I just say yes to everything because it creates great stories."

Matthew Dicks (01:25:41):
Really?

Lenny (01:25:42):
Yeah, it's in his Masterclass talk,-

Matthew Dicks (01:25:44):
And I just finished Sedaris's Happy-Go-Lucky, which is a great book. I love him.

Lenny (01:25:48):
Yeah, yeah. So I'd love to hear your advice here for people just to give them a little bit of a final takeaway.

Matthew Dicks (01:25:53):
Sure. So I'm going to disagree with Sedaris a little bit. Nah, I won't disagree with him by saying, yes, you do end up with some great stories, but that's not the purpose of the yes. There's actually a book, a storytelling book in the world that I'm not going to mention, and it talks about how to find great stories and it says, go do crazy things and you'll have great stories. I disagree. Fundamentally first, that's a foolish way to live your life. And also some of the best stories I tell, I think the best stories I tell are about tiny moments in our lives where nothing extraordinary happens except everything in our head, right? Most stories that I tell, if you had actually witness the moment of transformation or realization, you would've never known it was happening because most things that happen to us happen in our heads.

(01:26:34):
It's not while we're hanging from a cliff, right, for our dear life that we suddenly have a revelation. It's usually like we're walking across a parking lot and suddenly something hits us that's been building up for three weeks, but now it's hit us walking across the parking lot. So the reason we say yes to everything is if you don't say yes, what you're essentially saying is, I am so presumptuous that I understand what's on the other side of that door already even though I've never set foot beyond that door. Right. I just know so much about the world that I know that what's behind that door is not for me. And I think that's foolish and arrogant and full of hubris that is not helping anyone in any way.

(01:27:19):
So I say when someone offers you an opportunity, as crazy as it is, as ridiculous, as much as you don't want to do it, which many times in my life, the yeses that I have said about something I did not want to do, but forced myself to do it because of my belief system have resulted in the best and most extraordinary opportunities of my life. A yes can always become a no, right? Yes, I will try that. I step through the door, I give it a try, I spend some time with it. I look around and I say, you know what? Not for me. I step back through and I close the door.

(01:27:54):
But so often in life, people don't step through the door. They're too afraid. They've already prejudged the opportunity in some way. They fail to see the benefits of it or the value because they can't see that because they haven't gone through the door. And then there's this ridiculous belief in the world that we're supposed to learn to say no so that we can sort of sequester our time and make it as meaningful as possible, which sounds really terrible to me. The problem is you're going to be 100 someday, and when you're 100, no one is going to be asking you to step through any more doors, and at that point, you're going to look into the past and you're going to say, there were a lot of doors I didn't step through, right, and you're not going to be thinking, I'm so glad I didn't because I allowed myself to stay on the one path that I knew was going to be good for me.

(01:28:46):
I just think that there is no one good path that's good for you. I think there's a multitude of paths, and they're all great, and a few of them are terrible, but you find out which ones are terrible by stepping through the door, deciding this is not for me and coming back. So I think most of the time people say no because they're afraid. And when someone asks me to do something that scares me, that is when I run to that thing as quickly as possible with all of my might as terrified as I am, because I know that it's the things that frighten me are often the things that are the best for me.

(01:29:19):
So we say yes with the acknowledgement that we can say no eventually, but a yes can lead to extraordinary things. And if you watch my TED Talk on saying yes, you'll see that yeses just lead to these extraordinary chains where you said yes to something you didn't want to say yes to, and suddenly it forced you to meet someone who you never would've met, who opened a different door for you. And I mean, the causal chain that you can sort of create by saying an odd yes is extraordinary.

Lenny (01:29:47):
There was a quote I often come back to around this, which is, "The cave you fear contains the treasure you seek."

Matthew Dicks (01:29:51):
Yeah, that's really good. I mean someone, I do standup now quite frequently. I was just in the New York City Comedy Festival, and I do standup because six years ago, one of my buddies sent me an email saying, "Hey, we should do standup." And I replied to him and said, "No, I'm not interested in that." Hit reply. And then I said to myself, "Whoa, why did you just do that?" And I said to myself, "I'm terrified of it." I can tell funny stories and if it's not funny, still telling a story, but if I'm doing standup and I'm not funny, I'm failing. And that's a terrifying thing.

(01:30:24):
So I immediately sent a second email that said, "Okay, I'm in. When are we doing it?" I have now done standup many, many, many times. That guy who initially asked me to do standup with him has never done it. Not once in his life. He wanted to do it, but he's afraid to step through the door. He's too afraid to do the thing that he challenged me to do that I now do on a regular basis because he challenged me and it's still the thing that probably scares me the most. And therefore, it's the thing that I'm relentlessly trying to do at all times because I know the things that scare me are the things that are the best for me.

Lenny (01:30:56):
Amazing. Matt, is there anything else you want to share or leave listeners with before we get to your very exciting lightning round?

Matthew Dicks (01:31:04):
No, I've said enough. They've heard enough from me. Let's go to the lightning round.

Lenny (01:31:08):
We've covered a lot. Let's do it. Well, welcome to our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Matthew Dicks (01:31:12):
Yes.

Lenny (01:31:14):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Matthew Dicks (01:31:18):
Oh, so Nathaniel Philbrick's, Heart of the Sea, which is a non-fiction account of the whale ship Essex, which is the origin of the idea for Moby Dick. The sinking of the Essex is what gave Melville the idea for Moby Dick. It's an extraordinary non-fiction account of the whale ship Essex. So that book for sure. If you have children, but even if you don't, because this is one of those children's books that reads well for adults as Kate DiCamillo's, The Tale of Despereaux. It's a young adult novel. It'll take you two hours to read. I've read it 20 times. It is beautiful and extraordinary and fantastic. And then anything by Jessie Klein, she has two books. The only thing I don't like about her is she only has two books. Actually, Sedaris too, Jessie Klein and David Sedaris. Go read those two people too. I'm actually right now reading Bamford's book, the comedian, what's her first name? Bamford. I have Amy stuck in my head for Amy Sedaris. Maria Bamford's memoir right now I'm reading. Also, extraordinary. So there's four that I am now recommending.

Lenny (01:32:26):
Amazing. What's a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Matthew Dicks (01:32:32):
Well, for TV shows I enjoyed The Last of Us, which is based on a video game I've never played in my life. Pretty extraordinary as a TV show, both because filled with stakes. Yeah, it's one of those shows they'll kill anyone at any time. And so you're on the edge of your seat. No one is safe, which is fantastic. And then it has this beautiful bottle episode in the middle of the season, which is one of those things where you're in a zombie TV show, which oddly is unlike any zombie TV show I've ever seen. And then there's a beautiful, fantastic episode. There's another one later on that's sort of very similar. It's just great storytelling in a multitude of ways. It's great. And for a movie, the Barbie movie is better than I ever expected it to be, quite frankly, and is proof positive that you can make stories about just about anything, and if they mean something, it's going to do extraordinarily well.

Lenny (01:33:35):
My next question, I don't know if it makes sense to ask you, it's usually for product people and founders, but the question is, is do you have a favorite interview question you'd like to ask people when you're hiring? Is there anything that comes up when I ask that?

Matthew Dicks (01:33:44):
I guess I'll say it's the question I like to ask people most often maybe when I'm playing golf and things. I don't like to ask people what they do. I like to ask, how did you get into the job you currently have? It's a dangerous question because occasionally I ask people it and they realize they're in their job for weird happenstances that don't relate to what they dreamed of doing. So I've had two people in my life cry while they answered the question because they suddenly understand, I'm doing this because my sister got me into the company 16 years ago. And I go, "Oh, well that's great. Is that what you always wanted to do?" And they say, "No, it's actually still not what I want to do." But I do think that most of the time, how you get a job is more interesting than the actual job you're doing. The answer to that question is more interesting.

Lenny (01:34:33):
You have a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really like, whether it's an app or something you bought?

Matthew Dicks (01:34:38):
Well, if you celebrate Christmas for years, I have had an idea on how to design the best Christmas tree stand, and I finally said, someone must've done it. And they did. So I wrote it down for you. It's the Krinner tree stand. The Krinner Tree Genie is extraordinary. It's exactly what I would've designed if I had any ability to design it. It holds up the tree like none other. It takes two seconds. It is everything that the research told me it would do. It's fantastic. If you don't celebrate Christmas, I will tell you that a Power POD, which is a small, it attaches to your keychain and it will charge your phone twice and it just lives on your keychain. So I am never a person who's going, oh no, I don't have any charge left. I have two charges on a Power POD, which lives on my keychain.

(01:35:29):
You forget it's even there. And then one day you need it and it's fantastic. It's the best one. There's lots of versions of it. The Power POD is the one you want. And then I just bought a hot dog toaster that toasts the hot dogs and the buns at the same time. It's called the Nostalgia Hot Dog Toaster. It looks like it's from the 1950s. It's really beautiful actually. It's the kind of thing you want to put on your counter because it looks fantastic. My son and I love it because we like hot dogs and it'll put two buns and two hot dogs into the toaster. You pull it down, three minutes later you have a hot dog ready to go. You didn't dirty anything. It's not the best hot dog in the world, but hot dogs are pretty great no matter how they're cooked. So I fully support the Nostalgia Hot Dog Toaster.

Lenny (01:36:10):
These are amazing selections. There's also call back to our nostalgia trick for getting to be funny.

Matthew Dicks (01:36:15):
Right. That's true. Yes. Unintended, but I'll take credit for it.

Lenny (01:36:19):
Do you have a favorite life motto that you often repeat to yourself, share with friends, either in work or in life?

Matthew Dicks (01:36:25):
Yeah, it changed my life really. When I was in fourth grade, a teacher who, and I don't remember which teacher it was, which kills me. I was having a bad day and I was being the way that most people are, frankly. And the teacher said to me, "Listen, a positive mental attitude will be your key to success." And I don't know why it's stuck in my head, but it did. I have said that to myself 100,000 times.

(01:36:48):
And today there's one human being in the world who I think is more positive than me, one human being who I've met, who has more positivity than me. I am a relentlessly positive almost, my wife says offensively positive person. She's like, "You know what? Some days you can have a bad day." And I said, "I just don't. Because a positive mental attitude is my key to success." And it's really the way I frame so much of my life, is looking to the positive, looking to the good. And I do it for people whenever I can. And sometimes it frustrates people. But I really believe that most of life is the mindset that you bring to it. And for me in fourth grade, "A positive mental attitude will be your key to success," for some reason, hit me at the right moment in the right way and has stayed with me ever since.

Lenny (01:37:30):
What's interesting about that is it's not even like that well, cleverly put. It sounds like a fortune cookie,

Matthew Dicks (01:37:36):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:37:36):
You get and you're like, yeah, sure. But I love that that really had so much impact on you, it stuck with you.

Matthew Dicks (01:37:41):
Yeah, I think it was probably timing really. I think I was really having a hard time, and I know at the time two of my friends were not being my friend anymore, and they were my only two friends sort of at the time. And I think I was just open and ready to hear something that I could do to make my life better. And that was the one, and I'm probably predisposed to being an optimist anyway, so it probably landed just right for me.

Lenny (01:38:05):
A positive mental attitude will be your key to success. Amazing. Final question, maybe just to leave listeners with one tactical thing they can do to become better storytellers. What would that be?

Matthew Dicks (01:38:17):
So two things should start every story you ever tell for the rest of your life. So you start with location, where are you? Location activates imagination, right? If I say I'm standing in the kitchen, you've already automatically applied 1000 adjectives to my story. You see the kitchen with great clarity. You probably put me in your own kitchen or your parents' kitchen or a kitchen you see on TV. But if the particularities of the kitchen are relevant to the story, that's what I want you to do. I'm not interested in reproducing locations with some kind of visual accuracy in your brain. I want you to see a fully realized location. So I love location because it's one word that comes imbued with 1000 adjectives.

(01:38:59):
So you start with location and you start with action, meaning something needs to be happening right away. Literally, I am in a place and I'm doing a thing. It indicates to the audience that you're actually going to tell something that's moving forward. It's why there's a big spaceship shooting of little spaceship in the opening of Star Wars. It's why there's a police officer chasing a guy across a roof. Something is already happening.

(01:39:27):
We didn't start with nonsense. We started with something happening that grabbed us right away. That's what people want from story. Also, if you're a person unlike me, which is to say anyone who isn't sort of a white straight American man with no physical or mental disabilities, who thinks, I've always thought every room I walk into, I have the right to speak. But if you are unlike me in those regards, you often find, and I know this is true, that it's harder to make space, to get people to hear you if you're from any marginalized or discriminated against group in any way. But what I've been told by women and people of color and members of the LGBTQ community, they've discovered that when I start a story by going, I'm in a place doing a thing, it's a signal to people that I am now telling a story.

(01:40:12):
And when you can signal to people, I'm now telling a story, they will get quiet for you and they will afford you the opportunity to speak. I didn't know this was going to be the case, but I have had many, many people who I teach this skill to come back to me and say, "My God, people listen to me." And they've said they think they listen because I tell a good story, but they've told me because I start with that location and action, it just tells people, the movie's on. Nobody talks during the movie. You can eat popcorn, but you're not allowed to talk. It silences the room for you and affords you some space to then start doing the work that a good storyteller does to hold those people's attention. So start every story you ever tell for the rest of your life with those two things, and you're already going to be like 50% better than you were before you heard this.

Lenny (01:40:57):
Wow. Well, the hits just keep on coming. Matt, you're much more of a philosopher than I imagined you were when we started this conversation. I learned a ton. I'm really excited for people to learn from you. Where can folks find you online if they want to learn more or continue learning from you and work with you potentially, especially companies? And then finally, how can listeners be useful to you?

Matthew Dicks (01:41:17):
Sure. So you can find me at matthewdicks.com or if you're a business oriented person or someone who wants to learn, I also have storyworthymd.com, my initials, MD, and that's where I sort of have courses and online training and things like that. So either place you'll be able to find me and contact me. In a non-self-serving sort of version of your second part of the question, I think if you just tell stories, but more importantly, if you ask people to tell you stories, again, creating that space, listen for people who say things like, oh, something like that happened to me once. What they're really saying is, I wish someone would want to hear what happened to me once.

(01:41:59):
And so I am always someone who's willing to say, oh, tell me that story. Offer someone five minutes of your time so they can finally speak the thing that they've been waiting to speak to someone. So if you just do that, there's going to be more opportunities for storytelling in the world, and ultimately, perhaps that will funnel down to me where they will want to buy my book or visit my website or take some training with me, but just create space for storytelling. I think that'd be a beautiful thing.

Lenny (01:42:25):
I love it. What a beautiful way to end it. Matt, thank you so much for being here.

Matthew Dicks (01:42:29):
Thanks so much, Lenny. I really appreciate it.

Lenny (01:42:31):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at Lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Nancy Duarte (00:00:00):
A lot of people think that the only time you really need to present well is when you have a big stage talk and you make the big investment in the script. The big investment in the contrasting story. I'll tell you a dirty little secret. I can get my husband to do chores for me on the weekends with a real quick, what is, what could be new bliss. So, the ability to just have that contrast as a framework in your brain during a meeting, on a phone call, any moment of influence, like literally it works. It works in any format.

Lenny (00:00:29):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast where I interview world class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard-won experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Nancy Duarte. Nancy is the type of guest that I never imagined being able to get on this podcast, but I'm so happy that it happened. Nancy is a bestselling author, speaker, and CEO of Duarte Incorporated, which has helped create over 250,000 presentations for the world's most influential business leaders, brands and institutions including Apple, TED, Google, the World Bank, and famously Al Gore on his Inconvenient Truth presentation. In our conversation, Nancy shares a ton of tactical advice for how to improve your own presentations, how to tell better stories, how to lay out convincing arguments, how to reduce your nerves when you present, and even a simple communication framework to improve your relationship dynamics. I had such a good time chatting with Nancy and I'm sure you'll love this episode. With that, I bring you Nancy Duarte after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:01:29):
This episode is brought to you by Microsoft Clarity, a free easy to use tool that captures how real people are actually using your site. You can watch live session replace to discover where users are breezing through your flow and where they struggle. You can view instant heat maps to see what parts of your page users are engaging with and what content they're ignoring. You can also pinpoint what's bothering your users with really cool frustration metrics like rage clicks, and dead clicks and much more. If you listen to this podcast, you know how often we talk about the importance of knowing your users and by seeing how users truly experience your product, you can identify product opportunities, conversion wins, and find big gaps between how you imagine people using your product and how they actually use it.

(00:02:11):
Microsoft Clarity makes it all possible with a simple, yet incredibly powerful set of features. You'll be blown away by how easy clarity is to use and it's completely free forever. You'll never run into traffic limits or be forced to upgrade to a paid version. It also works across both apps and websites. Stop guessing, get Clarity, check out Clarity at clarity.microsoft.com.

(00:02:37):
Are you hiring or on the flip side, are you looking for a new opportunity? Well, either way, check out lennysjobs.com/talent. If you're a hiring manager, you can sign up and get access to hundreds of hand curated people who are open to new opportunities. Thousands of people apply to join this collective and I personally review and accept just about 10% of them. You won't find a better place to hire product managers and growth leaders. Join almost a hundred other companies who are actively hiring through this collective. And if you're looking around for a newer opportunity, actively or passively, join the collective, it's free. You can be anonymous and you can even hide yourself from specific companies. You can also leave anytime and you'll only hear from companies that you want to hear from. Check out Lennysjobs.com/talent. Nancy, welcome to the podcast.

Nancy Duarte (00:03:31):
Thank you for having me, Lenny.

Lenny (00:03:33):
How many presentations have you helped craft at this point, both directly and indirectly?

Nancy Duarte (00:03:38):
That's a great question. People know I'll like take a swag at data and pretend it's real. So, I had a president who took us a whack at that number in, it was 2014, and he said at that time it was 225,000, and that was almost 10 years ago, so I can't even tell you, I mean we stopped tracking, but it's a lot. I mean, in 35 years we have thousands of projects we open and each sometimes has two to a hundred presentations in it, so it'd be hard to tell.

Lenny (00:04:13):
200,000.

Nancy Duarte (00:04:15):
He said 250,000, but that was 10 years ago and I didn't do the math. So, when my team questioned it, I'm like, oh, Dan did the math. They're like, "Oh, then it's accurate." Because they thought I was just making up this number. I'm like, no, no, we actually went in and looked.

Lenny (00:04:31):
Okay. I was not expecting it to be that large. That's insane.

Nancy Duarte (00:04:34):
It's so funny because I have the whole history of the Silicon Valley in a way. It's like every little startup and then they grew to massive brands like Cisco and you could actually look at the rise and fall of all these companies. And then I actually have all the decks. I still have a lot of these archives, so I could actually verify that number exactly.

Lenny (00:04:52):
Okay, well this next question's going to be extra hard then. Of all the presentations you've worked on, which one stands out to you as the most memorable or most impactful?

Nancy Duarte (00:05:02):
I mean, it has to be Al Gore's Inconvenient Truth. It kind of hit the world in a season where nobody really knew or had an example of a really well done presentation. So, it came out before TED Talks were even out on the web, and so people had never seen someone tell a data story and stand in front of data and the scale in 90 foot screen, but we had worked with him for five years before an Inconvenient Truth. People think he went from vice president to this presenter and I didn't work with him. I let my team work with him. So, they were the ones jetting around jumping backstage at Oprah. They loved it. It was a real peak season.

(00:05:40):
But the thing actually that was most memorable is we work with these 20 some year old CEOs here in the Valley and they tend to show up and act like they know better than someone who's been doing this for so long. And what was so interesting about this large figure politician communicator is the team would sit in a room and say, "Hey, we think you need to do this way. We think you needed to convey it this way. We think it should be visualized this way." Or whatever it was we were proposing. And he would literally pause and touch his chin and really think, and really consider that we might actually be experts.

(00:06:18):
And more times than not he would adopt the way we said it should be done. And so I think as the customer who actually probably had some of the most power in the whole world to thoughtfully defer to us as experts was delightful customer and consulting experience. I mean, I remember when they called me to say it was going to become a movie and that it had gotten funded and I started to get the information. They wanted us to do a lot of work to get it movie ready. And I'll never forget, I said, "Wow, that's going to be a lot of work we'd have to do for free, and who's going to go see a movie about a slideshow anyway?" That's literally what I said. So, yeah, I just didn't believe it would become what it became. So, the whole process was amazing.

Lenny (00:07:05):
Did you expect the impact of what happened after that presentation or was it just like, oh, we got this one job we got to do, let's just get through it and then move on?

Nancy Duarte (00:07:14):
Well, we've been doing it for five years. I think the strategy, whether it was intentional or not, I don't know. So, he would go city to city to city, because he was traveling for five years seeding, like planting seeds for a groundswell, and he went into, he would go to the Stanford campus invite the Bay Area Elite, and it was always private and it was always VIP. And so he did a really good job for five years, traveling, traveling, traveling, traveling and really delivering that talk. And I think that created a desire. I don't know that it would've gotten that much traction. I don't know if people already didn't know about the presentation and hadn't already seen the presentation and they brought their friends to the movie, is how I kind of picture at least that part happening.

(00:07:59):
And he was generous, Lenny. I mean, at the end, when he traveled around for those five years at the end, he always had a slide with our name on it and would thank us if you're in the audience. I mean, super, and paid, mostly paid for what we did that we did give a lot of our own time. But yeah, super generous and yeah, movie became what it was. It was a bit of a surprise. It was good. The movie was good.

Lenny (00:08:24):
It was good. It also makes me think about a pattern that I often see of it wasn't just one presentation that changed everything. It was, you said five years of prep ahead of that, and you always see these wow overnight success stories and you always find, okay, it wasn't actually that.

Nancy Duarte (00:08:42):
Yeah, and he did a good job after, once it got traction, we built a whole training program where he could fly people out to his place in Tennessee and start to train people. So, it almost became a train the trainer and he could sanction you as a ambassador for it. So, it was just the way the whole thing kind of unfolded and scaled and then got traction was lovely.

Lenny (00:09:03):
Speaking of impressive clients, I only learned this recently, but Apple has been a client of yours since the day you were founded as an organization. Is that right?

Nancy Duarte (00:09:12):
Yeah, it was. Yeah.

Lenny (00:09:12):
Okay. How did you land that initially? And then also just what have you learned from that experience that's informed your approach to presentation, design, communication, and how you work with clients?

Nancy Duarte (00:09:22):
I love that question. So, yeah, I had a real job. I was working my real job and my husband had bought a Mac and he's like, "I think this is a business. I think it could be a real business." And he was an illustrator, wasn't a designer, but he had been a fine artist. And he's like, "Look, I can draw." Of course it's all pixelated and bit mappy. He goes, "Look, I could draw lines in here." And if I could show you his art studio, his work is just gorgeous. So, he's definitely a fine artist. And he's like, "I think this is a business. I think this could be a business." And I'm very pregnant. We were talking about that earlier. I am very pregnant with my son and I'm like, "Dude, you're going to go get yourself a real job. I don't want you playing around with this little Mac thing."

(00:10:02):
And he begged me twice in our marriage. He literally has gotten on his knees and to try to get me to see his perspective begged me. He's like, "Just read a Mac World magazine, just read it through once, and if you still don't think this could become a thing ..." Because I was working on a mainframe, I'm like, I work on a real computer. So, what happened was I made some phone calls. I called NASA and I called Tandem, which is now HP, and I called Apple and we won contracts at all three brands at the same time. And back then our company was called Duarte Desktop Publishing and Graphic Design.

Lenny (00:10:36):
Oh, wow.

Nancy Duarte (00:10:37):
I know, I know. And we slipped in. When you talk about a product lifecycle, very early, everything was still bit mappy, was not attractive. Most people as users didn't know how to typeset, didn't know how to do columns, didn't know how to make in this tool at all. And there's about an 18 month window in the life cycle of the Macintosh where graphic designers refused to use it, refused. It's a toy, it's ugly, it's bit mapped. Nobody would do it, a font like that. We use Linotype. It was very, the snobby kind of, we won't touch it. And that's right when we entered right then went and checked out books at the library on type setting, we tried to figure out what we could do, what could we do with this tool, and then the rest was kind of history. And so that's how it started and the timing and just kind of pushing the tool that nobody was that interested in that we're in the design community. It was small adoption.

Lenny (00:11:36):
So, that's interesting that it was cold emails basically are cold reach out just like, "Hey, we want to work with you." Yeah, that's an awesome [inaudible 00:11:42]-

Nancy Duarte (00:11:42):
Cold calling. Cold calling, yeah, it was.

Lenny (00:11:45):
What did you take away from that experience that kind of informed what works and doesn't work in presentations?

Nancy Duarte (00:11:51):
Presentations used to be 35 millimeter slides in an old carousel. In fact, that's what Al Gore had when he showed, he was like, here's my slide carousel from the seventies. It was just how it was done. But Apple was the first company to hook up the computer to a projector at scale. Now the projectors at these big venues like San Jose Convention Center, I mean it was huge and it was risky. So, because we were first in, they pushed us to start to do the presentations in this tool and it was black and white. Everything was black and white when we first started. And then we started to push and push and push from how we illustrated things in the tool, how we would colorize clip art. I mean, I'm talking like clip art packages just came out and they're like, "Hey, grab these, colorize them."

(00:12:32):
And so it was a really momentous moment to win them as an account. And I remember the tool had started to really take off and it was ugly. You can call it fugly, I don't know what you want to call it, but everyone who made slides did it so poorly, just so poorly. And we were kind of pushing the boundaries of it to make it look attractive. And there was a sales conference in 1992 in San Francisco and the leader of sales at the time was kind of a creative savant of sorts. And I remember he's like, "I don't know how you're going to do it, but I want you to take the whole slide." This is when slides were basically teleprompted covered in text. If you could stick a piece of clip art on it, you were lucky. And he said, "I want you to just make the whole slide, it's just covered with the word big in hot pink. And I want the background black, because when this slide pops up in all pink big, I want it to actually light the faces of the people in the audience."

(00:13:26):
And it was like I didn't know how to, we couldn't do that. We had to go into free hand, convert it to this, do these six steps, and then we came up with a small JPEG at the time or png or something and we scaled it up. So, it was still kind of pixelated. And I remember I was in that hall during the rehearsal and the production team gasped. Couple people squealed. They're like, "Who did this? I mean, it was just the word big in magenta pink." And I just remember thinking, this is how it's supposed to be done. Putting the tool in the hands of the masses kind of destroyed the medium itself.

(00:13:58):
And I feel like the first 10 or so years I was in business, it was reshaping this medium that ran amuck when it got into the hands of the users, it just went completely the opposite way that it was supposed to. So, it's weird to say that was a real defining moment for me to say, wait, we can do this different and we can return to how they used to be done when they were 35 millimeter slides. So, that's one story. And then I think we're very good at mapping to the brand requirements. So, we take this tool, whatever the tool, we have all our brands use different ones. They use Slides, Keynote, they use PowerPoint. We use whatever tool the brand wants and we push it in each medium. But we take their brand guidelines and really push it into the spoken word medium where when they stand up on a stage, it's cinematic. The visuals can become an experience in itself.

(00:14:57):
And I remember when Apple came up with the Think Different campaign. Steve Jobs was just back and my designer, everyone Photoshop was new. And everyone's doing these beveled backgrounds with tons of crap on the background. And I walked by, I'm like, "No, oh, we can't have a blue frame looking photo frame to for the Think Different campaign. This is not going to work." And so I remember looking at all the posters and remembering the Alfred Hitchcock ones. It had these particulates like these particulates, and it was just shadows.

(00:15:34):
And I found a stock video that Adobe had made at the time, and it was just particulates floating through the air at the angle and we stuck the six color apple on top of it. That was so revolutionary back there to push the brand and get out of the way every, the whole world was making these hideous templates. So, there are these moments that pushed the company forward because of an idea that I knew would not be okay for the Apple brand, therefore it shouldn't be okay for any brand. And I think those are just a couple stories of how to really push the medium in a way that is more pleasing to the audience. The audience just likes it better when it's really clear what you're supposed to focus on. We love that brand. We love it.

Lenny (00:16:22):
Okay, so let's get a little tactical, because you're talking about some very specific things that you've found to be working. So, everyone listening to this podcast has probably heard many times it's really important to be great at presentations that there's so much power in storytelling and communication, all these things. And they probably read a bunch of books and blog posts and watch videos of how to give a great presentation. But myself, and I feel like most people sit down at a deck when they're about to present to an all hand, say a week later or are going to do a meeting. And I'm always just like, okay, what do I do? Okay, there's like a beginning, middle end, they should have some kind of problem. And it's always like, I don't know what I'm doing. So, if someone were to just be listening to this podcast and they're like, I'm going to write a post-it to myself of three bullet points of things that I should remember when I'm starting a deck, what are those three bullet points?

Nancy Duarte (00:17:11):
Your audience is the hero. That was in my TED talk from 2011. I would say it's infuse your talk with story. And I would say it is asking yourself, can they see what I'm saying? Those would be the three tips other than starting with empathy. I mean that that's, well, audience is the hero, is the empathy centric approach.

Lenny (00:17:33):
Let's dive into these then. And I was actually going to ask around empathy, and it feels like that comes up a lot in your recommendations to people's empathy is kind of the heart of your methodology of telling great stories, telling great presentations. So, let's spend a little time there. Why is that so important and what does that actually look like in practice?

Nancy Duarte (00:17:50):
Empathy is important to Duarte, everything we do is empathy first. And some of it comes from my own childhood story a little bit. I was raised by a clinically narcissistic mom and narcissist are missing the empathy gene. So, I feel like that void of not having it modeled for me is why I keep clawing at empathy as being important. And I think a lot of people listening might work for a boss that does not have empathy, that isn't other centric, that doesn't think before they talk and all of those things. And I was raised by someone like that. And so every single book and every single model that I ever make has empathy at the core because you have to have to think about who am I speaking with, especially in communication, who am I speaking with? And so when I went on my journey through storytelling, I figured out that I thought, okay, the presenter's the hero, for sure the presenter's the hero, they're the central figure. They're talking the most. They're well lit, they're up on a stage.

(00:18:48):
So, when I started to look at all the archetypes, that's where I landed. And then I was like, oh my god. When I got to really digging into the mentor, I realized it's really the mentor in myths and movies that's the presenter and who really holds the power in the room of a presentation is the audience, the audience gets to make a choice if they accept or reject your idea. So, the balance of power is with them and not you. So, it really is the role of the presenter to be the mentor. And in myths and movies, the mentor comes alongside the hero. In other words, the presenter should come alongside the audience and help them get unstuck or bring a magical tool. So, I think Obi Won Kenobi's a great example.

(00:19:32):
He did two things for Luke Skywalker. He gave him a light saber, which was for his outer journey, the physical journey he was doing, and then an inner tool, which was the resolve, which came to him through the force. So, when you're speaking to an audience, they're going to have an internal conflict that you have to give them something to soothe. And then you're asking them to therefore go and do this thing, take this action, do this call to action. That's asking them to physically do something or physically change in some way. So, they're not going to do that for you if you haven't empathetically thought about how hard what you're asking them is going to be for them to do. And so you have to change your mindset when you're starting to build your deck to think about who am I talking to? How am I going to help them get unstuck? And that's just a super foundational principle in everything we do.

Lenny (00:20:29):
What is an example of that in practice as we go through these? Because this is really great of that implemented the deck that we know about maybe?

Nancy Duarte (00:20:38):
Oh, that we know about. So, I could talk about our own internal ones. Most of what we do is under MSAs because they're fantastical brands. So, in my own company, before I do a presentation that's going to require goals or them reaching goals or we do an annual vision talk, we do a listening tour first. So, some of it's based in survey, some of it's based in interviews. And we feed that information up and then we compare it to what we're going to ask them to do. And we do some gap analysis. We literally, there's some actual questions you can ask yourself, which are somewhat classic design thinking kind of questions about where they're at. And then what we do is I create a real rough cut or the exec team creates a real rough cut and then we invite the next level of leaders in and we do a fake, I mean the slides are ugly, we don't spend time on the slides.

(00:21:31):
This is about the message and maybe a model or two or three that we're going to go through to feel like it may amplify or make the message more concrete. And then they get feedback and that's when it's hard. It's hard to go from rough cut, here's what we're going to say to making it absolutely resonate. And then we deliver it after all of that work has been done, then we share it to the company. So, we go through that knowing that's the hardest presentation I deliver all year. I used to travel and speak and be a public speaker, but it's my own internal ones I have to take more time with.

(00:22:05):
So, when I travel and speak, they're like, oh my God, I love your models. Oh my gosh, can I get a picture with you? But when I'm standing in front of my own team, they're like, I wonder what she's going to say, because she's about to either make my job harder or she's going to change my priorities. They come in more skeptical. And we definitely have nailed the annual kickoff meeting. Definitely have nailed that. And then we do quarterly updates to that annual kickoff meeting. And it's a cadence and people get enthused and we're kind of killing it right now.

Lenny (00:22:40):
Yeah, that's what it feels like from the outside. I'm just thinking about the pressure to create presentations within Duarte Design. If you think about your job as hard, creating a deck for your company, imagine that.

Nancy Duarte (00:22:52):
Presentations in front of presentation experts is like-

Lenny (00:22:55):
Oh my god.

Nancy Duarte (00:22:56):
And I get nervous. I get really nervous because I have one slide that's kind of flawed or I say um or I pace too much. You lose a third of your team each time. They're such experts. So, it's hard.

Lenny (00:23:10):
I want to walk through these three bullet points. So, the first is make the listener the hero of your story. And that comes from being empathetic and understanding their challenge. So, if you're trying to do that, what are signs that you're doing it well or not well? Is there the way the flow of the story start? Is it the here's the way it starts? Or what should people identify of I'm doing this well or I'm not doing this well?

Nancy Duarte (00:23:31):
If the audience is the hero, you would see visible signs that they get it. People would come before I did a really good talk and people were tweeting saying, "Hey, come to this talk. It's really good." So, you'd see a reaction. You know you've done it well if you're infusing your talk with story, which is the second bullet by utilizing story structures. So, when I say storytelling, I'm talking about an anecdote. When I say story structures, I'm talking about this format of a three act structure of storytelling that goes back tens of thousands of years, which is fused into the brain like FMRI machines now you can see them while a story's being told and the science is beautiful, if you're telling me a story and I'm listening, our brains are firing in the exact same order, in the exact same place. So, it has power to align our brains.

(00:24:26):
And so by implementing attributes of story like a beginning, a middle, and an end, and we have method for that. And in also incorporating the rise and fall story kind of builds tension and releases it. And that's why we love it so much is we escape through someone else's messy middle and conflict and problems like it's messy and then it resolves. You build the tension and resolve it. And that's what a really well structured presentation can do. It can pull on that rise and fall in a way that creates longing.

(00:24:58):
So, story creates longing. It helps people long for something they'd never wanted before because if the future is told in the shape of a story and they see this alternate future, so many people escape through sci-fi. They escape through movie making into these future worlds. And so picture that you could verbally paint a picture of this future state and then you could bring your whole audience to this future state in an amazing way using this cadence of rise and fall. That's how you can incorporate story into a presentation where you need to influence others, actually really can be beautiful when it's done well.

Lenny (00:25:38):
And so you gave a TEDx Talk on this exact topic. And so I want to go deeper here. And you kind of shared this very visual way of thinking about a great story where it kind of goes up and down and up and down these teeth almost. Can you actually talk about-

Nancy Duarte (00:25:51):
[inaudible 00:25:51] pumpkin teeth. Yeah, it does.

Lenny (00:25:54):
Can you share what that structure visually looks like? And we'll share a link in the show notes of what that actually looks like and then just why that is so impactful and important.

Nancy Duarte (00:26:02):
Yeah, I love that. So, I went on a three year journey through story and I knew that the greatest speeches overall time did have that rise and fall and rise and fall. But it wasn't one single story. It had a whole lot of other very important information, but it still did this rise and fall and risen fall. So, I am not a digital native. I took a quarter inch graph paper and I would listen to all kinds and map out, took the words. When I analyzed Steve Jobs's iPhone launch speech, I did it all by hand. I wrote every word I did quarter inch graph paper. I needed to know, I needed to see it the way I work, which was analog. And so at first it was zigzaggy and I realized, wait, you can't map something over time and have it be a zigzag.

(00:26:49):
There was too much data lost. So, to verbally describe it, you could picture a line at the bottom of your screen and that line going left to is what is. And you need to set up every talk by stating what is. And then it moves straight up and you move to what could be come back down to the bottom line again say what is, back up, what could be, what is, what could be, what is, what could be? And then at the last what could be you state the last horizontal line is what we call the new bliss. So, this motion of traversing between what is, what could be, what's is, what could be, what is, what could be, that sense of longing for the future, it makes people leave their current state or the status quo or our current reality and makes them long for this future state by using contrast.

(00:27:37):
So, that rise and fall of hey, here's our current problem, here's a solution, or here's the state of the union. But we imagine it could look like this. There's so many different ways to build that cadence of contrast that's so lovely. I mean it really works. I think the talk came out in 2011 and the amounts of notes and emails of things people have accomplished by changing the structure of their presentation has been really astounding.

Lenny (00:28:09):
The State of the Union is a really interesting example because I'm trying to imagine this and presentations I've seen and that totally resonates of just like, here's the problem we're having and here's where we're going to go. Here's another problem we're having. Here's what I'm going to change.

Nancy Duarte (00:28:20):
Steve Jobs was great at that. When he launched the iPhone speech, he always did, here's the state of the company, here's how we're doing. Oh my God, our stores are more full than 10 Mac world expos. He always did a setup of what was going on. And then he did a really rapid what is, what could be when he started to compare the iPhone to the Blackberry. It's like, look how much it sucks now that you've seen what we're doing. It's just what is, what could be, what is, what could be. And so I took all the classic speeches, historical speeches, everything, presidential speeches and knew that if I could find a pattern in Dr. King and Steve Jobs's iPhone launch speech that was the same, that had the same type of nature of cadence and pulsing to it, for lack of a better word, that I knew I had solved it using story. It was a really great moment to finally draw that out on my quarter inch graph paper.

Lenny (00:29:19):
I love that.

Nancy Duarte (00:29:19):
It was awesome.

Lenny (00:29:22):
I feel like there's just so much opportunity for primary research that still I feel like that's why my newsletter does well is I just spent the time doing that work that you're describing of watching a thousand interviews and then just distilling, here's a takeaway here.

Nancy Duarte (00:29:34):
Pattern finding, that's an interesting point. I worry sometimes with the emergence of new technologies and stuff, the ability to be able to sit and think, synthesize and all of that is because a human's going to come up with different insights and synthesis than any future machine can do. So, I think it's fascinating that you do that so well and it really shows that.

Lenny (00:29:34):
Wow, I appreciate that.

Nancy Duarte (00:29:59):
Yeah, you're really putting your mind and heart into it all.

Lenny (00:30:02):
Enough about me, I'm thinking about, but I appreciate it, I'm thinking about product managers and founders maybe listening to this and they're like, oh man, every time I do a deck, I need to create this whole story and this up and down thing. In your experience, when do you go that far to create? Is this when you have an epic important presentation, you think about a story structure like this, or is there always a way you should put this into your presentations of some kind of story with this contrast?

Nancy Duarte (00:30:31):
It's interesting question. I think a lot of people think that the only time you really need to present well is when you have a big stage talk and you make the big investment in the script, the big investment in the contrasting story. But I'll tell you a dirty little secret. I can get my husband to do chores for me on the weekends with a real quick, what is, what could be new bliss, kind of just that first bit, what is, what could be new bliss. It's like even the very, very short talk that Abraham Lincoln gave in the Gettysburg address, it was basically a funeral, it was a eulogy. And back then eulogies used to be two hours long. It was an Aristotelian structure and he only had a couple hundred words, so there's no pictures of him giving it because it was so short, so tight and done.

(00:31:16):
They were setting up the cameras, still thinking they had tons of time. So, the ability to just have that contrast as a framework in your brain during a meeting, on a phone call, any moment of influence, getting the husband to do some chores for me, literally it works. It works in any format. And I think the investment that you make in the longer form or when it's a huge audience, you add the visuals, you really hire the speaker coaches, you really make that moment. And there's these moments that breach above all other moments where you really have to nail it just in basic conversations, in a moment of influence. If you practice it enough, it'll live in your head as a mental model for when you're in a situation where there's influence in the air that you could do.

Lenny (00:32:07):
How do you actually do it with your husband if you could share for helping you do the dishes?

Nancy Duarte (00:32:11):
Well, I won't get graphic about what the new bliss might be, but early in our marriage we figured out that, not early, I actually spent almost in the only the last 10 years we've been married for 40. And we realized that when we tangle it's usually only about process. So, the gaps are if I ask or he asks me to do something or we start to kind of pick on each other, it's because the way I'm executing something is different than the way he chose to execute it. And so it'll be anything from like, "Why are you chopping onions like that?" He'll say to me. And now I'm like, oh, we have a process gap. "Do you want to chop the onions or do you want me to chop them my way?" So, for the what is, what could be new bliss, it happens all the time.

(00:32:59):
So, he needs a lot of context. He's a detail-oriented person and I've started to learn with him that my what is needs to be quite a bit longer than sometimes I have patience for as I start to frame, "Oh hey baby, I need you to take the dog over to the dog care." I don't start there. I start with, "Oh my gosh, tomorrow I've got back to back meetings, in fact, I'm going to be on Lenny's Podcast right about here. And that's when she's whiny. And what's going to happen is if that doesn't happen, I'm going to have to reschedule next week and next week it's just loaded up. And you know how it is when I'm stressed out at the end of the day and I'm kind of hard to deal with and I say, well, what could be, the doggy place, she was loved it last time she was spooning with a red cavalier king spaniel and loved it."

(00:33:46):
It's like that, I have to unpack it a little bit more for him. And then the new bliss could be any sort of marital promise you want it to be, but I just have to unpack the current state a little bit of the process, and then I state what could be. And it's funny because acts of service like that, like him taking the dog to the doggy daycare for me or is I feel loved. So, when someone does something generous with their time for me, it's how I feel loved. And so there's a whole lot there in shaping how you communicate with someone. Empathetically at my company, everyone knows each other's love language. They know that this person feels more appreciated when they get a written note. This person feels more appreciated when they get a gift and everyone knows that. So, that's just baked into our, I don't know, our marriage, our company, just how it rolls.

Lenny (00:34:43):
I imagine people listening to this podcast were not expecting marriage advice. And so I love that. I'm going to try.

Nancy Duarte (00:34:50):
You can scrap that if it doesn't work the process tip though is good.

Lenny (00:34:52):
This is going to be the best part. This is going to be the whole podcast is just the segment. Just joking. But this is really good advice. I'm going to try to use it myself. So, the structure, I think it's even easier to think about this less as story, infused story. For me it's more this, what is, what could be, what is the ideal bliss, that's almost the simpler way to think about it. The story is this like, oh my God, I got to think of a story.

Nancy Duarte (00:35:17):
It has a beginning, middle, and an end. So, the first, what is is the beginning. The middle is the messy middle. That's where you're trying to contrast and show them that it's messy. It might be hard, it's worth it. And then the new bliss, you end with what in western cultures, where's like a happy ending. So, the new bliss is just imagine a world with your idea adopted, and then you paint a picture of that world poetically or pragmatically, and it works. It definitely works.

Lenny (00:35:41):
Okay, this is really great. So, just to recap, point one is to make your listener the hero of the story and come at it with empathy. And I was actually thinking the Think Different campaign is an excellent example of that because it's about you thinking differently and being this incredible creative. And then item two is infuse your presentation with story and this what is, what could be new bliss. And then, okay, and number three, what was number three again?

Nancy Duarte (00:36:09):
Oh, it was ask yourself if they can see what you're saying. Can they see what I'm saying would be written on the note?

Lenny (00:36:16):
I love this. Okay, let's talk about that. What does that mean and how do you do that?

Nancy Duarte (00:36:20):
Yeah, so for people to see what you're saying, that you have an opportunity to use visual tools like the presentation software, you have opportunities to have live sketchers sketch it while you're talking. There's so many ways you can help people see what you're saying. I would contend that you can use something in your talk that gives people something they'll always remember. We call that a star moment. And it could be a piece of dramatic data where the big numbers put up there. It could be an evocative story, it could be a beautiful picture. And one of the things that happens really well, especially with tech companies, is demonstrating through a picture so you can get alignment. So, the concept of a diagram when you describe your product that you're working on, is this thing inside of it, outside of it attached to it, is it on it is above it, especially architecture slides or just how technology works as something flows through a complex system.

(00:37:20):
When people can see that and it accompanies your verbal narrative, they can actually understand what you're conveying and move on. If you only had a verbal narrative, it wouldn't work as well. There's a lot of times though, where you don't have the support of a presentation or slides. You could be at a dinner table. If you're in a interesting conversation and you want someone to see what you're saying, that's where you pull out the napkin and you draw it. So, you could both see it, in meetings sometimes someone will just walk right up to the board and draw something. And my team, especially my design team is so good at this because they'll just stand up and say, I want to draw for you what I see, because we're about to prepare them to present to an audience. When you verbally said that, I saw this, was that your intent?

(00:38:03):
And then the room will stand up and we'll start all co-creating a graphic so that everyone sees the exact same thing, the exact same steps, the exact same insights in the order. So, nobody leaves with a question in their mind. And that's just so important for there to be an alignment around what is this? What are we all fighting for? What are we all living for? What are we all working for? And those moments of alignment are so, so important. And I'm a leader who sees things in the air. I just see it. And to me, my pattern finding nature, which you're like that too. I could see these patterns and to me, I see a whole scene and I could see it all clearly, but when my team's trying to look at the same thing, they might see 22 mosaic tiles out of a massive mosaic beautiful picture.

(00:38:53):
I see the final beautiful picture, but I've only served up a little tiny mosaic tile in a few places. And so I even have to be better about really bringing it to earth and saying, oh, here's the seven steps to get to this amazing outcome. Sometimes we see things so plainly in our mind's eye, and I was working with a really famous, powerful CEO and as she was talking, it's like, yeah, I could see her. I was watching her hand motions too, and she was like in this thing and she's moving her arms around in a distinct way and I said, I can tell you you have a picture in your mind's eye.

(00:39:31):
Let me draw for what I, and I did the same thing, walked up, drew had this, had this, had this. And she's like, "Exactly." And we were brought in because nobody could articulate at all what she saw in her mind's eye. And so that was a massive program to be rolled out to the entire retail. It was like a hundred thousand retail workers needed to understand this graphic and the whole process she was trying to roll out wasn't getting traction. So, the minute people could see what she was saying, then it had all the breakthroughs that needed to happen around that program.

Lenny (00:40:04):
That reminds me of when I was working on the super host program at Airbnb. I don't know if the story will be of any interest to anyone, but I just remember I had this very clear handset of motions that described the strategy of the super host program. And then my friend's like, you should draw this on a slide-

Nancy Duarte (00:40:19):
You should draw it. Unless it's such a powerful hand gesture, right? Yeah, you could do that because your body is visual. And the other thing we try to get our customers to do is, if Dr. King had slides that day of the I Have a Dream speech, it just wouldn't been as beautiful. His words painted the pictures in our mind's eye. And so when we can have the slides off so people are focused on the verbal stream and what's coming out of your mouth that is such a powerful moment is to not have any visuals supporting you. So, they're a hundred percent focused on your body, how you're showing up and on the words coming out of your mouth and they're verbally seeing what you're saying versus actually pictorially seeing what you're saying. It's good.

Lenny (00:41:03):
I like the idea that people are not staring at me and I prefer them distracted with a slide and I want to talk about nerves and stuff presenting in a bit. But that's interesting. So, you were talking about very kind of some concrete tips for slides and something I've heard a lot is when you're sharing a deck internally or talking an internal meeting, it's really powerful to just have obviously just a quick image thing, but then also the title of the slide is the point you want them to get from that slide. Is that something you recommend? And then generally any just very tactical advice on how to make a slide effective?

Nancy Duarte (00:41:35):
Yeah, the concept that each slide should make one point. So, your whole presentation should be grounded in what we call the audience journey, which is the big idea where you're trying to move them from where you're trying to move them to. Then a big idea is what is your point of view and what's at stake if they do or do not adopt it? That's the organizing mechanism for your whole deck. And then each slide itself that supports that one big, big idea, each slide itself should make one point in support of that big idea. People can't process too many things at one time, so depending on where you work, some people want something that's not the key insight at the top of the slide, some people do. So, some might want the action to be taken or some might want the dreamy future state to be clear.

(00:42:22):
Some consulting firms where the slides are much denser because they were paid millions of dollars to make a big old deck. Some of them are like, "Oh, it always belongs in the lower right corner." So, it's kind of a little bit up to the brand and everyone believes it belongs somewhere else. If you're making what we call a slide doc, which I think your listenership would be interested in, presentations go from big staged event to in a meeting where you're trying to persuade your peers too. Can I make a presentation I can just circulate on email and everyone gets it? Well, that's called a slide doc. You put more words, you put stronger picture. You could have a hundred page appendix and maybe the front of it's only five slides, but everything they need to see your thinking, it follows behind it.

(00:43:08):
And you could circulate those and people read it. You write full sentences, you write full pros. It's kind of like the six page memo that's so popular to Amazon, but we contend that the F words and pictures, the six page memo is better. So, how do you send a memo around without the help of a presenter? And that's on one extreme. And those are called slide docs that you build in presentation software. And then the other extreme is I'm on a massive stage somewhere and there's all kinds of usage in between. And so I think the one idea per slide is important. And then this guiding principle, don't make a single slide unless it supports the one big idea of your whole talk. That's another principle for slide making, because most people go back to some sort of repository in some data store somewhere and they dig through old crappy slides and see if they can assemble something super quickly.

(00:44:01):
And that's a cop out. Most of the time if you really think empathetically about your audience, going to the repository might get you halfway there, but you should be modifying and mapping all of the content based on who you're talking to and especially if it's high stakes. And sometimes you're speaking to an audience that wants high density slides, because that's how they communicate in their culture. And if you showed up with cinematic stage ready slides, they'd laugh you out of the room. And so you really got to, I mean, you got to know your audience, you got to know how they communicate, who they talk to and map to that.

Lenny (00:44:39):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing platform built by Airbnb alums from modern growth teams. Companies like DraftKings, Zapier, ClickUp, Twitch and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern grow team stack. This leads to waste of time building internal tools or trying to run your own experiments through a clunky marketing tool. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most about working there was our experimentation platform where I was able to slice and dice data by device types, country, user stage.

(00:45:16):
Eppo does all that and more delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytics cycles and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basically through metrics and instead use your north star metrics like activation, retention, subscription and payments. Eppo supports, test on the front end, on the backend, email marketing, even machine learning plans. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com, that's geteppo.com and 10 x your experiment velocity. What's your take on the Minto Pyramid principle? I don't know if you think about that. Yeah, because there's a recommendation of just start with the conclusion and then explain why. And you're saying sometimes that's effective, sometimes not. Maybe in [inaudible 00:46:00]-

Nancy Duarte (00:45:59):
Sometimes it's effective. So, the Minto principle is amazing. She's got the, was it horizontal and vertical thinking? So, your main segues or your main section head should add up and then all the slides should support it. And then also how the construct of it is and when you state the conclusion first, that's a great thing to do with execs. It's a great thing to do when you are fundraising. There's a certain type of an audience that works for, and there's other audiences where they really need to be taught to long for this future state and you need longer to unpack it. So, one of the reasons you would start with the conclusion is especially in a funding round, now my version of a conclusion or result or is different than how she describes it. Because I would say you start with the new bliss. So, if you're trying to raise funds, you would say, I am going to share with you something today and you share how your solution increases human flourishing.

(00:47:02):
It needs to be tied to the humanness and the big problem you're going to solve and how humankind will benefit. Well, that's different than just a consultant would show up and say, hi, I have this 800 page deck and the results of it are this. Let's unpack it. It's just a completely different motion and we use a three act story structure that's quite a bit different too. But that work is solid and it was based kind of like my work, her work was based in going super deep in McKinsey's thinking over time, whereas my work is going laterally across the 35 highest performing brands in the world that have been our customers. So, I went laterally across all those brands and then come up with solutions that are based, foreign story and are based in a bit of a broader application across companies that I have tons of respect for that body of work.

Lenny (00:47:57):
Awesome. And willing to, I wrote a post about this whole concept for folks that want to dig deeper. Maybe one more question around tactical slide stuff, and I know this is, people ask you about this stuff all the time, but I can't help it. I guess just any other tips for just like you're sitting there trying to create a couple slides. What else maybe people should keep in mind to make it effective and let's say this is for a small meeting kind of thing.

Nancy Duarte (00:48:18):
Yeah, that's a good question. I think that if do some thinking first, if it's important, if it's an important point of the meeting, my team is taught to just kind of sketch, change your environment up a little bit. A lot of people will fire up the deck, which is very linear. It's like make one slide, second slide, third slide. So, just think and plan for a minute. And we tend to draw up storyboards. It's like, okay, the first point, the second point, the third point or the just think first. It can be analog or digital. Put a page in front of all your decks. It's just boxes. Just get the narrative right. And then when you actually open up the software, that's where you have to think about, what's the slide type that will convey this the most? Is it a table? Put a table. Especially for program managers, you have to convey dense project information, program information, product information, and that comes with density.

(00:49:12):
So, if you're in a room with your peers and everyone in the room is a team and everyone has their own shorthanded and way of working, put that common slide up there. That common slide for that team might be dense to the outside world, but everyone's used to using it so there's no harm in using a commonly known, commonly acceptable framework or slide or table or Excel spreadsheet because you're aligning around a process. And so don't feel like every needs like cinematic pictures of kittens because that's not going to get you anywhere. You're trying to move an objective along, and that does mean that your slides might be more dense and sometimes internal slides have a lot more important information that needs to be on it to kick a product along or kick a process along.

Lenny (00:50:00):
You were just talking about process and that is a great segue to a question I wanted to ask is just what does your process look like when you're working with a company to help them craft an awesome presentation?

Nancy Duarte (00:50:10):
Yeah. Yeah. It's funny because I don't have to do this much anymore. I haven't done it for about 15 years, which is nice. I have a gorgeous team of strategist, writers, conceptual thinkers, beautiful design.

Lenny (00:50:22):
I was curious.

Nancy Duarte (00:50:24):
Coaches. Yeah, I know. I get coached. It's fun. I definitely, my books look awesome, not because of me, but because I'm followed around by people that do really gorgeous work. But the phrase that we use internally and sometimes with customers is we make presentations the way Pixar makes movies. And that's very similar to the way we get somebody that has this high stakes moment where it's a big deal in this moment. You have to win in the moment to push things along. And so we do, we literally craft a narrative, craft the big idea, craft the script and visualize certain moments. We start to map it out, we start to chunk it out.

(00:51:05):
And then big models sometimes when you're really making a revolutionary model, one that could drive all the web assets, a lot of that stuff people don't realize actually happens in the presentation first as an idea. So, sometimes we'll start working on some of the key models right away too, and we start to circulate that around the company, because everyone has to build consensus around it. So, sometimes there's multiple motions happening at the same time. Let's sketch this. You go away, you work with this department, you try to get this settled, you get that set, you get this.

(00:51:36):
And then it gets reassembled at the end. And then the narrative is where you work all the kinks out and then when they stand and deliver, it's like, yes, it's the voice track that all the process supported. And then other times we're building a report in a slide doc, or there was a time where we had a head of a multinational company that will remain nameless and the guy that was head of all of India was going to come over here and petition the CEO for a hundred million dollar budget.

(00:52:09):
It's not trivial. And he comes, is like, "Okay, I need your help with these five slides." And he just sends us the five slides and we're like, "Well yeah, a hundred million. That's kind of a lot. You really want to put technology between you and the CEO. Do you really want to sit side by side and both be looking at a computer in this moment where it's like you're petitioning him for, that's a lot of money." And he's like, "Yeah, you're right." So, what we did is we made a mental model he could hold up in his head and the structure was so simple and clear. And then there was three moments where we're like just, I don't know, just grab a piece of paper or go to a whiteboard and just start to draw in front of him. Let him see your eyes, let him have eye contact.

(00:52:46):
Let him see your passion. Don't be dispassionately looking at this computer. And he did it and he called us and he's like, "I got a hundred million bucks." So, it's just those moments where you have to realize, wait, wait, wait, wait. Do I need a deck? Who am I talking to? And should is this a cookie cutter thing? And does the same process work every time? No. So, every time we solve something it's very different and we try to make it unique to the presenter and the audience that they're speaking to.

Lenny (00:53:18):
Along the same lines, a lot of presentations now are actually remote and on Zoom and virtual. What do you recommend to people in terms of how they present and put presentations together being remote?

Nancy Duarte (00:53:28):
Yeah, it's funny, we spent a lot of time coaching people to look in the camera. So, while I've been talking to you, I'm not actually looking at your face. I'm looking at the little dot at the top of my screen and my camera. And not a lot of people can do that. So, it's gotten to where I can see that little white glowing dot and my heart warms, I know you're there, I feel you. I can get sensations in my skin when I know I'm talking to someone that I adore or admire. And that took a long time to get there. And I was presenting remotely pre COVID. So, a lot of our coaching was about eye contact and doing that. The other thing that happens is people don't see our hands anymore. They're under the table. They can't see how much space in a room we're taking up.

(00:54:15):
They can't see a lot of the characteristics that are common in communicating. And so there's a lot of coaching around presence and how do you have presence in a room? How do you even get the microphone away from someone that's remote and all those kinds of things. And a new study just came out, I just came across my desk today and it said that soft skills really suffered. And the people who did it right say and looked at the camera, they don't have good eye contact skills anymore. When they are looking face-to-face in someone's eyes, it's like, oh, they're not used to it. It's been so long.

(00:54:50):
And then the other thing is, where do I sit in a room who's got the position of authority? Just kind of some classic things that convey information in real life. So, it's interesting, it peaked and now people are going back to the office some. A percent are back in the office. And now we have this weird place where it's, oh, it's half in the office and half people are remote. And the people that are remote are having a hard time getting their voices heard because the people in the room consume most of the air. So, it's kind of going through this undulating life cycle of new communication skills people need while they're remote. It's all changing.

Lenny (00:55:34):
I'm glad that I was not a PM in this remote world to be honest. I never experienced it, but I have a lot of empathy for being a product manager in this remote work world. Feels like the job got a lot harder.

Nancy Duarte (00:55:44):
It did. I think it did.

Lenny (00:55:46):
Yeah. So, let's talk about nerves and stage fright. So, I hate public speaking. I get extremely nervous people. They may not feel this when they watch me, but it's not my natural state. You work with a lot of people that I imagine are like, oh my god, I'm so scared to give this presentation. What advice do you give them to help them through that and feel more comfortable?

Nancy Duarte (00:56:06):
Yeah, I think people who are more thoughtful and contemplative about speaking have better content. They tend to really think through stuff than someone who's like, I got this. I'll just wing it. I'll just walk on the stage. Anyone who's like, tells me I am a nervous presenter, I'm like, you have probably got gorgeous content in your heart that the world needs to hear, because usually they are really deep and thoughtful. Like you already mentioned, you're a pattern finder and you like to do thoughtful work. And so it's hard. My husband is actually a brilliant communicator, just getting him to feel like he wants to take up the space. He's a better communicator than I am. And so what happens is the reason you get scared, it's a fight or flight instinct. For some reason stepping out on that stage, you feel your body and your mind and your psyche is feeling threatened like you would be attacked by an animal.

(00:56:56):
That's literally what's happening. And so you couple things you could do. You can actually sit in one of the seats of the auditorium and just sit there and look at the stage, look at the setting so you can imagine yourself on it. But then picture yourself as that friendly face, the one that's happy to see you, the one that's delighted that you're speaking. And then as you're standing up, remember that you saw yourself sitting there smiling and very happy. You have to change your visual model that people's faces will be scowling, they'll be judging you, they'll be doubting you. All of those things are only in your head because getting you out on the stage to be able to start to expose people to this amazing content you have, the biggest battle is to get you out on this stage and delivering it.

(00:57:47):
And I asked a bunch of people once, I did a survey of all these public speakers and was like, how do you prepare? How do you prepare? What's your pre-talk ritual? And some of them were like, "I play heavy metal music and I skip around the entire convention center, just get all fired up." I'm like, "Wow, I have to calm myself down because I already have over to the top energy." So, I literally find the dark. I don't go to the green room, that stuff. I don't like to hear gibber jabber. I have to be focused on my content. And so I find the darkest corner of the backstage and calmly sit and just breathe. I just breathe. Sometimes if I'm nervous, if there's someone real famous in the audience, I have a little list playlist of funny things that people sent me, but I never watch. And that way right before I walk on stage, I chemically, my whole body chemically shifts from nervous to laughter. And that really helps me too, because it's chemical and you have to train your chemistry a bit.

Lenny (00:58:46):
I really like that tip. What are these funny things you watch if you-

Nancy Duarte (00:58:50):
It's like YouTube things, TikTok things. Just things that I tag and I try not to watch them or things that make me laugh. There's this dorky low watched video of a guy with tin cans wrapped around his waist and he plays them. And my husband walks around the house like him and making the noise and I could probably sing the beat if I had to. And so sometimes I just play that, because it just transports me home, because a lot of times I'm presenting away from home and it just makes me laugh at my husband who's hysterical. So, it's just random things, but if you laugh and somehow can transport yourself outside of the fear of walking out there, it helps reset you before you walk out on stage.

Lenny (00:59:39):
I really like that. Is there anything else just off the top of your head that just like right before you go on stage that you find to be really effective? So, watching funny videos, I love that. [inaudible 00:59:47] use it. Anything else?

Nancy Duarte (00:59:48):
I breathe. I think I've learned a breathing pattern. I take a deep, deep breath and then I take that one while my lungs are full, I take another gulp of breath and I have to let it out real slow. But when I got the feedback that my friend and some people get over their fear by headbanging to heavy metal, so I'm not saying that's not the wrong thing. So, I thought, well, maybe I should try that before I do a talk. And so I literally didn't do that. But I stretched, I jumped a little, just low jumps, put my arms real big up in the air. And then I walked on stage and I happened to be speaking at a massive medical company, like big brand. And I finished my talk and my assistant got a call and they were like, "We're little worried about Nancy. We think she might need to see a doctor. She could never control her breathing and we're really concerned."

(01:00:38):
And it was just because I just pumped myself up a little bit. So, I don't do that whatsoever anymore. I went back to my calming, contemplative, meditative pre-talk ritual. So, for some people, literally I do encourage people to try headbanging to heavy metal. It might work. It's just a matter of what you need. And nobody would guess that I'm not one to dance around or pump myself up, but I am not, I have to calm myself down. It's the opposite.

Lenny (01:01:09):
Awesome. Just a few more questions.

Nancy Duarte (01:01:12):
Sure.

Lenny (01:01:12):
So, you wrote a book called Illuminate and something that stood out to me from that book is this idea of a torch bearer and torch bearer leader. Can you just talk about what that is and why that is important in power?

Nancy Duarte (01:01:22):
Yeah, I loved writing that book. Co-author Patty Sanchez, a hat tip to her. So, to come up with this book, we knew that there's one presentation, there's a single presentation, could be on a stage, could be in a meeting, just updating people on a project status. And we knew though that every presentation usually is part of a larger movement where you're trying to move people in mass to this alternate future. So, we studied movements, we deconstructed the largest movements. We met with Marshall Ganz at Harvard to say, "Hey, could this be true?" Because he studies movements. It was so fun. And then movements have a five act structure. So, picture, there's this moment where you have to verbalize the dream like, hey, we're going to head to this new place and this is what I have to do at my kickoff meetings. It's like imagine this place in the future that we're headed to.

(01:02:15):
So, it's five steps, it's a five act story structure, if you want to call it five acts. It's dream, leap, fight, climb, arrive. So, the torch bearer, the reason we called that is the leaders know where they're headed, but they might not ever see it super, super clearly. And we chose a torch because a torch, if you're in a cave and you have a torch, you only see about five, eight feet around you, but it's enough to dissipate the fear of the people following you in. And so nobody sees the future clearly. Nobody has that kind of level skill. All we know is I need to traverse this direction to be at the right place in the future so all my staff is safe, all are, we stay a leader in the industry. That's all I know. And as we start to head there, there's these moments of communication you need to do, which is, hey everyone, here's the dream. Here's where we're headed. That's the dream phase.

(01:03:09):
Then there's this moment where they either choose to jump in and go with you or they choose not to. You could talk about Frodo like Sam and only a few hobbits followed him. And so it's like people select to commit this journey. That's the beginning of your movement. But then the middle is the messy middle of a story. We call it the fight and climb phase. So, what happens is they commit to your idea, they commit to your program, your project, and they're like enthused at first. And then they go into the state of, oh my God, this is harder than I thought. It's a long slog. This climb is getting exhausted. I don't know if I have this much fight in me to make this all work, not fight with each other, but like, oh my God, I'm having to overcome this roadblock and that roadblock and we have to go get that budget.

(01:03:53):
So, it's just, it's like a fight, climb, fight, climb, fight, climb. And then ultimately you arrive. Each one of those five phases you need to use speeches, stories, ceremonies and symbols at each phase to give the people traveling with you the emotional fuel they need to keep going, to keep seeing that idea become realized. And it literally is about fueling the right emotions with speeches, stories, ceremonies, and symbols while you're moving people toward a bigger initiative. So, it's bigger than just one presentation, it's multiple presentations, multiple stories, multiple ceremonies. So, I loved that book. People are really feeding off of it right now because leading change has been nonstop. It's just been change, change, change the last especially few years.

Lenny (01:04:40):
Change is the only constant like they say.

Nancy Duarte (01:04:42):
Exactly.

Lenny (01:04:43):
I really like this metaphor of the torch giving you a sense of, as a leader, you can see some portion around you, but you're not going to see the entire cave necessarily. That is really interesting. Maybe a final question very tactically is I give an interview where you shared that you had kind of two videos, one where it's very informal, you're just standing in front of whiteboard in jeans or something, just talking about some about data, I think in presentations. And then you had a similar video where it was very well constructed, high production value, and the informal video did a lot better. Is that something you're seeing? Just that kind of content ends up being more successful and why do you think that is?

Nancy Duarte (01:05:21):
I think video content, production quality now isn't the expectation for it being high quality. It's just completely shifted over the last five, eight years or so as everyone's an expert and can show up as an expert. There's a big difference to me about showing up as a keynoter, which is like, I'm going to stand, I'm going to look right. I'm going to have this eye contact, I'm going to nail it. My slides are gorgeous, I'm driving the industry. And for people to think that our explanations of things needs to be done as a stand and deliver keynote, that's just not true. So, I experimented with that and I had some videos I had done, and one of them, like you said, was me looking in the camera. I even had HD makeup, a film crew. I was well lit, I looked amazing. I mean, I did look amazing and it was polished.

(01:06:09):
I delivered it really well. And then I thought, because on LinkedIn I post a lot, that's where my primary channel is, and I thought what would happen if I just posted a rando shot of me? And I'm maybe airing on a little bit like orange, I look a little Trumpian, a little bit orange. It's not color corrected, but it's super informative, really full of information. And that was my highest viewed video so far. And I realized that it's like people want the content and we do as a presentation company, I have to nail it maybe more than others, but it doesn't have to be fully video edited, infographics spinning, swooshing things forward and swooshing things back.

(01:06:50):
That kind of nature of it is not necessary to get the message across. And so we actually have a whole process and program we're rolling out where you're going to see a lot more video from us, partially from that insight, but partially because my team, I have a team of experts, they have a lot of great things to share, and so I'm trying to give them, I'm trying to make it be like Duarte does not equal Nancy Duarte. I'm trying to make it so it's like so many experts work at Duarte, you got to watch any video from any of them is where we're moving at Duarte. They're freaks of brilliance and just experts. They're world class experts. So, that's what we're trying to do.

Lenny (01:07:27):
I feel like you have a similar challenge to me where I named my newsletter, Lenny's Newsletter.

Nancy Duarte (01:07:32):
Yeah, same thing.

Lenny (01:07:33):
[inaudible 01:07:33] talk about that.

Nancy Duarte (01:07:33):
Same thing.

Lenny (01:07:33):
Yeah, can never be anyone else. It's a challenge, but yeah, don't know, it worked out. Okay. Actually, real final question before we get to a very exciting lightning round. Have you seen examples of product managers specifically telling really good stories?

Nancy Duarte (01:07:46):
The product management process has multiple phase. There's the creative explorative process all the way through to getting it produced. And I think story can take you along in each phase. So, there's example, which I read about, I wasn't actually even part of, but Brian Chesky at Airbnb, there was a whole article where he unpacked this moment in their product development cycle where they decided they would take a walk in the shoes of their customer and they hired a Pixar illustrator to illustrate each scene as the team's like, okay, okay, they said this is her name. And they were like, okay, what happens? Her alarm goes off. Okay, what happens next? What happens next? Okay, now she's decided she needs to book something. What does she do? She wants to do that. They realized from this little walk in the shoes of their customer just this day in the life, which is a classic storytelling method for any product, they realized that they had their strategy wrong, that they needed to move as soon as possible to a mobile first strategy.

(01:08:46):
And it was just because they actually thought about, okay. She goes, brushes their teeth, they do this. They were just literally walking through the life of their ideal customer and that was when they realized they had it all messed up. But the other phases, after all this work people put into product and the making of the product and the managing of pushing it through. We have a large client that makes shoes or athletic things. I love telling stories, but I can't say this. And there's this moment where we get brought in and could you please train our product people in story? We're like, "What's the big problem?" They're like, "They'll spend a year or two on a shoe and be like, chunk, put it on the table. And they're like, what do you have to say about it?" They're like, "It's red." And it's like all these years of investment, all these years, they couldn't unpack any sort of story or any sort of reason or even their passion for why they chose red.

(01:09:41):
And it was like, here's my shoe, it's red. And so this ability to move things along by adding meaning or why and then wrapping it in a story actually can get a product chosen or rejected or there's just so many examples of different spaces in the product cycle that could benefit from a really well told story from, like I said, how the products innovate in the roadmap all the way through to what gets accepted. And then the big reveal, you think about even all the big Apple launches, it's about a big product reveal. It's about revealing this thing that had been hidden for so long and it's another moment to tell amazing stories. So, that's kind of a little bit of an insight on the product side of how to use story.

Lenny (01:10:27):
The Airbnb example is an awesome example. It's all true. When I joined Airbnb is actually right there in the process of doing that.

Nancy Duarte (01:10:34):
I love that.

Lenny (01:10:36):
And they ended up drawing these key frames of the journey as you described, and they put it right in the center of the office. Here's the journey of a host and a guest that's like 12 frames of that journey. And that actually became the strategy of the company is let's pick six of these frames and make them awesome. And that's what we're going to do.

Nancy Duarte (01:10:36):
That's awesome.

Lenny (01:10:54):
Make booking experience awesome. Make the arrival experience awesome. So, there's a lot of truth to that.

Nancy Duarte (01:11:00):
And it was visualized, right? The vision was visualized like what you're saying we're headed in the future. And it was super clear. I love that story. So cool you were there.

Lenny (01:11:09):
Yeah, it was very cool. And they actually were very mobile. You could grab one of these drawings and bring it to your desk and how are we going to make this moment better this week?

Nancy Duarte (01:11:17):
That's awesome.

Lenny (01:11:19):
And it was actually indeed, Pixar storyboard artist that they hired for a year. That was his job. Draw these key frames.

Nancy Duarte (01:11:25):
Oh, that's amazing.

Lenny (01:11:27):
And it connects so directly with your point about empathy. That was the epitome of empathy. Here's what the guest and hosts are going through, and here's where we can do better.

Nancy Duarte (01:11:37):
Yeah, it's amazing. Yeah, it does tie together.

Lenny (01:11:40):
If folks want to look this up, by the way, we'll link in the show notes. If you just Google Snow White Airbnb, you can watch a video of how they all kind of came about this. Well, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions for you if you're ready.

Nancy Duarte (01:11:54):
Yep, I'm ready.

Lenny (01:11:56):
What are two or three books that you recommended most to other people?

Nancy Duarte (01:12:00):
I think I always classically recommend the gospels because there's just so much love and groundbreaking thinking there. And then for people who do wind up taking an interest in story, I think one of the best books, if you want to pick that up, is Chris Vogler's, The Writer's Journey, where he took Joseph Campbell's Hero's Journey, made it 12 Steps, and he was a Disney story analyst. So, it's just really classic body of work that had really helped people get their minds around story and the archetypes.

Lenny (01:12:30):
What is a favorite recent movie or TV show?

Nancy Duarte (01:12:33):
It's my little sinful pleasure. It's way into K drama, Korean drama. Don't even ask me how, but I'm way into that. I've seen almost all of them now. I'm at the bottom of the barrel of them.

Lenny (01:12:44):
Is there a favorite?

Nancy Duarte (01:12:45):
No, my husband just watched one. It's called Business Proposal, and he watched it with me and he's like, oh no, now I'm going to be hooked too. They're just real. They're just cute as a button. And they have a longer arc. They're like an epic length tail. They drop in 12 part seasons or one season 12. Anyway, don't even get me started. It sounds dumb, because I like the epic tales and the dramas, but they're cute.

Lenny (01:12:45):
I love it.

Nancy Duarte (01:13:07):
They're just cute.

Lenny (01:13:08):
This is great. Getting very real. What is a favorite interview question that you like to ask people that you're hiring?

Nancy Duarte (01:13:14):
Oh, favorite interview question. We ask a lot about who they are. So, we use psychometrics a lot here, and we really understand who they are, and we actually ask people to tell a story. And if that's uncomfortable or those psychometrics are uncomfortable, they're not really a fit, because we are a systemic story culture, and we define empathy at the company as know yourself, accept yourself, kind of work on yourself, and then adapt to others. So, if people aren't open to really understanding how they show up then and then adapt and change under our care, then we don't hire them.

Lenny (01:13:51):
What is a favorite product you've recently discovered that you love?

Nancy Duarte (01:13:55):
I'm excited about a tool I just paid for last week. It's called writer.com. So, it's built on multiple language models and including, it's going to be trained on our own, all my IP, all my books, every blog post, it'll learn the voice and it'll use my own kind of language model to help us write faster. So, we put really good prompts in and we get a really good product out. So, I'm super excited about that.

Lenny (01:14:17):
I'm actually an investor in that company, so this is great to hear.

Nancy Duarte (01:14:20):
Oh yeah. That's awesome.

Lenny (01:14:21):
Writer.com. What is something relatively minor you've changed in your approach to developing presentations that has had a big impact on your ability to execute and get them out?

Nancy Duarte (01:14:33):
Yeah. I think there's the biggest roadblock for so long that made things painful was the edit cycles. How do we do a round with a client? Then you have multiple version, then you have version control. So, we've come up with this annotation system, so everyone on a project knows exactly the status of that slide, and there's no way really to check slides in and out. And so we've come up with this amazing, beautiful, very visual process where everyone knows the exact status of the slide, and it's really easy. You could put it in thumbnail mode and be like, hmm, we're 80% complete. Everyone's going to focus on just these two things. So, that part of the process, especially enterprise at scale where 20 or 30 people are contributors to a deck. That process we made is the clients are really liking it.

Lenny (01:15:14):
To leave people with one final tip to give better presentations. What would that be?

Nancy Duarte (01:15:18):
To become a better presenter, pick a topic you are passionate about, something where you're like, oh my gosh, I've got to see this happen. And pick that topic and be so passionate about it. Work on that talk or stand up at a volunteer thing and really work on something that makes you feel passionate. And then in the future when you're presenting something that you're not passionate about, everything you learned will apply to a business presentation, but you're going to have that feeling. You're going to know what it's like to present from your soul and from a place of passion and the great presenters tap into that passion point and pull from that, and that's what makes them a great presenter on other topics, that they might not be as passionate about.

Lenny (01:15:58):
Nancy, I so appreciate you making time for this. It's been an honor.

Nancy Duarte (01:16:01):
You're amazing.

Lenny (01:16:02):
Everything. You're amazing.

Nancy Duarte (01:16:03):
You're amazing.

Lenny (01:16:05):
You're amazing. Two final questions. Where can folks find you if they'd like to reach out, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Nancy Duarte (01:16:12):
Oh, they can find me at duarte.com. There's also a duarte.com/nancy where I've got a ton of free stuff where you could find a lot of the things I've talked about. I'm on Twitter @NancyDuarte, and I do connect to everyone who connects to me on LinkedIn, which is kind of fun. So, I think, how could they be useful to me? I think it will cure so many problems if everyone became a really good communicator, so you can help me by working hard on your communication skills, working hard on your clarity, and making everyone around you much happier people.

Lenny (01:16:47):
What a beautiful way to end it. Nancy, again, thank you so much for being here.

Nancy Duarte (01:16:50):
Oh, you're amazing. Thanks for having me.

Lenny (01:16:52):
We're amazing. Let's end it.

Nancy Duarte (01:16:52):
We are. Let's just say it.

Lenny (01:16:56):
All right. Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Tristan de Montebello (00:00:00):
People tend to get into a public speaking voice. We'll be in a class and they'll be chatting normally and look super normal. And then we'll say, "Okay, now just a timer, I'm just going to give you a speech. Just speak for 60 seconds so we get a baseline," and I click play, and suddenly I say, "The important part about doing this," and they enter into a different version of themselves, a professional version, whatever that would mean. It's so much more freeing, powerful, connecting, and effective to speak conversation. So the cue I often give people is-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:36):
Today my guest is Tristan de Montebello. Tristan is the co-Creator of Ultraspeaking, which is the best public speaking workshop I have ever come across. In 2017, Tristan became the fastest competitor to reach the finals of the world championship of public speaking. And based on that experience, built a very unique course that helps you quickly build the skills to become better and to become more comfortable speaking in public, and especially speaking on the spot.

(00:01:04):
I'd like to spend time on this topic on this podcast because becoming a better speaker is such an accelerant of your professional life. And in this episode, we delve into a bunch of tactics and also misconceptions about how to become a better speaker, and to make it even more fun and interesting, we go through a few of the exercises that Tristan and his team have developed live on the podcast. He goes through them, I go through them, it was a lot of fun. I'm excited to hear what you think. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you, Tristan de Montebello.

(00:01:45):
Tristan, thank you so much for joining me and welcome to the podcast.

Tristan de Montebello (00:01:49):
Thanks so much for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:51):
So I took an abridged version of this speaking course that you teach called Ultraspeaking, and it immediately made me feel more comfortable public speaking, which I've never felt doing any other course. Public speaking is something it's just is very scary to me as it is for a lot of people, but it's just something I really dread. Even doing these podcast episodes, every time I get nervous before doing these things, as much as it may not seem that way. So this is not my natural habitat speaking, being in public. It may not seem that way to people, but it's true.

(00:02:22):
And the way you approach this stuff is so unique and worked for me. And because of that, I thought it'd be awesome to just bring you on this podcast and basically try to teach people the stuff that you've learned about how to become a better public speaker. I know we're not going to do your course here, but just, what are some very tactical things people can immediately start to apply? And also, I want to make the super interactive, so we're actually going to do some of the exercises that you use in your class. So that's what we're here for. How does that sound?

Tristan de Montebello (00:02:54):
That sounds exciting. I'm in.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:56):
Great.

(00:02:59):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next-generation, A/B testing and feature management platform built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams. Companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth and for understanding the performance of new features. And Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous, deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most was our experimentation platform, where I could set up experiments easily, troubleshoot issues, and analyze performance all on my own. Eppo does all that and more with advanced statistical methods that can help you shave weeks off experiment time and accessible UI for diving deeper into performance, and out-of-the-box reporting that helps you avoid annoying prolonged analytic cycles.

(00:03:52):
Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insights with your team, sparking new ideas for the A/B testing flywheel. Eppo powers experimentation across every use case, including product, growth, machine learning, monetization, and email marketing. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com/lenny and 10X your experiment velocity. That's geteppo.com/lenny.

(00:04:18):
Today's episode is brought to you by Command AI. If you're like me and most users that I've built product for, you're probably used to chatbots at the bottom right of websites, where you ask a question and it says something like, " Check out these three helpful articles. Did that answer your question?" And then you click away and then a few seconds later you get bombarded with some other useless pop-ups. For those of us who work on software, no one wants their product to feel like this. Command AI is an AI power toolkit for support, product, growth and marketing teams that embeds in your company's product. The AI support agent can deflect upwards of 80% of support questions, providing actually useful answers, and it can magically co-browse with your users to show them around your interface. They do pop-ups too, but their nudges are based on in-product behaviors like confusion or intent classification, which makes them much less annoying and much more impactful.

(00:05:11):
Command AI works with web apps, mobile apps and websites, and they work with industry-leading companies like Gusto, Freshworks, HashiCorp, LaunchDarkly, and over 25 million end users interact with Command AI interfaces. To try out Command AI. You can sign up at command.ai/lenny and experience a custom demo of how it works in your app. That's command.ai/lenny.

(00:05:36):
Okay, so let me first ask just kind of a broad question. What do most people get wrong about public speaking? What are some of, what's maybe the biggest misconception about how to become a better public speaker and how to be good at it?

Tristan de Montebello (00:05:49):
I actually think that the biggest misconception with tackling your speaking is that people grossly underestimate just how transformative it could be to your life. And the reason it's so transformative is because speaking is not a specialized skill, it's a meta skill. That means that the better you get at speaking, the better your life gets.

(00:06:16):
So an example of a meta skill is fitness, for example. If you were to start saying, "Okay, I'm going to transform my fitness," and you start lifting weights and you start going on runs, obviously your muscles are going to get bigger, you're going to get more in shape, and your cardiovascular system is going to improve. But that's actually only a sliver of the impact it's going to have on your life because you're going to start feeling more energy, and you're going to start having these nice hormones, these endorphins flowing through your body and you're going to feel better about yourself. And when you walk in front of the mirror, suddenly you're going to have a boost in confidence. So naturally, everything else in your life is going to start to improve as a result of you focusing on your fitness. And for speaking, it's the same thing.

(00:07:01):
This blew my mind when I went on my own speaking journey, is when I started making breakthroughs in speaking, other things started to feel different. So as you get breakthroughs, how you feel at work feels different. How you feel in your group of friends feels different. How you feel in a group of strangers, especially, how you feel and your family can even be impacted. This seeps into everything else in your life. But the thing is, because there's so much self-consciousness that goes with speaking, we often feel kind of constraints under the layers of overthinking and anxiety that come with speaking. So it can be hard to realize that underneath these layers, you actually have this extraordinary superpower, because as humans we're evolved to speak, this is what we are. So you don't need to teach a baby how to speak, it will learn by itself with no formal education. So what that means is, we all have this incredible hardware.

(00:08:12):
The thing is, over the course of our life, because of all these little situations that happen, we start getting bugs in the software and we're not really upgrading our software. The moment you get the bugs and things start working, not working, we start avoiding, and suddenly it's like we're not upgrading our software anymore. So we're stuck on old, buggy software. But the reality is, let's not forget that we have incredible software that were evolved for this. So all we need to do is some debugging and some upgrading of the software and suddenly your entire life can change. So that's really one I want to impart on anybody listening. You have it in, you already have what it takes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:56):
Okay. So kind of building on what you just talked about, some of this insight of, your life can improve and how you kind of always have to unlearn stuff. One of my favorite maybe core insights and tenets of the way you approach teaching people to speak, is you talk about how if you don't enjoy speaking, you're doing it wrong. And that really helped me because you kind of encourage, you kind of remind people, try to have fun as you're doing. Can you just talk about that insight and why that's important and how that helps people become better?

Tristan de Montebello (00:09:26):
Well, I think that's very tied to what you were saying. I see enjoyment as a barometer, if I'm doing things right, I'm probably enjoying myself. If I'm doing things wrong, particularly with speaking, because again, this is something we're naturally evolved to do. So if we're naturally evolved to do it, it's not something that we dislike doing. It has to be something that rewards us. So as soon as things start not feeling enjoyable, it's a sign, hey, I'm probably doing this wrong, guy. There's something here that I'm doing that is making this unenjoyable that's probably not helping me.

(00:10:03):
And I think you mentioned that in those people who can hold an audience who are really good communicators in business, it looks like they feel very comfortable, it looks like they feel like themselves. And if you think about speaking, when you're talking with your kids, or with your partner, or with your best friend, your childhood friend, your parents, ever, we all have environments where we feel completely like ourselves. And when we do, communication is extraordinarily enjoyable. It's just a means to connect with other people, a means to share what we have on our mind and it's very, very empowering and it feels very good.

(00:10:42):
Then I take the same person with the same skill set and the same ability and I bring them in a business setting, and suddenly I don't feel like myself anymore. And because of the pressure, I start trying to speak differently. So people start having, I'm going to try to think really hard of what I need to say and I want to control the words that are going to come out of my mouth before they come out of my mouth so I make sure I don't make a mistake. And you basically loop in this thing that is so counter what communication is, which is just a natural subconscious scale. So using speaking as a barometer of, hey, if this is not feeling good, I'm probably overthinking. I probably need to relax and try to just feel a little bit more like myself.

(00:11:27):
But this also applies to practice, where in your practice, because this is not an overnight thing, you can't just snap your fingers, read a book, and be a better speaker. Well, your practice has to be enjoyable as well because otherwise two weeks in, you're going to quit just like a shitty fitness journey or diet. Right? You have to find joy in it and it has to be structured in a way where it rewards you as well, so that you get more energy and you get more enjoyment while you do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:58):
Awesome, and we're going to show people how you do that. You do these games, they're games that you play that help you actually learn these skills. So before that, and also I want to get into actual tactics that we can just give people to become better public speakers. But right before we get there, are there any other core insights or principles or lessons that are fundamental to the way you found that it works to become a better public speaker, that kind of inform a lot of the stuff we're going to be talking about?

Tristan de Montebello (00:12:25):
The day I understood that speaking was a subconscious flow-oriented process and not a conscious process, completely changed the way I approached it. So instead of thinking tactics and frameworks and adding more to the outside of the things I need to think about, when I realized when I speak best, I'm actually not thinking about speaking. It's the last thing I think about is the speaking part. I'm completely in tune with whatever it is I'm trying to convey to my audience or the person in front of me. And the goal is to get into a flow state and stay in that flow state all the way through the finish line. That's what really, really changed my mindset about speaking, because then it changes all of the exercise, the exercises you want to do. It changes how you can think about speaking.

(00:13:24):
And one of the ways that changed how I practiced was, instead of focusing on the symptoms of speaking, I started to try and figure out, well, what are the root causes that create these symptoms, and can I address those? So instead of counting my filler words, if that's something that's annoying to me, I'm going to go back and try to figure out, well, what's the root cause of that? Well, the root cause of having lots of filler words or racing in your speaking, is that you probably struggle to feel comfortable slowing down, relaxing, or even pausing when your mind is racing and you feel pressure. Solve that, and not only do the filler words take care of themselves, but the racing takes care of itself and you suddenly have more mind space.

(00:14:11):
And if you feel super constrained in your speaking, very monotonous, then maybe you feel boxed in and you're struggling to allow yourself to feel to be all of what you are under pressure because there's probably a lack of certainty. A lack of trust in, hey, if I let myself be more intense or if I let some of these emotions pop out, or if I take a time to gather my thoughts, is everything going to unravel, or is that going to work for me? And if you haven't proven that to yourself, then you're just going to go for safety and so you're going to be very monotonous and constrained, and that's creates monotony. But if I can solve that, suddenly I have freedom. So thinking through this and understanding that the goal here is upgrading the software and it's really layering, taking all the bad habits away and putting in new habits that I can just stay in this flow state without getting pulled out, that really changes the game.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:15):
That is a really interesting insight, and I love that you actually demoed that in the way you answered this question, where you took time to get into that state and not just get, um... It's just like, pause.

Tristan de Montebello (00:15:28):
Pause.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:29):
Yeah, that was a really beautiful example of that. Okay, let's get into a few tactics just to give people something they can-

Tristan de Montebello (00:15:29):
Sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:34):
... actually change about the way they speak this week. What are two or three things that you can recommend people tweak in the way that they do public speaking, in the way they speak in meetings and presentations, whatever?

Tristan de Montebello (00:15:47):
I actually thought about this because once you think about speaking being much more about the root causes, like play the games that are going to change you at the root, don't focus on the symptoms, then you find yourself sharing much less purely tactical advice and frameworks because we're trying to get out of our brain into our subconscious.

(00:16:10):
So when I thought about it, I thought of three things I wanted to share. One makes you sound better or look better, one makes you sound better, and one makes you feel better. So the first makes you look better. Now this is super basic and very crunchy, but it's a bad habit that a lot of people have. That when I am trying to gather my thoughts or think, people tend to look down. And if you're looking down on Zoom, it's three times as bad because it looks like you're looking at your phone or looking at notes if you had any, but even when you're in person, it doesn't look very confident. And so you're suddenly giving off of that vibe of, oh, this person feels a little bit uncertain here, and maybe it's going to look like you stopped speaking and you might get more interrupted.

(00:16:56):
If instead you switch that up and you start thinking up. I think up into the right, but you can think in any direction you want, but as long as you're looking up, you actually look thoughtful by default. So suddenly you're looking thoughtful. That means you look more confident because anybody who'd be willing to pause in their speaking is somebody who's confident. And as a result, you're much less likely to get interrupted. So it's a small tweak but makes a real difference.

(00:17:24):
The only thing is if you're not used to doing this, if this is not your habit, then it's going to feel a little bit awkward the first time you do it and you probably won't think about doing it. So I recommend writing, think up, on a post-it and putting it on your computer so that it's there for you. And then once you've done it a few times, this will become the new normal and by default, you'll look more confident.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:46):
I'm going to do this as we talk. I have a poster right here. Think up.,

Tristan de Montebello (00:17:48):
Oh, nice. Think up.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:50):
Okay, great. What else?

Tristan de Montebello (00:17:53):
Look more confident. Now how to sound more confident. This is a really important one, and this concept is called end strong. And it's, we had to bring this up because most people tend to end weak. And why is that? They put freestyle rappers in an fMRI, and what they found out is freestyle rappers have to enter a deep flow state. If you're freestyle rapping, you have a beat, you don't have any lyrics, and you have to get into the beat and invent the lyrics and the melody and everything on the fly. So there's no choice but being completely present. What happens is you can see their brain and it's lit up in a very specific place that shows that they're in flow, and when they get to the very end, the brain just blows up. Before they finish, they start getting pulled out of flow. And this is the same feeling of you're running at school and you see the finish line and just a few yards before you start slowing down. It's just, I don't know, we're built that way.

(00:18:53):
And in speaking, it's the same thing. People tend to give a great answer and then either they kind of taper off at the end, which doesn't leave you with a good impression, or they'll actively say the doubts that are coming up in their mind of maybe they'll be giving a great answer and then suddenly they say, "I don't really know if that makes sense."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:10):
I do that all the time. That's very relatable.

Tristan de Montebello (00:19:13):
Yeah, but what the thing is, what happens when you do that? When you do that, it's like you're forcing this lens on your audience, where now even if they had the best of experiences with your answer, now they're looking at everything you said through the lens of, oh, this person was kind of uncertain. So it's like you had a very smooth flight across the Atlantic and your landing was absolutely horrible. You were bumpy when you were coming up, and then when you hit the landing, you bounced three times and you thought you were going to die. You're not going to remember the smooth flight, you're going to remember the ending. So a simple tactic here is, anticipate that as you get to the end of anything you're saying, you're going to naturally start regaining consciousness and you're going to start being a little bit more self-aware, and some of those uncertainties are going to pop up. Know that it's coming and make sure you land the plane.

(00:20:14):
So what that looks like is, either you just make your ending sound like an ending and then leave it at that, or you can prompt your brain. You can use summary prompts, this is incredibly powerful. It just means you say the beginning of a sentence or the beginning of, yeah, the beginning of a sentence, and your brain's going to fill in the gap. It's going to. You're prompting your brain and your brain will always deliver. So you get to the end, you're like, okay, I got to wrap up now. And so you'll say, "So to wrap up..." And your brain's going to fill in the gap. Or, "In summary, so my point here is, so what I want you to remember," and you just place those words and your brain's naturally going to do the work of closing it for you. But make sure you don't let go of the gas pedal at the very last moment, you need to land that plane.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:01):
Awesome. I could definitely get better at this, great tip.

Tristan de Montebello (00:21:04):
Yeah, thanks.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:06):
I'm going to try to do that as we talk.

Tristan de Montebello (00:21:07):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:07):
And what else we got?

Tristan de Montebello (00:21:09):
I'll be paying attention to that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:11):
Okay, pressure.

Tristan de Montebello (00:21:15):
Yeah. The third one is staying in character. And these go hand in hand. And what's really powerful is when you start doing these, there's a beautiful feedback loop that happens that gives you a lot of confidence. So staying in character I said is the one that's going to make you feel more confident.

(00:21:33):
What's staying in character? So it's related to end strong in some sense, in that people tend to self-sabotage a lot. I'm speaking, and obviously as I'm speaking, all of my senses are really, really heightened. So I'm aware of everything, if a word comes out a little bit weird or if it's not the word that I was expecting to hear come out of my mouth, I'm going to be very aware of that because I was expecting something and something different happens. But that happens all the time when speaking. I'm starting to not make as much sense or I feel like I'm rambling, going a little bit too long. All of these create insane noise in the back of my mind, the insecurities. And you have a choice there, because I can tell you right now, nobody can tell. People cannot see what you feel, even though it feels that way when you feel really, really strongly, but people can't see it. You're just looking like a normal speaker, competent and confident. But internally, it feels like everybody can see.

(00:22:34):
So you're feeling all this insecurity and it feels like there's an elephant in the room. And so what most people do is they start leaking and they break character. And they'll say, "Oh, man, I'm not making sense right now," or they'll laugh nervously after saying a word that came out weird, which is kind of saying like, "Oh, I also noticed that this word came out weird and it's okay." Right? Or they'll keep letting all of the insecurities and doubts come out when people didn't see it in the first place. So again, it's like I'm forcing these filters onto my audience and now they can only see me through that light.

(00:23:15):
And so one analogy I love for this is, again, a flying analogy. You're on the plane, everything's smooth, you're having a great time watching your movie, and suddenly you're interrupted by the pilot who picks up the intercom and says, "Oh, ladies and gentlemen, so I just had a red light start blinking here in the cockpit, and I'm not sure what this is. It could be really bad, honestly, but I don't know. So don't worry, please, I'll get back to you soon." First thing that's going to happen if you experience that is you're going to think, I wasn't worrying in the first place. But then you start thinking, wait, something probably is going wrong. And now the smallest noise, the tiny little bit of turbulence, a creak on the right, you're going to start thinking, oh no, we're going to die, every time.

(00:24:03):
So you're going to make any little mistake, any little imperfection, you're going to turn that into something big. That's what happens when you speak. If you start leaking and letting the insecurities come out, people are going to start thinking, this person doesn't really know what they're talking about. It's like a leader who isn't clear in their direction. Suddenly I'm thinking, wait, I think I have to second guess everything here because I'm not sure about this guy or this person.

(00:24:33):
And the good news is, the solution is very, very simple. The solution is that is just, don't share your insecurities. Put your best foot forward and stay in it the whole time. Stay in character from beginning all the way through past the ending, because you go all the way through your speech, then you got to end strong, which is a form of staying in character, and then let it be. And that's so important, just let it be and you're going to notice something incredible. If you're the type of person who would break character a lot, start staying in character, and the cue use for myself is, stay in it. And the worse it gets, the more I'll say, just stay in it. And what happens is, you stay in it.

(00:25:21):
And you expect everybody at the end to say, "Oh my God, you looked so uncomfortable, what was happening?" But people can't see that, that you look confident. So they're just going to give you the reaction that a confident person would get, and you're going to notice, oh wow, I am coming off as confident, and that's going to make you feel more confident. And so it's a very reinforcing cycle. If you start staying in character and ending strong, naturally, you're going to be reinforced by this behavior and you're going to realize, oh, I didn't need to break character. I didn't need to hedge every time I spoke, and that's going to give you much more confident, and you're going to start realizing, people just look confident by default. This is a crazy thing. I want everybody to walk around the world and look at people and think, most of the people I'm looking at are actually nervous right now. You're going to look at them and you're like, I can't tell. Most people speaking up in meetings are feeling a level of nervousness, but you can't tell unless it's through the roof.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:23):
I love this, and it's something I'm extremely guilty of. And I think the reason I do this and the reason I think a lot of people leak, which I love that term of just I don't leak, that you know, feel something's not going right. The reason I do it is I feel like me being upfront, I know this isn't great-

Tristan de Montebello (00:26:41):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:41):
... makes it okay, but in reality, that's hurting you because it's like when I watch standup comedy. When the comedian's like, "Oh, sorry, that bombed," if he didn't say that or she didn't say that, I'd just forget about it, and we'd move on to the next thing. And it brings all this attention to, oh, I see, okay, it's not going great. Otherwise, you're just like, all right, whatever, I didn't like that joke. And so, yeah, I guess any thoughts on just that, why people do this?

Tristan de Montebello (00:27:07):
Well, I think that's exactly that. It's because you're convinced that everybody can tell. And so two things will happen. Either they could tell because it was a big thing and everybody could tell, but you shining light on it is literally that. It's like, hey, everybody, you're driving a train, everybody's in the train, you're the driver as the speaker, everybody's going with you. So if there's a crash on the side of the road, you can keep going and they'll not be looking at the crash a second later and they'll be looking at the next landscape, or you can stop the train and tell everybody, "Hey, let's look at this crash here real quick. I'm so sorry about it." When you keep going, people will forget it in a second and they're not going to pay attention to you. And with the peak end rule, what we we're seeing, people remember the end of experiences more than they remember the beginning of experiences. So you're going to be left with that feeling at the end.

(00:27:58):
The other piece is, because most people won't notice it in the first place, they'll be in their own minds. So when you share this, you're popping their bubble. And so I see people speaking all the time where I'm super in tune with the feeling I'm getting when they're speaking. I'm listening to the energy, I'm listening to everything that's happening, so I can try to understand, what state are they in right now? So when I get woken up from that state of somebody saying, "Oh man, can I go again right now? That really sucked." It's even more visible for me.

(00:28:36):
And I'll often have to say, "Hey, man, I was so into what you were saying," and I'll poll the audience, "is anyone surprised?" And everybody every time is like, "No, I thought that you were doing great. I was completely with you." So that's the case most of the time, but because we're convinced that people can tell, we want to break that fourth wall or because something happened and we know people can tell, we want to acknowledge it so it doesn't feel like I'm the only one in the room who can't tell that something went wrong here. But this habit of saying, "No, I'm going to be confident, I'm leading, I'm going to keep us going in a certain direction," is extremely powerful and very self-reinforcing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:18):
Okay, so let's actually show people what this looks like by actually doing some live games. I know one of your principles for Ultraspeaking is you can't learn to speak by not speaking. You need to practice speaking to get better at speaking, and these games are a way to actually do that in a really fun way. So maybe first of all, just why games? When I did this course, I was just like, huh, because it's a bunch of games. I thought this was a public speaking course. So maybe talk about just why you approach it through games, everything you do is a game in this course.

Tristan de Montebello (00:29:48):
Yeah. Well, the first piece of the puzzle is what you were saying, that you can't get better at speaking without speaking. And it's, intuitively you could think, everybody knows that if you want to become a great cook, you can't just read 100-

Tristan de Montebello (00:30:00):
Everybody knows that if you want to become a great cook, you can't just read a hundred cookbooks. You actually have to spend most of your time in the kitchen refining your intuition, testing things, experimenting, learning new recipes, and building your timing and everything that goes with it. But in speaking, we tend to do the opposite, probably because it's a little bit scary and because there aren't that many options out there to practice the speaking itself. There aren't that many environments where you can do it right now. So we're kind of left with nothing, so, "Okay, I'll just go read an article or watch a YouTube short and hope that's going to make a difference."

(00:30:38):
But maybe the bad news is, you have to do it. You have to ask yourself, "Am I going to be serious about taking on speaking and making a difference here?" And if you are, then you're going to have to do the thing. You have to practice speaking. But the good news is, it's only the outside that's scary. As soon as you get started, you're going to get rewarded. And then, the better you get at it, the more enjoyable it becomes.

(00:31:03):
So why games then? Well, games number one, are fun to play. And as I was saying earlier, if your practice is not fun, you're going to stop. So you need intrinsic reward with what you're doing. But what all of the Ultraspeaking games have in common is that it's short, deliberate practice, short reps followed by feedback, followed by another rep. So that was more important than the idea that it was a game at first.

(00:31:35):
When we started coaching with Michael Gendler, my co-founder, it was just him and me in my backyard with somebody in front of us testing things out. And we would say, we would give him a speech title just to get a baseline. "Okay, what's the most incredible invention in the world?" And we'd watch this person go into their mind and start freaking out. And they'd think, " The iPhone," and then, "I don't know the iPhone. That's pretty recent. So maybe it's fire. Is it fire though? Was there a bigger maybe communication? I don't know. Wait. Maybe we've evolved for communication."

(00:32:08):
And the longer they spent thinking, the worse their answer tended to be, and the more their confidence tended to go down as they were speaking. So then we said, "Well, we've got to get this person speaking right away." So we'd say, "I'm going to ask you another question, but just start speaking." And so, I'd ask them another question and they couldn't start speaking right away.

(00:32:27):
So we just tried to compress it more and more and more to turn it into something where then it was like, "I'm just going to say a word and you have to say something about it, so horses." "Horseback riding is fun because you can go places." "Cats." "Cats are crazy because if they were bigger, they would eat you." And I just, almost like word association. Let's get words out.

(00:32:46):
Then we started developing different games for everything. Every root cause we were seeing, every symptom we were seeing, we'd figure out the root cause and we'd create some sort of a way to get the person into it as quickly as possible. And it's just one day, six months in that we realized, "Hey, did we just create a game? This feels like a board game." And then we created, I have this, we created Speak Before You Think, the game for people who think too much, and this is a bunch of cards with all of our games. And then, Covid hit and we turned it into online games.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:21):
Oh, I didn't know that.

Tristan de Montebello (00:33:23):
Yeah. The magic of games is short reps, immediate feedback, practice feedback, practice feedback. And it's enjoyable, you get rewarded, you get to adjust as you go. And what's changing is your internal feeling as you're going. So you're learning lessons, but you're internalizing. All of the practice is happening through speaking.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:48):
To reinforce what you just shared, I haven't shared this with you, but after I took the course, the mini course, I went to see my family in L.A. We visited for a few days, and I was talking about this course and just how fun it was and interesting and how much I learned from it. And I pulled up the games because I have access to the things online. I was just like, "Hey, you guys want to try this?" and we started playing some of these games that we're about to get into. And it was just, we spent like an hour just doing this and everyone loved it.

Tristan de Montebello (00:34:15):
Wow.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:15):
Everyone just felt so much better about their public speaking. Afterwards, my mom was like, "Hey, how do I do that on my own later?"

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:22):
Wow, that's cool.

Tristan de Montebello (00:34:23):
My sister's like, "I want to start doing open mic nights because that was really fun just to talk."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:27):
Nice.

Tristan de Montebello (00:34:28):
So were you actually coaching them? How were you walking them through the different games?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:34):
We just pulled them up and played them. And then, I shared some of the tips that I learned in the class that we took, just like, "Try it this way" or "Try not to focus on being correct. Just focus on confidence and not leaking that you're not doing great." All these things we're going to talk about. Yeah. So it was a lot of fun. So let's get into some of these games. So we're going to try two or three. Which one do you want to start with?

Tristan de Montebello (00:34:56):
Conductor maybe.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:57):
Sweet. I love Conductor. That one was really insightful to me.

Tristan de Montebello (00:35:00):
Okay, so I've got Conductor. The way this game works is that when I click "start training," I'm going to have a random title that's going to appear. And for those of you who are just listening and not watching this, Lenny will say the title out loud so you can hear. And then, what you won't see or what you'll see if you're watching is in front of me, all I'm going to see are a series of random numbers. It's going to start with five, and five is just my natural rate of speaking like I'm speaking right now. But then, I might see a number from one to 10, and each one of these numbers represents an intensity or a state that I have to tap into. So if I see a seven, I automatically have to raise my voice and get into that kind of an energy. And if I see a 10, you could only imagine what that is. But it's also true for the lower ones. If suddenly I see a three, I have to find a way to calm my energy and match the three and go all the way down to one.

(00:36:00):
And then, there might be a slide that says "breathe," which is just an indication to pause. And when I see that slide "breathe," if I just go silent, that's because I'm in front of the breathe slide and I'm not allowed to speak. And in that moment, my goal is just to relax myself and calm myself and then see what happens where I'm at when that slide moves on to the next one. And now we're going to do this. This is going to be 70 seconds, so it's going to be super quick. Ready?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:28):
Yeah. So I'll read the title as soon as it pops up.

Tristan de Montebello (00:36:31):
Perfect.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:33):
"When I grow up."

Tristan de Montebello (00:36:36):
When I grow up, I want to have taken on all of my weaknesses or all of the emotional things that are holding me back. Because kind of annoying for me that I'm 40 years old and there's still things that are holding me back that man, I've had these when I was a kid. I was like this when I was 10. And it drives me crazy, because aren't I supposed to be an adult? Aren't I supposed to be mature and have my life together? I have two kids. I have this incredible responsibility. And I have to teach them, I have to show them the way. So I've decided I'm going to hire a coach, and I talked to him just a couple of days ago, so this is perfect timing because I want to unwrap, unravel, and untwine every single one of these emotional blockers so that when I grow up, I'm completely free.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:45):
That was so fun to watch. I'm seeing the numbers. If you're on YouTube, you can see what's going on there. If you're not, basically there's different numbers that give Tristan the different energies to be at, and that was masterful.

Tristan de Montebello (00:37:56):
I think we saw, what did we see? We saw a six. It went up first, six, seven, then it went down to three. Then we saw, I think a two, a one, then a breathe, and then it went back to a five. How about you give it a go and then we chat.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:10):
Let's do it. What do you think?

Tristan de Montebello (00:38:11):
Ladies and gentlemen, let's see this. Here we go. The title is The Greatest Puzzle.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:19):
The greatest puzzle that I think that I've had in my life, and I think just for most people, is trying to figure out what to do with their life. And I just had to spend so much time thinking... Actually, no, let me change. I'm changing direction. I actually have known from very early on what I wanted to do with my life. I've actually found it to be not much of a puzzle. I knew from pretty early that I wanted to be a software engineer. And interestingly, I became a software. And as I think about the puzzle that created around my life, I ended up... So my life actually started to look like a puzzle instead of what I'd always thought I'd be. So I ended up having a bunch of different careers. And I look back at my life and it started with one piece, and each piece led to all these other careers. Nailed it.

Tristan de Montebello (00:39:33):
It's funny. At the end you were like, you didn't even see there was a six that came up and then when you looked up, it had already gone away. That's a good warm-up.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:42):
Yeah, yeah. Let's do it.

Tristan de Montebello (00:39:42):
It's funny, because what it looked like to me is that, well, you just didn't let yourself play the game. You wanted to... You were more focused on, "I want to make sure this works well, this looks good, or I don't make a fool of myself" than "Let me just play the game." So switch your mindset from that. Back in the Creator Cohort, you didn't really care, because if you failed, it didn't matter. So you just played the game. And this is the same idea. Just don't try. Just let yourself play the game.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:43):
Okay.

Tristan de Montebello (00:40:15):
The game will do good. But that was actually really interesting. I feel kind of similar, which is cool, except I didn't know where it was going. But that feeling of all of these puzzle pieces, and suddenly when I hit Ultraspeaking, it's like, "Oh wow, every single... There's no more. There are no more gaps." That's really cool. Okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:35):
Here we go.

Tristan de Montebello (00:40:36):
You ready?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:37):
Ready.

Tristan de Montebello (00:40:38):
Here we go. "Integrating new cultures."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:48):
It's interesting having a kid. So we just had a kid about a year ago, he is a year and a half. And there's an interesting new experience where there's my family and their culture, there's my wife and her culture. And it was never a big deal for us, these different backgrounds that we have because we could do our own thing, we have our families, they're doing their thing. But now that we have a kid, I have to really think about this. I have to constantly wonder, "Is he getting both experiences? Is he being pushed in one direction or another? Is he going to get the full benefits of both of these cultures?" And I find if I don't actually think about it too deeply and just let him have fun and hang out with our different family members, he gets everything that I want him to get; that he experiences my wife's family's culture, my family's culture, and then the combination of my wife and I's new kind of culture and family that we're building. And so, I'm really excited about the future for us all.

Tristan de Montebello (00:41:57):
Yeah, that was awesome.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:00):
I'm practicing not leaking. All I think about is how much better it could have been, but now I'm leaking as I say that. See?

Tristan de Montebello (00:42:01):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:01):
It's hard.

Tristan de Montebello (00:42:10):
Yeah. You're hedging.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:10):
Hedging.

Tristan de Montebello (00:42:13):
So the point of all of these games is to create turbulence. This is going to be the theme of this podcast. I'm going to share only flight analogies. But if you think about a pilot, a flight simulator, you can think about these games as the flight simulator. You don't put a pilot in a flight simulator and waste those precious hours having them just cruise at 30,000 feet in clear skies. You're going to say, "Okay, you're going and now hey, you've lost your captain and you have to do something" or "Hey, your motor just broke" or "You're going into crazy turbulence."

(00:42:46):
So the gain here is always, every one of these games have in common that we're creating turbulence for you. So it's on purpose that like, "Ooh, that's interesting how I tend to want to leak, to want to break character. Wow. It's interesting how at the end, the ending strong is not just an automatic habit that I've built for myself." So what we want with the turbulence is that it highlights areas that we want to work on. And you can go again and see immediately because you have that same pressure every time. There's no way you can prepare for Conductor. You can do just a ton of reps and get to become the person who can just navigate the turbulence really, really gracefully.

(00:43:29):
Which reminds me of a Kevin Kelly quote that I love where he says, "Pros are just amateurs who've learned to recover gracefully from their mistakes." And this is what we're trying to do here. If you know that you can recover from any mistake gracefully, then you're going to have confidence in any speaking scenario. And most of the scenarios you're going to be in are spontaneous, are ones you can't prepare for. So it's that much more important.

(00:43:57):
So tell me, what do you remember from going through Conductor and the Creator Cohort, or specifically here, what was coming up and what were some of the things that pop into your mind?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:10):
There's two things that I really took away from it, and it's different doing it now on camera with this whole podcast thing.

Tristan de Montebello (00:44:15):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:16):
But the things that I really took away that have stuck with me from this exercise is one, is that you have this kind of metaphor of these file folders that you have kind of in your head where every energy level, like a one when you go low and a 10 or even a five, when you're at that energy level, you access different insights and memories and stories. So it's not just like, "Now I'm going to say the same thing at a 10, or I'm going to say the same thing at a one." It's when you let your body just slow down and relax to a one, new thoughts come up, because making it up as you go along and you're just trying to figure it out as you go. And that really happens when you're forced to go from five to, "Okay," and you let your body settle into a one. You're like, "Oh, okay, here's a new thought that comes to mind." So that was really powerful for me because I never had realized that.

(00:45:12):
And then, the other is just this idea of doing these really hard things with very low stakes. It's higher stakes, so maybe that's why it's different, how it feels different doing it here where it's like, "Oh, this is-"

Tristan de Montebello (00:45:22):
Yeah. Yeah, this is extremely high stakes for you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:26):
Yeah, relatively. But yeah, there it's a couple people and you're like, just don't worry about failing so you don't even have to worry about apologizing or fleaking. It's just like, "Yeah, I did what I did." So those are two really powerful ones. I just like practicing this. And knowing you'll be okay at low stakes builds confidence. I'm like, "Okay." It's making up a minute of talk about the most random thing on the spot, not something that I would feel I'd want to do, but then you realize, "Okay, it's fine. I can do that."

Tristan de Montebello (00:45:54):
The common theme for me, and I've been on this journey for seven years now, I still am blown away every week by the lessons I've learned over the course of the seven years, which all come down to your brain, your subconscious is so incredibly powerful. So your hardware is magical. And because I've spent seven years kind of getting rid of the bad habits, getting rid of the gunk and trusting myself more, I allow myself to take many more risks. So I'm jumping into these games still with the same doubts in some sense, but they've just, everything's tapered down way, way, way into the background. So I get to be much more present.

(00:46:43):
And I talked about the summary prompts earlier in the podcast, saying the beginning of a sentence and trusting that your brain's going to fill in the gap is something that's initially hard to do. But when you've done it 1,000, 2,000, 10,000 times, you start believing, "Hey, maybe my brain will deliver every single time." So you can start saying the beginning of sentences the direction you want to go into and your brain fills in the gap, and we're going to do a game on that in a second.

(00:47:12):
But the Conductor one is so beautiful because the way we describe it, so that folder one when it came into my mind was my favorite ever. But the original one was when you tap into a certain energy, that creates emotion. And if you tap into that emotion, the words come as a natural consequence. So it's energy leads, emotions follow, and words fill in the gap.

(00:47:44):
And when you experience this for yourself, if you go into Conductor and you play, you realize, "Okay, if I want more conviction, I can raise my energy or get into a state of conviction and the words that are going to come out, the ideas, the stories, the anecdotes, the examples, everything is going to fit into that. If I feel frustrated, I can dive into that state and stay in that state, and naturally the content is going to follow. It's a very, very powerful game. It's a very exciting game, and it's a game that, especially when you're playing with low stakes, you very quickly feel the effect of, "Oh, I can see the potential of what it could be if I could just be like this anywhere." Maybe you taper out a little bit of the extremes.

(00:48:42):
But you can access this for free on Ultraspeaking or the way we did this at first, you just go to Google and type in a random series of nine numbers and then just have a friend say each number, one after the next, and you just match it. I used to just put my hand out and go up and down. So in essence, it's very, very simple to apply it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:03):
And it's just like a lot of fun to just get an excuse to just go wild and high and then just get low. I love that part of it. And let's get into the next theme. But just one other insight I had that you shared with me when I did it the first time is just people have a strength.

Tristan de Montebello (00:49:16):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:16):
They're either, correct me if I'm wrong, they're strong at the highs and just very uncomfortable at the lows or the opposite. And for me, I thought I was going to, "Oh, obviously I'll be more natural at the lows, because like introvert world." And you're like, "No, you're actually super energized at this high end, and then it's hard for you to access the low." And I thought that was really insightful for me.

Tristan de Montebello (00:49:39):
Yeah. You'll notice it pretty quickly once you jump in, especially with a friend. It's cool because when you get to see, "Oh, I'm much more comfortable going up than I am going down or vice versa, or I'm stuck in the middle and I am only comfortable when I'm not in the extremes." It's just telling you something.

(00:49:59):
This is what we want. We want to a mirror in front of us so I can know, "Okay, what's happening here?" I'm not very much a fan of actually watching yourself on camera on video, because again, this is an inner game, not an outer game. So when I watch myself on video, I see the outside, which can be useful for certain things, but the fundamentals are inside. So getting a mirror of I play this game and I feel a certain way, "Oh, interesting. It was easy to go up." So I can muster energy pretty quickly, and I'm willing to take risks of jumping into a different energy stage, which might mean changing the direction of where I'm going.

(00:50:37):
But slowing down means I need to be willing to take up space. I need to be willing to just be while everybody's looking at me and I'm using up their time. But I'm going to take up space and I'm going to take a moment to go inside and be introspective and really ask myself, "Okay, what do I want to say here?" And so, that's a reflection of, "Well, what does that mean if I struggle to do that?" And that's why speaking such an interesting skill set.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:08):
All right, let's do another game.

Tristan de Montebello (00:51:10):
This next game is called Triple Step. And Triple step is a game for people who struggle to stay on a single thought or get very easily put off their game or distracted. If you're the type of person where you're speaking and suddenly somebody yawns and you just start freaking out thinking, "I'm so boring and things are horrible, I must be terrible." Not, they probably have a baby and they didn't sleep last night. A pen drops and you start losing your ability to stay on track, this is a game for you. Also, a very fun one.

(00:51:46):
The principle of the game is pretty simple. Similarly to Conductor, we're going to start with a random speech title. So I have no idea what's going to show up. Then as I'm speaking, in this setting here, I'm going to speak for a minute. There will six random words or series of words that are going to pop up as I'm going through my speech. And my goal is to integrate the words into the speech as seamlessly as I can, as if they were part of the speech the whole time. So in theory, if I do a perfect job, if you're listening, you should struggle to pick out which words were actually the words that were popped up. The likelihood in one minute of me being able to do that is low, but let's see if you can do it. So if you're listening, you're not going to see the words. We'll tell you afterwards what they were. See if you can pick up on them. But otherwise, my goal is just to choose a strong direction and stay on that direction as naturally as I can.

(00:52:43):
Here we go. The title is, How Would Your Friends Describe You? I've been described as a Labrador by my friends. And I think the reason people describe me as a Labrador is because I am so easy to excite. It's like if you give me a box of french fries, I'm going to go nuts and it's going to be the best french fries I've ever tasted in my life. But if the next day I get a massage, I'll be completely in that experience and the massage is going to be the best massage. And then, I'm going to think, "I need to get a massage every day." I'm going to start daydreaming about massage as my natural day to day.

(00:53:19):
But the problem with being a Labrador is that Labradors get kind of excited. So I may be doing cartwheels one second, and the next second I'm supposed to be working. And so, I'll be on my computer, but then I hear the microwave ding and I think, "Oh, maybe I should go get some food next." And so, there's a beautiful trait to being the Labrador that allows me to explore all of what it's like to be human. I always have access to the internet inside me, but there are definitely some drawbacks as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:50):
Okay. So the words that you had to integrate are french fries, getting a massage, daydreaming, cartwheels, a microwave, and the internet.

Tristan de Montebello (00:54:05):
Yeah. And so, you might notice that some of the words I'm integrating literally, and some I might integrate more metaphorically like the internet of my mind. It's like I have access to the internet. So you can give yourself as much leeway as possible. The whole point here with Triple Step is you want to be that tree in the storm that is not so rigid that if the wind is too strong it's going to break in half, but not so flexible that it's going to swing every which direction as soon as there's a gust. So you want that firm solid grounding, which is in choosing a clear direction, that one thing off the bat, and then you want to make the words work for you. So stay focused on that one thing. And as the words come in, the more focused you are on that groove you've created for yourself, the easier it will be to let the words work for you. Okay?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:03):
And again, the skill this builds is to be more comfortable with things not going perfectly and being distracted.

Tristan de Montebello (00:55:12):
Yeah. I would say this one can be used for two other things. Number one is resiliency, right? Because this one will make your brain go crazy. And if you can stay composed within it, with all of these things happening, it really builds this ability to say, "Well, man, if I can do Triple Step on hard mode, I can do anything. Why would anything else scary? Why would an interview question scare me when I can throw these kinds of things? I can always navigate my way through." Right? We're trying to lower the likelihood of a mistake really hurting you.

(00:55:48):
And then, the other piece is this is a game, this one and a game called Rapid Fire Analogies, are games that are really, really nice to use as a way to warm your brain up. So you could use it before a podcast. You could use it before a job interview, before a meeting. When you want to be on, do a few reps of this, and your brain's just going to be completely lit up because it's pulling on so many different parts of your brain that are necessary for communication.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:13):
One last thought just before we dive into it. I think it's just to zoom out again, the reason that you've found this is a better way to learn to become better at public speaking, my sense is just if you were to just do the standard thing of just give more talks, find more opportunities to do presentations, it's too broad of a brush to build these different skills, and which you've identified is there's these very specific skills that add up to a great presenter. And these games pick a specific skill and help you just focus on that again and again and again.

Tristan de Montebello (00:56:51):
If you're already practicing, you're already leagues ahead of everyone, because most people aren't practicing. They're you're trying to learn from a video or a YouTube short or an article. You can only go so far with that. But if you are practicing, there are kind of two suboptimal ways that might show up. One is what you're saying. You're doing talks and you're speaking up more, but you're not really practicing. It's kind of, as you were saying, it's broad, broad strokes.

(00:57:17):
The other one is you are in a choreography, so it's like learning how to dance, but you only learn choreography. Well, that's all you know how to do. So if I ask you to do, I say, "Okay, now I'm going to put music on. Just dance." You're kind of stuck because you only know how to do the moves you were doing. So we're trying to get people outside of, "I have to be in my mind, or I have to do things that I've memorized how to do" and come back to trusting your natural ability to communicate.

(00:57:51):
So that's what we're doing here. You can feel like when you don't speak, when you struggle with speaking, you're stuck in this box, and everything around you is tiny and you can feel the sides of the box. And we're expanding the range. We're playing around with all kinds of different things, different tools. And all of them have specific meaning, but even if they didn't that much, you still would be able to, "Oh wow," you're pushing back the sides of the box. And now suddenly, "Hey, I can move around. I feel comfortable moving my arms and moving my legs and going to the right and the left and up and down." And just that act of making you feel more comfortable and more at ease is going to unlock your ability to communicate, because you already know how to do a lot of this. So we're tapping into these different skill sets and we're doing both at the same time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:42):
This episode is brought to you by Brave Search. Brave Search is the private, independent search engine that doesn't bias or censor results. Brave Search and its answers with AI feature are available for free to all users on desktop and mobile devices. With Brave Search, you get real answers faster, served from their own independent index of the web. Their AI search engine can give lightning fast, incredibly accurate results for almost any question.

(00:59:09):
But Brave isn't just AI answers. It's also a powerful traditional search engine with real innovations versus big tech options. It fights bias and SEO spam. It brings a cleaner results page with fewer ads, Reddit threads in the search engine results page, powerful local results, and even community-driven ranking options. Tired of big tech's same old list of links? It's time to try Brave Search. Visit brave.com/Lenny to get started. That's brave.com/Lenny.

(00:59:40):
All right, let's do this. I'm energized. I'm pumped.

Tristan de Montebello (00:59:43):
Let's do this.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:44):
No, I'm not going to... I was going to say I'm going to nail it, but no, let's just have fun. Let's have fun.

Tristan de Montebello (00:59:49):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:50):
It goes how it goes.

Tristan de Montebello (00:59:52):
Indeed. Here we go.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:53):
Okay. And I'll say the title. The best thing about pain. So this is something I recently shared in another talk is just this quote that I always think of.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:01):
In another talk is just this quote that I always think of, "The cave you fear contains the treasure you seek," that the thing that is hardest often points you in the direction you want to go. Like I hate blue cheese, but sometimes I find that if I eat the blue cheese and add it to a salad, it ends up being the best salad I've had. Having kids is another amazing example where just kids are... There's so much pain, but it's also, there's nothing that is more joyous than having a kid.

(01:00:29):
And sometimes even growing a beard. I grow this beard and I have to maintain this beard for the rest of my life. And I know people would look at me without a beard and be like, "What the hell? Well, you look so different now and so young." Sometimes I think about just having a sibling and the pain that if I had a brother, if he just hit me, the pain that would come from that, but just then having the brother would be so much worth it, even if he's hitting me all this time.

(01:00:58):
And there, I ran out of time, but that was solid.

Tristan de Montebello (01:01:04):
Okay, I realize this is your first time playing Triple Step. It's kind of mean of me if you [inaudible 01:01:09]-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:09):
I have to go faster.

Tristan de Montebello (01:01:10):
... Give you six words. So I'm going to give you four words.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:12):
Okay. Okay.

Tristan de Montebello (01:01:13):
But here's what I noticed. What I noticed is you were letting the word... The word was the beginning of a new thought. Right, so you say, "Another thing is beers. Another thing is...". So you're finishing your thought and then you're moving on to the next one. Try to hold onto one direction. The one direction is approach your fears head on. And then, so when you see a puzzle, it's like, look, this doesn't have to be a hard puzzle because now I know that if it's scary, I do it. And it's like having kids, which I thought was so scary, I just jumped in and now I'm moving forward. And so it's like I'm growing my beard without caring what other people think just because it might be scary, or maybe I cut my beard because that would be something scary. So you're holding onto the line.

(01:02:08):
With four, it's going to be a little bit easier to integrate them. Ready?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:16):
Let's do it.

Tristan de Montebello (01:02:18):
Social-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:18):
Social distancing. It's interesting that social distancing was such a thing that we all had to do for so long. And then all of a sudden we look back at that time we're like, "Was that actually necessary? Did we actually have to stay far from each other? Did that actually have any impact?".

(01:02:34):
There's all these things we have to learn, like sometimes we look at the stock market and we wonder, "Should I be paying attention to the stock market? Should I be distancing myself from it? Should I be investing more often? Should I be reading every newspaper that comes out every day to stay on top of what's happening in the world? Should I get closer to this information or should I distance myself? What's better for me?". And sometimes it feels like you're running this marathon where sometimes you go back and forth. Sometimes it's, "Let's all be together. Let's pay attention to all the news. Let's hang out." And it kind of feels like I just want to just want to go to the toilet and peace out.

Tristan de Montebello (01:03:24):
Amazing. That works. That's really good.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:27):
Okay.

Tristan de Montebello (01:03:27):
That's really good. Well, tell me what, because again, the games are meant to put you in a state of turbulence and find out what was easy, what was hard, what am I noticing? And now you know what you want to work on. If you did a rep and you got it and it went perfectly, then you're learning nothing. A really easy rep is not worth much. The only reps that are worth something are the ones where you feel an edge.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:57):
Yeah. And by the way, we should say the words right, that I had.

Tristan de Montebello (01:04:00):
Oh, yeah. The first one was the stock market, then a newspaper, which you brought in really, really well, then running a marathon, and then toilet.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:13):
Yeah. Okay, great. Yeah, just the fact that I'm okay doing this is a big milestone for me of just like, ah, whatever. Because before doing this thing I'm like, oh my God, I never want to sit there and come up with a talk for a minute on the most random subject, and there's a lot of power in just feeling comfortable just doing it, just like, sure, let's do it. Whatever. Something will come out that's interesting enough.

Tristan de Montebello (01:04:35):
That's why taking on this journey of speaking is so empowering because speaking is a high performance skill. So taking on a high performance skill, and starting to tackle it, and getting kind of good at it is very addictive. It feels really, really good. If you get good at tennis, if you get good at golf, if you get good at anything, product management, it's a addicting, it's exciting. And as soon as you get good, there's nuance to it, and it's energizing in and of itself. And because we have such awesome hardware as humans, we've been speaking all of our life, a lot of us have a pretty decent level to start out with. So you really quickly, you're getting to like, "Oh, I'm getting some results here. This actually feels good." So there's something really energizing about jumping into it. It's the thinking about doing the exercise that's scary, but as soon as you're in it, it's energizing and empowering.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:35):
And also just doing it, this is a very hard exercise. Just giving a made up talk for a minute with words you have to integrate, and concepts. And I think just doing that makes a regular talk so much easier also, because you don't have to do that. So there's something there about just doing it on hard mode, learning things, and then, oh, okay, I just have to talk about a thing that I already know about, that I have planned, much easier. Anything else around this game that is worth sharing before we do our final game?

Tristan de Montebello (01:06:06):
We have a whole series of games, and you could probably even invent other games, but some people will play Triple Step and will say, "Wow, that's so hard." And then they'll go and play Conductor and think, "Wow, this is my game. This is so easy." But other people will play Conductor and think it's impossible, and then come play Triple Step and they'll be like, "Man, this is my jam. I can get this one very, very easy."

(01:06:31):
So again, it's just a mirror of where you're at. And what's beautiful about this is you start playing around with these games, you're very, very quickly going to see, okay, this is my edge. And where your edge is, as you were saying with your quote, is often where the gold lies. So if you can spend some time there and learn what it is underneath the struggle, what's actually holding you back. When you unlock that, whatever's holding you back in Triple Step, or in Conductor, in any other game, is holding you back elsewhere in your life. So when you unlock it there, it kind of unlocks the other things, which is really nice, like a set of gears.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:12):
And it's interesting, as we were talking, where my mind keeps going is I just want to say how I didn't feel good about my performance, but I'm internalizing the lesson of don't leak how you feel. And that's a really powerful lesson. It's really hard not to just to be like, "Oh, that was not good." I really wanted to say that after every time I tried this and I am making myself not. And I imagine from your perspective you're like, "No, it's fine. It's like whatever."

Tristan de Montebello (01:07:40):
Yeah, absolutely. I was actually thinking, I bet a lot of people watching you do that would think, wow, I don't think I could do that. That would be their first thought.

(01:07:49):
So absolutely. And again, and this is a habit. And the noise doesn't completely disappear, but it goes down to being almost imperceptible. So what we're trying to do is we're trying to internalize all of these habits to the point where I don't need to consciously think about them.

(01:08:12):
So it's like a gymnast who's doing their tumbling routine and jumps into the air. As they're flipping, they're not consciously trying to think of how to do a flip. They've done it a thousand times. They know how to do a flip. The only thing they have that they may be thinking of, all of their attention is on being completely present to what's happening, relying on your body and your subconscious knowing what to do, is they have kind of like listeners, like in programming, keyboard listeners. You have something that's there that is just listening for anything out of the ordinary. And it's very, very fine-tuned.

(01:08:47):
So as I'm speaking, for example, I might think to myself, "Oh, I may be rambling right now. Maybe I'm going a little bit too long." And it's a little listener that's going to just gently, nicely, say, "Hey, warning, I don't know if you're aware of this." And as I hear that, I might say, "Oh, okay, let me wrap it up." Or maybe it's saying, "I'm not sure if you're being clear," or, "Can you be more precise here?". Whatever it is, it's just a gentle listener in the background.

(01:09:15):
So as you get into the habit of staying in character, and if you had an audience here, we could have asked them right away, "Well, how do you feel about this?". You probably would've gotten really good feedback, really positive, which would've kind of jarred that feeling of, wow, I didn't think I did it that good of a job. And people are saying, "Hey, I thought that was pretty good." So As you get that reinforcing pattern, the voice starts going down more and more.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:43):
Awesome. I need that voice to go down. That'd be great.

Tristan de Montebello (01:09:46):
[inaudible 01:09:46].

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:46):
Okay, let's do another game.

Tristan de Montebello (01:09:48):
Always does.

(01:09:49):
Cool. Let's do last game. Last one of these practical games. So this is actually a game from one of our courses that I'm pulling out. It's not a standalone game, it's one that's inside of the courses. But again, if you wanted to replicate this yourself, you can very easily do it.

(01:10:09):
So what we're going to do here is we're going to work on conviction prompts. So this comes back to this idea of entering a state or changing your energy to impact the words that are coming out of your mouth. So what's going to happen here, is similarly to Triple Step, I'm also going to get a random topic that I just have to start speaking about. But now, instead of getting a word that I have to integrate into my speech naturally, I'm going to get a prompt. So it's going to be the beginning of a sentence that I have to say out loud, and I have to find a way for my brain to just complete the sentence. And the sentences are specifically chosen because they're going to put you in a state of more conviction. So it's going to force me to care more about what I'm saying basically.

(01:10:56):
And this is a game for executive presence. If you think about somebody who you feel has great gravitas or great executive presence, they usually have, there's something about them that's saying, this person really believes in what they're saying. And what this game is showing you is that, hey, there's a way to fast track myself to that place. If I want to have more executive presence, let me bring a little bit more conviction to what I'm saying.

(01:11:27):
There's a caveat, small caveat. Maybe 10% of people in the workforce need the opposite. They need, "Hey, you need to maybe question what you're saying here." But the reality is the vast majority of people actually are not truly standing behind their words and their ideas. And what that does is that the people who speak a lot and feel a lot of conviction, their ideas go through more often than the others. And you'd want ideas to stand for themselves, but that's just not reality. So for most people listening to this, if you can bring more conviction to your words, then your ideas are going to have a better chance of being seen equally to those who are already doing that. So this is what this game's about.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:14):
Awesome. Okay.

Tristan de Montebello (01:12:15):
Okay, here we go. The title is Saying No. I've had to learn this the hard way as an entrepreneur, that saying no is one of the most important things I can do. But saying no is not saying no to a meeting, because that can be easy. And what I'm going to say now matters a ton. This is saying no to doing all of the exciting projects that I want to do. So as I said earlier, I'm Labrador. I get excited about everything, and I genuinely believe that every idea is awesome, but that doesn't mean I can do every idea. I need to choose a very clear focus and stick to that focus.

(01:13:02):
And this is a game changer. When you start reducing the amount of things you're doing to a painful amount, a painful few amount, then when you get there, suddenly everything else changed. And it astonishes me when I do that, just how much more I can get done, even though I'm doing fewer things.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:22):
I love it. That was great. These words are tough.

Tristan de Montebello (01:13:27):
They were, yeah. This was not an easy one. This was not a... Good thing that I get a tough one. Well deserved.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:35):
Let me read the phrases real quick, just so folks know. So the phrases you had to integrate is, "This matters a ton. I genuinely believe that every idea is awesome. Game changer."

Tristan de Montebello (01:13:45):
It was just, "I genuinely believe that." Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:49):
Oh, got it. Okay. "I generally believe that." And then, "game changer". And then, "It astonishes me when."

Tristan de Montebello (01:13:55):
And I'm so eager for you to go through this, and for anybody listening to try this for themselves, even if you know what's coming. Like, if you want to do this for yourself right now, write the words, the prompts that Lenny just shared, and choose any title, and just speak for a minute, and see if you can integrate those in. Because you're going to notice how if you bring conviction, these words naturally bring that out of you. And it's so interesting to watch the content change as a result of the state you get into and what you say. So it's really powerful to discover just how incredible your brain is.

(01:14:36):
So same intention for you I think, is choose a strong direction from the beginning. This is always, in speaking in general, the stronger the direction you choose in the beginning, the more ideas you're going to have. Everything gets easier when you choose a strong direction.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:54):
Okay, let's try it.

Tristan de Montebello (01:14:55):
But the goal here, is as it says, advocate for an important idea related to the speech title. Ready?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:01):
Yeah, let's do it.

Tristan de Montebello (01:15:02):
Here we go.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:02):
YOLO.

Tristan de Montebello (01:15:06):
The title is Space Exploration.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:08):
I think it's hard to imagine anything more important to the human race than space exploration. I know there's a lot of talk about people wasting time trying to get us to Mars, or trying to not think about what is happening on earth, but I feel like there's nothing more powerful, and important, and inspiring. In fact, the entire world needs to focus more on the value of space exploration. There's so many things we can discover, so many things that can help us on earth, and we cannot forget how much potential exists outside of our little earth, that we think our whole existence and everything that's ever existed on this one planet, when really we're this tiny, pale blue dot. And it just astonishes me when people don't think about this, don't think it matters, don't think they should spend any time getting us into space, investing money in space. And just hearing stories, if nothing else, of people that have gone into space and how life-changing that was for them, should tell us that space exploration is incredibly powerful and important.

Tristan de Montebello (01:16:14):
Yes, that was awesome. That was so cool. So you had, the title was Space Exploration, and the words were, "in fact", "the entire world", then, "We cannot forget that," then, "It astonishes me when," and finally "life changing". So what was that like? What did it feel like getting...

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:41):
Yeah, there's a lot of... It really helps, just like, "Here's the thing you're going to believe." And I don't know if I got lucky with stuff, but it just felt like, okay, I have, something comes up that I'm not going to leak. But anyway, it was like, oh yeah, cool, something interesting happens.

(01:16:57):
And that's one of my other actual, just going on a little quick tangent, insights from the lessons that you guys teach, is that as you are forced to talk, you have new insights emerge. And you almost figure out what you think and know by being forced to get out of your head, and these problems help you along that. But I think that's really interesting, of just like, this will help you develop things, and insights, and take them out of your head.

Tristan de Montebello (01:17:26):
Yeah. Well, hopefully we get to talk about the Accordion Method, one of the most powerful methods I have, which is very close to this.

(01:17:35):
But this is often a prompt I tell people when they're speaking. I say, because people tend to get into a public speaking voice, so we'll be in a class, and they'll be chatting normally, and look super normal. And then we'll say, "Okay, now just a timer. I'm just going to give you a speech. Just speak for 60 seconds so we get a baseline." And I click play, and suddenly I say, "The important part about doing this," and they enter into a different version of themselves, a very professional version, whatever that would mean. It's so much more freeing, powerful, connecting, and effective to speak conversationally.

(01:18:18):
And so the cue I often give people is don't think about us, just think out loud. And that's really what we're doing. We can, most people have a skill set that's up here and a mindset that's down here. And so if you can just change the mindset to match the skill set, you've already made a giant leap. And you do that by reducing the stakes in your mind and by just speaking. And as you do that, when you're thinking out loud, you have these moments of connecting things in your mind, and then naturally it pops out.

(01:18:59):
And if you're doing it well... And I love, there's a really cool Naval Ravikant interview on the Joe Rogan Podcast from many years ago that's phenomenal. And at one point he talks about communication, if I'm not mistaken. I think it's on that podcast. But he says something along the lines of, "One should discover the words they are saying at the same time their audience is." And this comes back to thinking out loud, like if I'm really in my mind, I'm making connections, and suddenly the words are the consequence of it.

(01:19:31):
So using prompts, poking your brain, giving these cues naturally creates things that you couldn't have anticipated otherwise. It's like putting constraints on a creative project.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:46):
I love that. Before we segue to a couple of these methods, the Accordion Method is one example, I want to ask about, when people hear this, they may feel like you're helping people more, just like make shit up, and why, why would we want that? Talk about just how this isn't just like, you're not going to actually give talks like this necessarily. This is... And I guess I'm answering the question, but I'm curious if that's how you think about it. This is building a skill so that when you actually want to give a real talk that you've prepared, you are better at it. But yeah, just thoughts on just that potential element.

Tristan de Montebello (01:20:23):
Yeah, I think that's an important question, and it's a question I hear a lot because we all know a bullshitter, and that's the person who masters the skill of communication but doesn't have anything to show for it.

(01:20:43):
And so this thing happens, is that I see bullshitter and I think to myself, I really, really don't want to become that person. And what happens is it becomes an immune response or like an immune response where the desire not to be that person and the feeling being around that person gives you is so strong that now if I take even the smallest step in that direction of speaking freely, sharing my thoughts out loud, bringing more conviction or confidence to what I'm saying, not leaking, then there's this immediate response like an immune response in my body that's just too strong, that's saying, "Uh oh, you're becoming the bullshitter. Alarm bells. Alarm bells. Go back to that safe little corner you were in."

(01:21:39):
But the reality is, if you're thinking that, then you have no chance of becoming a bullshitter. Because if that thought is even popping into your mind, then you're the type of person who has developed a very acute skill set of noticing when people bullshit. And you have that same skill set for yourself. So it's just going to be, now it's just too loud.

(01:22:05):
So as we go through this practice, we want to match, "Hey, I want to match that bullshitter's level of communication, except I'm going to have the ideas to back it up. I'm going to really put effort into my craft, but I'm going to be able to show them in the best possible light." And what we want to be able to do is notice, okay, if this is a big thing for you, the bullshitting, and you're noticing a big reaction, just even listening to us, not even playing the games yourself, then you definitely benefit from calming that voice down. So spending time learning these skill sets, because you're most likely atrophied because you're staying away from it. And you're going to have this very powerful listener in the back of your mind that's going to ping you, and it's like, "Hey, you're at the limit right now. Stay true to what you know." And it's going to be a very good compass for yourself. It's going to be there and you can trust it because you developed this capacity.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:02):
Awesome. That's really helpful.

(01:23:05):
Okay. So, so far we've shared a bunch of techniques, things that you could just start doing today. We've done all these fun games that you could play online. If nothing else, just learning from the techniques these games teach you I think is really helpful. You've shared a bunch of principles of just like, here's how you actually get better at public speaking, and not this way, but that way.

(01:23:27):
I know you have a couple also methods just like that people can implement that helps them develop talks that I found really helpful. So maybe just as a closing, we talk about these two methods, the Accordion Method, and I think it's the Bow and Arrow Method?

Tristan de Montebello (01:23:40):
Uh-huh.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:41):
Awesome. Let's talk about the Accordion Method. We did this in the class briefly, and it was really helpful, and I've been explaining it to people of just like a really cool way of making your talk better. So talk about how that works and how people might be able to implement it when they're trying to develop the talk.

Tristan de Montebello (01:23:55):
Now, I'm biased when I'm going to say this, so take this with a pinch of salt, but I think the Accordion Method, the Accordion Method might be one of the things I'm the most proud of in my entire life because it's almost revolutionizing the way I think we should prepare speaking.

(01:24:19):
So up until now, we've talked about spontaneous speaking mostly, and that's going to be the vast majority of your speaking. Probably 80% of your speaking is stuff that you can't prepare for. But there are going to be situations where you know you have a deadline and you're going to have to speak. And either you have to speak because it's a job interview, or you're talking to your CEO, or maybe you're presenting to your whole team or an audience of a thousand.

(01:24:45):
The old way I think is shitty. I think it's broken, and I haven't found anything out there that is innovating on this. And it drove us crazy with Michael, and that's what gave birth to the Accordion Method. What's the old way? The old way is I have a talk coming up, so I'm going to dump all of my ideas on a piece of paper or multiple pieces of paper. Then I'm going to try rearranging those ideas. And as I'm rearranging the ideas and trying to make them in a talk, I have more inspiration. And I'm thinking, oh, maybe I could say it this way, and I don't want to lose that other thing that I said in the beginning because maybe I would use it.

(01:25:22):
And you start just creating this alien stack of paper with all of your ideas of what your talk might be, and then you're left with 10, 15 pieces of paper. And now as the deadline comes closer, what do you have to do? Well, you have to go through the excruciating pain of turning 10 pages into a script so that you don't forget all of those brilliant lines that you spent so many hours editing. And they're still in writing mode. They're not in your mind.

(01:25:50):
So now that I've created that script that I spent a lot of time editing, now I have to memorize it. And memorization is pretty. We're not good at memorization. Robots are good at memorization, humans are not. And memorization is like a chain where you just have all of these links very linearly. And everybody knows the feeling of going through, reciting a poem as a kid, and suddenly you miss one verse and you're lost, and now you're a deer in the headlights.

(01:26:21):
So what we're doing with the Accordion Method is instead of preparing our talk by writing, we're going to prepare our talk by speaking, and we're going to do so in a very specific way where we're going down the accordion to create extreme clarity, and to understand what the essence of our talk is, and then back up the accordion to bring back in intentionally just the right pieces.

(01:26:48):
So I was thinking of an analogy for this, and one that I really like is imagine you're redecorating your living room. The old way, the writing 10 pages and memorizing it is I'm going to look at my living room and I'm going to rearrange things and put stuff in a corner that I might need later. And then I'm going to bring some new things that I thought could be really nice and I'm going to struggle to make something work.

(01:27:14):
The Accordion Method is saying, and imagine this were easy to do with furniture, I'm going to take everything out of my living room except the most essential pieces that make my living room. So I might be left with that one couch that I really love, a pillow, a beautiful light that I bought three years ago, and one or two other small things. And as I look at that, I'm going to have clarity on the vision I want for my living room. And then very slowly, very intentionally, I'm going to go take certain elements that were already there that I might want to bring back in, and I'm going to bring new elements that now I see make sense. And so by the time you finish with your beautiful living room, it's going to be this beautiful minimalistic room that has a very clear design choice, and every element there is there because you chose it. It's there because you did it very intentionally.

(01:28:15):
So how does that work with the Accordion Method? What we do is you can go through the first step. If you want, you can write all of those ideas on paper just to get them out of your head. That's totally fine. But from this moment on, there's no more script. And I'm just going to give an example of times, but you can change these time constraints slightly. We're going down the accordion by using time constraints. So for example, you would say, "I'm going to speak for three minutes." So you're going to put a timer, and you have two rules. I have to stay in character the whole time and I have to end strong. So you must make it to the end of the three minutes, and it doesn't matter how bad it sounds, how many mistakes you make. The only point here is I'm trying to get my ideas out into spoken word. So I'm starting to populate my mind with everything and seeing where am I actually at.

(01:29:13):
Then after the three minutes, you think of, okay, what did I like, what didn't I like? Then you go to two minutes. And you put a timer and you do two minutes again. And you're very strict with those two minutes, because we're just trying to learn something every time. It doesn't need to be perfect. So at the two-minute mark, you do the same thing, but now you had to shave a whole minute out of that content. And as you do that, well, that means getting rid of the noise, getting rid of anything that doesn't feel right.

(01:29:38):
Then you go down to one minute. And you're going to go down all way to 30 seconds. So you started at a three-minute speech and you make your way down to 30 seconds. By the time you make it to 30 seconds, you're going to have only the essential pieces like that couch and that lamp in the living room. When you have the essential pieces, you're going to have a clear sense of what your talk is about, and it might've changed as you-

Tristan de Montebello (01:30:00):
Sense of what your talk is about and it might've changed as you were going down the accordion. And then from that place on, we're going to do another 30 second rep and then we're going to go back up the accordion. So you do another 30 seconds and then you do one minute, two minute, and all the way back up to three minute. And every step of the way you go from 30 seconds to a minute. Initially, a minute felt hard. Now that's double the time you just had. So you can bring in something that's aligned with the talk you want to share, and then two minutes, same. And then when you get to three minutes, one of my clients once said that it felt like he had a football field in his mind. So much space. And now whatever talk you have left there is a very clear, intentional talk.

(01:30:45):
And not only that, and this is why this is such an incredible method, your talk is now internalized. So you're at the stage of I've written a script that I've painfully edited in the old way that you now still have to memorize and it's a written speech that you're going to have to pretend to give in a spoken way. In this case you're there, but it's already completely internalized, not even memorized. It's internalized. You have these pillars, you know where you're going and by the time you make it through the accordion method, you're basically ready to go give it on stage.

(01:31:22):
But you could give it now in one minutes, two minutes, three minutes, five minutes. It's very plastic. You're going to be able to navigate different time frames. It's not going to really matter if you make a mistake because you're going to have a deep sense of what your speech is. It's not memorized, it's internalized. So not only have you gotten clarity and built out your speech in a very intentional way, but by the time you get to the end of it, you also actually know it and you're ready to perform it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:51):
That example of the three minute when you come back up the accordion, that's exactly how it felt when I did this is just like, "Wow, so much time now" because you essentially, the way I think about it is you concentrate it to the best, most important nuggets and then you have time to build on those nuggets and you cut out all the stuff that no one really cares about, which is usually a long introduction, just like now just get to the good stuff and then you expand the good stuff. And it really worked for me and it was a really illuminating experience.

(01:32:19):
For someone that wants to actually use this. Say they have a speech coming up, say they're doing an all hands presentation in a week. Do you do this a week ahead of time? Do you do this a few days before? I guess where do you fit this in the workflow so that you actually remember what you want to say when it comes time?

Tristan de Montebello (01:32:36):
I can't say do it exactly a week or two weeks or it really depends how well familiar you are with the content. If you have an all hands, and this is something that you've been hashing with your executive team over the past two months, you probably know it really, really well and you have a lot of clarity and now it's just about organizing it nicely. So in that case, maybe you want to do a rough go through the accordion a week ahead of time so you have a clear sense of, "What is it that I want my audience to remember and what are the pillars that I know I like to hit that feel really good?"

(01:33:15):
So you can think about these as the foundational pillars that support that one thing that you're sharing or bookmarks that I know I have to hit and then what I would like to do. And so that's what I would write down. I wouldn't write a script. I'd write those down. And then before the all hands, maybe the day before, maybe even the morning of, depending on how important this is or how comfortable you feel, then you might go through just one or two reps of it, but now you already know it, so it should come back very, very quickly in your mind.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:44):
And it sounds like it's okay to have some bullet points at the end. It's hard for me to imagine going on stage with a bunch of people watching, not have any slide, bullet point, speaker notes. Any problems just having a couple of the bullet points of core points next to me?

Tristan de Montebello (01:34:01):
Before a talk, I might have four things written down. My one thing, and we'll talk about this in the bow and arrow, my one thing, the one thing I want people to remember and then the three bookmarks or pillars that I want to hit. And these are kind of cues or reminders that are going to send me into that part of the speech. So for example, if I'm talking about the accordion method, like what I just said, if I go back and I think through the pillars of this one. Well, my one thing would be the accordion method is more powerful than memorizing and then doing it the old way.

(01:34:35):
And then my bookmarks might be number one, describe the old way or the old way. Number two, the new way or the accordion method. And then number three might be internalize, don't memorize, and that'll be kind of the takeaway.

(01:34:53):
And if I have that in my mind, if I have 30 seconds, I can say the old way sucks because you have to work so hard and memorize everything and you're memorizing written stuff, the accordion method is much more powerful because you are going to compress it and go down and then open it up and then I'll explain that in a second and then I'll say, so you're internalized not memorized. What I realized right now is actually, it's funny enough though, those were the bookmarks there, so that sent me down that path. But actually I would say bookmark number two is probably the living room analogy. So it would be the old way sucks, the living room analogy, and then describe the accordion method.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:36):
That's cool. That was an awesome example of just the insights that appear by forcing yourself through this exercise. And it sounds like maybe the best use of this method is if you have a talk all of a sudden short term it's coming, all of a sudden you have to give a talk somewhere. There's a really powerful method to come up with a great talk that's maybe tomorrow, which you didn't expect.

Tristan de Montebello (01:35:58):
When I say I love this, I use this for myself, I use this with every single client I work with regardless of if it's a five-minute talk, a 20-minute keynote, we're using the accordion method, and you can use this at the macro level or at the micro level, so you can use it for the whole talk, but you can also say, "Hey, let's hone in on this part one that you're struggling with or part two and let's use the accordion to get clarity there."

(01:36:26):
So you can use the accordion as almost like a brainstorming way. I just want to see where I end up here and it takes maybe 15 minutes or something to go through a full accordion. It depends the time constraints you give yourself. Sometimes I'll just do two minute, one minute 30 seconds, that's even shorter, but I'll go through it for one piece of the puzzle or it's like, "Hey, we're almost there. Let's really internalize it. Let's clarify this. Let's get it really, really tight." And then I might say, "Okay, now let's do the whole thing through the accordion. So your 20-minute talk, I want to hear it in three minutes." That gets really, really interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:03):
Amazing. Okay. Anything else along the accordion method before we talk about the final technique before we wrap up?

Tristan de Montebello (01:37:10):
We have a full self-paced course on ultra speaking on the accordion. I think it costs like 30 bucks or something like that to access all of the games and all the platforms. A bunch of them are free, but I think this one's behind the paywall. But we also put together a resource where we go all the way, we describe all of the accordion method, the bow and arrow, staying character ending strong on a free email course that we put together. That's ultraspeaking.com/Lenny. So this is shameless self-promotion, but if you want it to go grab it there, you can grab it there and then the bow and arrow is going to tie into the accordion method as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:53):
Awesome. I'm glad you mentioned all that and we'll point people to that URL in the show notes. Okay, final topic is the bow and arrow technique. Let's talk about what that is and how folks can use that to give better talks.

Tristan de Montebello (01:38:05):
The bow and arrow starts with a, it's really a mindset shift that most of us are in the weeds, so we're very sensitive and familiar to all of the content that we're working on. If you're in data, then you have all of the data. If you're sharing ideas, you still have all of the ideas. And the mistake that most people do when they're preparing a talk, a presentation, an all hands a meeting, whatever it is we tend to focus more on what we want to say than what we want our audience to remember. So the mindset shift here is stop focusing as much on what you want to say and focus more on what you want your audience to remember.

(01:38:51):
What we found out is if you think about your last all hands, the last big meeting, the last talk you saw on YouTube or in person, you probably don't remember much. In fact, I wager you might only remember one thing from that talk. And that's what this is all based on. We call it the bow and arrow technique because we think you can only remember one thing out of a talk and that it's very powerful to go through that framework or that kind of thinking when you're building a talk. And the one thing is your arrow. And so when you have that one thing to me I say it's literally a single sentence that is the only sentence people would remember if they left your talk. Would you be satisfied with that sentence?

(01:39:37):
It takes some times to get to a good one, but if you have a good one, it unlocks everything. It's like you're having a north star or a compass in your pocket. You can always pull it out. You always know where you're going. It gives you a lot of clarity. It's also giving a lot of clarity to your audience obviously.

(01:39:54):
But you can't just throw an arrow at somebody's face. You need to notch it in the bow and pull the bow back. And so to pull the bow back, you need to add in weight to that sentence. And that often comes in the form of an interesting anecdote or a data point that's going to support that or a story that's going to add emotion or illustrate it. So you want to find ways in which you can give weight or pull back the bow so that your arrow has that much more impact. So usually the process of clarifying what your arrow is is a back and forth between the bow and the arrows. So if you're going down the accordion method after the first one you might write or before the first one, you might write a tentative arrow, "Here's my one thing", and then the next one you say, "Okay, actually my one thing might be a refined version of that."

(01:40:55):
And so you might rewrite it a little bit and then you might tentatively put in what you think the bow is. "I like the anecdote I used here. I like this data point that I thought was powerful and maybe I can end on this story or this call to action." Then you'll put that in and then you go back in and you give that a try and that's starting to simplify in your mind.

(01:41:17):
And as you go, usually one informs the other. By the time you finish the accordion for example, you should have a very clear arrow and those clear bookmarks, which is the bow. But really the thing to remember with the bow and arrow, if you can only remember one thing, is switch your mindset from what I want to say to what I want people to remember and limit whatever that is you want them to remember as much as possible and that's going to give you extreme clarity.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:41:48):
That is really helpful. I'm preparing my talk for the summit, and so I'm going to use both of these exercises and what I take away from this last piece is as much as you may want to say a lot of things, really all someone's going to remember, as you said is one thing, if anything, but hopefully they remember that one thing.

(01:42:06):
So it's essentially what's the one thing you want people to remember and then what are the pieces of support that will convince them that that's right and that's something that'll stick with them?

Tristan de Montebello (01:42:16):
Exactly. And again, similar to the accordion method, this works in the macro and the micro. So if you have a talk where you're using slides, use it for the whole talk. But then for every single slide, ask yourself what is my one thing? And you might have some support there as well, but if you don't have a one thing for each slide, either the slide shouldn't exist or it should be multiple slides.

(01:42:45):
The symptom of not having a one thing is usually having a slide that says way too many things. I don't know what data point I want you to remember, so I'm going to put all of it on that slide. I'm not sure which piece of information is more important. So I'm going to write down all of my thoughts and I'm going to go through all of them or hope that you go through all of them and extract what you think is interesting. But the reality is people are just going to zone out if you do that. So if you do that slide by slide, you're going to gain incredible clarity and again, you're going to need less preparation and less memorization.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:43:21):
And to build on that, a pro-tip is to make that title of that slide exactly that one thing you want them to take away. Just put it there and tell them exactly what you want them to learn.

Tristan de Montebello (01:43:31):
Yes. I love that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:43:32):
Sweet. Tristan, we've been on a journey. This was a really unique experimental episode. I had a good time even though I did some hard things, you made me do hard things that are good for me. Is there anything else you want to share before we get to our very exciting lightning round? Is there anything else you want to leave listeners with or a nugget you want to?

Tristan de Montebello (01:43:50):
I hope people found value. I mean, we did. This was really a group effort and I really appreciate you working on the agenda, really bringing in the games and trying to make this as practical as possible. I think the only thing I want to leave people with is again, this idea of how transformational tackling speaking can be, and the more constrained you feel with your speaking, the more transformational it will be to your life. So I just want to give this encouragement. It's much, much, much more enjoyable than you think it will be. It can actually be exhilarating and energizing and you feel like you can take over the world once you're on this journey. It's beautiful. And so I just encourage everybody, take the first step and start practicing your speaking.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:44:45):
Awesome. And I definitely felt that after doing the workshop of just I feel energized, I want to just talk all time, but then I'm like, I need more work. I need more practice. Tristan, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Tristan de Montebello (01:45:01):
Let's do this lightning round. Here we go.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:45:04):
Here we go. First question, what are two or three books that you have recommended most to other people?

Tristan de Montebello (01:45:10):
I was given a book by my first coach, Nathan Seward seven years ago called The Big Leap by Gay Hendricks that I've recommended so many times. And it's based on this idea that we tend to self-sabotage ourselves when we experience too much success or too much happiness. And that that's linked to I think five things that would happen to us when we're growing up. One of them is the... What is it, the wild poppy syndrome or something like that. Like the tallest poppy is the one that's cut first. So if you shine in a family of siblings, then anytime you shine too much we're going to say, "Hey, hey, hey, that's not cool for the others." So that's going to be internalized and hardwired in your body and as an adult, as soon as you start shining a little bit too much, you're going to do the same thing to yourself. So the idea is going from having this point above which you can't be happy to turning it into, he calls it an upward-facing spiral with no upper limit. It's a really exciting and empowering book.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:46:20):
Do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show you really enjoyed?

Tristan de Montebello (01:46:23):
I haven't watched much very recently, but I'll say one of my favorite TV shows of all time is the Peaky Blinders, English show with Cillian Murphy. I'm absolutely obsessed with that movie that show. I think it's a true masterpiece. And I've recently rewatched, so I'll qualify this as recent. I recently rewatched The Nice Guys with Ryan Gosling and Russell Crowe, and I think it's just a brilliant comedy. Brilliant. Another masterpiece, I thought.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:46:58):
Do you have a favorite recent product that you have discovered that you really love. Could be an app, it could be something physical.

Tristan de Montebello (01:47:05):
I have a physical product actually right in front of me that was gifted to me by my business partner Michael Gendler, co-founder of Ultraspeaking. This is called an Ember Mug, and this keeps whatever you have in it, warm and it's extraordinary, whether you are a coffee drinker or a tea drinker, you know the feeling of pouring this and sipping it and by the fifth sip, it's cold. This keeps it at whatever temperature you want it to for however long you want. And I absolutely love it. I've been using it basically every day.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:47:37):
I have one of those. I find myself, you could actually control it through the app. You can control the temperature through an app, which I love. I haven't been using mine, but I love the idea. I know a lot of friends love them. Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to, share with friends or family, find useful in work or in life?

Tristan de Montebello (01:47:56):
I think we are too future focused as a species or as a society and as a result, we're always looking for the next thing. So the motto I share with my friends and my business partners and my family the most I think is these are the good old days. And I remind myself, I'll tell you right now for you and for whoever's listening. I mean think about the podcast, it's never going to be this young, it's never going to feel like it feels right now. And it always feels like these things are eternal, but truly one day you're going to look back and you're think, "Man, those were really the good old days." And so I say it right now, enjoy because these are the good old days.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:48:40):
I love that. And it's so relevant with a young kid, you're always going to think about, "Oh, they're little." I love that. Final question. You were the fastest person to reach the finals of the world championship of public speaking. I imagine that was quite a journey. I'm curious if there's a story from that experience that comes to mind that's like a wild part of that journey or something that might surprise people.

Tristan de Montebello (01:49:09):
Well, the journey lasted almost seven months, and it was the craziest journey of my life. I went into that with no experience whatsoever speaking, so really just a random amateur, and I just climbed the ladder by outworking everybody. The story that came to mind right away was six days before the semifinals. So I'm six days before the semifinals and I've qualified for the semifinals two and a half months ago. So I'm nobody, now I'm going to the semifinals of the world championships of public speaking. So my mind really is struggling to compute, and I had finally unlocked a speech that I thought was worthy of giving on the final stage. You have to show up there for the semifinals with one speech, and then the next day, if ever you win, you're going to the finals and you have to have a brand new speech, a completely different speech that you're going to give on that stage.

(01:50:12):
So you need two speeches ready to go, and both of those speeches have to be in theory, world-class. I'm six days before. I was struggling at that, really, really struggling to get that speech together. I finally got something and Michael managed to get me. I was flying I think two days later to Vancouver for the semis, and Michael managed to unlock this one opportunity to speak in front of 50 people to give it a try. And so I ran there. I give the speech, and as usual, we film. I film every single speech. I gave more than a hundred speeches over seven months, and I filmed every single speech. And we'd get home, we'd ask everybody for feedback, and I get home and I'm thinking, "Man, something is wrong. Something is wrong." I was so pumped. I wept. I genuinely wept as I wrote the speech because it was so moving. It was all about my life. It was something that I was so connected to. I don't know, probably the emotion of the pressure as well, but that's how much I believed in that speech.

(01:51:14):
We get home, we put the speech on the computer, and as I get to the most important part of the speech, I see two things happen. So this is the moment where I'm expecting people to pull out their tissues. One person pulls up the agenda for the event that they're at and is starting to look at the agenda. Another person pulls out their phone, another person starts going through their purse, and I'm looking at this, and suddenly I realized, "Oh, this speech, nobody cares about this. This is not a good speech. This is terrible." And then I go through all of these feedbacks.

(01:51:53):
I have 50 pieces of feedback, and all I'm getting is, "Good luck for the semi-finals. It's going to go great. I thought it was good", and I'm like, "I'm going to humiliate myself. This is terrible." So I had waves of anxiety. I threw my speech away, and in five days from the ground up, I rebuilt a completely new speech that was basically the best of everything I'd explored, everything I'd experimented with over the course of the three months leading up to that, the jokes that worked the best, like a stand-up comic would. I built my special and I focused on different areas like all of the transitions.

(01:52:38):
And right before the semi-finals, I gave the speech to one person. I was in Vancouver trying to internalize my speech and memorizing it in a plaza where I delimited the size of the stage and I'm just giving my speech out loud to get over the nerves, so I'm ready for the pressure to see if my brain will remember it and everything.

(01:53:01):
Anyways, I gave it in front of one person who was our district director at Toastmasters, and this is a speech meant for 500 to a thousand people, not one person. So I was scared it would flop. But in the middle of the speech, which is a completely different one, I saw a tear roll down her cheek, and then she just hugged me and said, "You got it. You did it. You did it." I walked out on that stage and I made it, and I won the semi-finals with that speech.

(01:53:32):
I think to me, that was really the, it showed me that everything I'd done was worth something, that it actually worked. If I was able to build a speech in five days, that could get me a win at the semi-finals of the world championships. That was kind of the ultimate, "Wow, I won." So when I walked into the finals, to me, I felt like I had already won.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:53:57):
Wow, that is a story. What an arc. Amazing. I'm so happy you asked that question. Now I just want to watch that speech and I want to learn more about this whole championship of public speaking, which I have no insight into. That could be its own podcast interview.

(01:54:13):
But Tristan, thank you so much for being here. This was incredible. One of the most interesting episodes I've done. Two final questions. Where can folks learn more about Ultraspeaking? I know you built a page where they could experiment with some of this stuff, so share that. And then how can listeners be useful to you?

Tristan de Montebello (01:54:28):
If you go to ultraspeaking. com/Lenny, so ultra like U-L-T-R-A ultraspeaking.com/Lenny, we put together, you have five emails that go deep into a bunch of the things that we've talked here. You can also just go to Ultraspeaking.com where you'll get access to a bunch of the games for free, and you can check out everything else that we do. If you want to follow me or hit me up or ask me questions about this podcast, you can do that on Twitter @Montebello, M-O-N-T-E-B-E-L-L-O. And how can listeners be useful to me? Well, first of all, if you made it to here, then I really appreciate you. Thank you. Thank you for being here with us, and what I would love for you to do is to apply this. We said in the beginning, you can't get better at speaking without speaking, and another piece of that puzzle is you want to do the thing that you're trying to get better at. So if you're nervous speaking in front of people, you want to speak in front of people as part of your practice. So the way you could be useful to me is introduce these games to somebody else. Try them for yourself, practice them with somebody else. Go through the accordion method with a friend. Try conductor, and when you succeed and when you have an awesome experience, then you can tell the world that Ultraspeaking helped you do that, and that would be huge.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:55:56):
Awesome. Tristan, thank you so much for being here.

Tristan de Montebello (01:56:01):
Thanks, Lenny. It was an honor.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:56:03):
It was my honor, Tristan. Bye everyone.

(01:56:05):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at LennysPodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Wes Kao (00:00:00):
I often see operators who explain things poorly and then are shocked and horrified when people are confused or there's skepticism, there's apathy. I'm a big proponent of asking myself, if I'm not getting the reaction that I'm looking for, how might I be contributing? How could I explain this more clearly? How can I be more compelling? How can I anticipate any questions that they might have?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:22):
You are one of the best teachers of communication I've ever come across. I made a list of people's favorite tactics and frameworks and approaches that you teach in writing. Any tactics you can share for someone to be a little more concise?

Wes Kao (00:00:35):
I think the blast radius of a poorly written memo is way bigger than most people think. If you are just shooting off a message in a Slack channel with 15 other people, and it's confusing, you didn't include information you should have included, there's going to be a bunch of back and forth. Whereas if you had just taken another look at it, those 15 people would be off to the races.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:52):
You have an awesome framework called MOO.

Wes Kao (00:00:54):
MOO stands for Most Obvious Objection. A lot of times we're surprised by the questions that we get especially in meetings, we feel blindsided. When really, if you thought for even two minutes about what are obvious objections that I'm likely to get, you often immediately come up with what some of those things are. Are you going to be able to anticipate every single objection? No. But can you anticipate the obvious ones? Absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:22):
Today my guest is Wes Kao. Wes co-created the Alt-MBA program with Seth Godin. She Co-Founded a company called Maven, which I often collaborate with, which makes it easy for people to host live cohort-based courses. She recently left Maven to launch her own course on Executive Communication and Influence. There's a quote that came to mind after I stopped recording this conversation with Wes by George Bernard Shaw, "The single biggest problem in communication is the illusion that it has taken place."

(00:01:51):
By the end of this podcast if you listen to what Wes suggests, you'll be a lot closer to becoming a world-class communicator. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. Also, if you become a yearly subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of Perplexity Pro, Superhuman, Notion, Linear and Granola. Check it out at lennysnewsletter.com. With that, I bring you Wes Kao.

(00:02:18):
This episode is brought to you by WorkOS. If you're building a SaaS app, at some point your customers will start asking for enterprise features like SAML authentication and SCIM provisioning. That's where WorkOS comes in, making it fast and painless to add enterprise features to your app. Their APIs are easy to understand so that you can ship quickly and get back to building other features. Today, hundreds of companies are already powered by WorkOS, including ones you probably know like Vercel, Webflow, and Loom.

(00:02:50):
WorkOS also recently acquired Warrant, the Fine Grained Authorization Service. Warrant's product is based on a groundbreaking authorization system called Zanzibar, which was originally designed for Google to power Google Docs and YouTube. This enables fast authorization checks at enormous scale while maintaining a flexible model that can be adapted to even the most complex use cases. If you're currently looking to build role-based access control or other enterprise features like single sign-on, SCIM or user management, you should consider WorkOS. It's a drop-in replacement for Auth0 and supports up to 1 million monthly active users for free. Check it out at workos.com to learn more. That's workos.com.

(00:03:36):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta. When it comes to ensuring your company has top-notch security practices, things get complicated fast. Now you can assess risk, secure the trust of your customers, and automate compliance for SOC 2, ISO 27001, HIPAA and more with a single platform, Vanta. Vanta's market-leading trust management platform helps you continuously monitor compliance alongside reporting and tracking risks. Plus, you can save hours by completing security questionnaires with Vanta AI. Join thousands of global companies that use Vanta to automate evidence collection, unify risk management, and streamline security reviews. Get $1,000 off Vanta when you go to vanta.com/lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny. Wes, thank you so much for being here and welcome back to the podcast.

Wes Kao (00:04:36):
Thanks, Lenny. I'm very honored to be a second-time guest.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:40):
Very rare honor. No pressure, but I think this is going to be one of the highest leverage episodes I've done and let me tell you why I think that's the case in the newsletter and on the podcast, I often talk about just how important and how high leverage the skill of communication is to product leaders, to leaders, just to people in general. There's this quote that Boz, the CTO of Meta, he's been on the podcast, he wrote this famous blog post, "Communication is the job." And I think that's true for product people, but it's true for basically any sort of leadership role. Anyone trying to get ahead. And you are one of the best communicators I've ever met. You are one of the best teachers of communication I've ever come across. You have one of the most popular courses on Maven, on executive communication, so I'm really excited to have you here and to help people become better communicators, better at influence and all these things. So thank you again for being here.

Wes Kao (00:05:32):
Absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:34):
Okay. So something that I often do with guests on the podcast, not even often, always, I ping people that the guests have worked with and ask them, "What should I ask Wes? What should I know about Wes?" Let me read a few quotes about you in regards to your communication skills from folks that have worked with you-

Wes Kao (00:05:34):
All right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:51):
And these are three different people. Okay, so first, "Wes single handedly raised the quality of the entire company's writing by like two X across the board. I always say the best writing course I ever took was working with Wes for a year."

Wes Kao (00:06:07):
Wow.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:09):
Okay. That's one.

Wes Kao (00:06:10):
Great.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:10):
"Wes never just throws things out there, she's precise with her use of language, meticulous about examining her own ideas before bringing them in front of others and knows how to make her points in a way that people will understand them and buy into them." Okay. And third, "Wes includes a reasoning with every proposal in the context behind all of her recommendations so that everyone around her learns in order of magnitude faster. This also makes her an exceptional teacher because she can clearly define what excellence is and why something is the goal, and then break down the steps and principles involved." Okay, reactions.

Wes Kao (00:06:46):
Those are really nice things. That's amazing. Yeah, thank you so much.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:52):
And these are people across different companies, so.

Wes Kao (00:06:52):
Cool.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:55):
Okay, so that was just to highlight of how good you are at this stuff. And what we're going to be doing with our chat is going through a bunch of your tactics that you teach and that have helped people become better communicators, executive communicators, better at influence. Before we get into the specific tactics, is there anything that you think is important for people to understand just broadly around the skill of becoming a better communicator?

Wes Kao (00:07:17):
I often see operators who explain things poorly and then are shocked and horrified when people are confused or there's skepticism, there's apathy, there's a lot of avoidable questions, and I'm a big proponent of asking myself, "If I'm not getting the reaction that I'm looking for, how might I be contributing to that?" So, you know, instead of blaming other people for not understanding me, I think about how could I explain this more clearly? How can I be more compelling? How can I anticipate any questions that they might have? So I'm a big proponent of agency. And realizing that we can only control our own behavior. And so the best place to start, if you're not getting the reaction you're looking for, is reflecting on how can I get better at the skill of communicating? And it absolutely is a skill.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:11):
So what I'm hearing is if you're having a hard time people buying into what you're trying to convince them to do or you're finding people are doing not what you asked them to do, it's likely an issue with your ability to communicate, it's probably not their fault.

Wes Kao (00:08:28):
Yeah, I would say so. You can't solve everything with improving your communication, but you can increase the likelihood of getting what you want.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:39):
Cool. Okay. Anything else along these lines of just things that are important to understand just broadly around communication, executive communication?

Wes Kao (00:08:46):
I think another big one that I teach in my course and really kick off with is practicing like it's game day, playing like it's game day. So I see a lot of operators who save their best behavior for executives only. So you know, they want to shine when they're presenting to senior leadership, but with everyone else, they're kind of calling it. And I just don't think that you're going to be able to get enough reps to actually get good at executive communication if you are only doing it with executives. Because many of us only present to execs once a month, right? Or a couple of times a quarter. And that's just not a lot of chance to practice. So really treating every single stakeholder as if they are important because they are, and you shouldn't be if you don't want to waste your CEO's time, you also shouldn't waste your cross-functional team members' time or your manager's time or your direct reports' time. So that's something else that I ask to keep in mind.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:39):
And maybe a last question before we get into the tactics. When people think communication, they think email, they think meeting presentations, things like that. How do you think about, when you talk about executive communication and communication in general, what's kind of the umbrella of things that includes?

Wes Kao (00:09:53):
Yeah, I would say broadly the two mediums are verbal communication and written. So verbal being meetings, conversations, presentations. And written being emails, strategy docs, notion docs, Slack messages, text messages, those two categories broadly. And I also think about communication as more of a means to an end, which might be interesting for some people because I teach a course on communication. So you would think that's like the end in and of itself, but I really see it as a means to an end where the end is getting the ideal outcome you're looking for. So whether that is buy-in or making a good decision as a team or moving to the next step, whatever that might be, communication is really in service of that end goal.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:43):
Awesome. Okay. So I made a list of people's favorite tactics and frameworks and approaches that you teach, and talking to folks that you've taught and folks that you've worked with. So I'm just going to go through a bunch and let's just help people get better at these things.

Wes Kao (00:10:58):
All right, let's do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:00):
Okay. So the first is something you call sales, then logistics. What is that about?

Wes Kao (00:11:07):
Yes. So a common mistake that I see is overestimating the amount of buy-in that you have from your audience. So that looks like jumping straight into talking about the logistics, the details of the how to do something, of the process. When in reality your audience has not yet decided if they even want to do the thing. So what I see operators do in response then is go even deeper into the logistics and the how, thinking that, "Oh, if I just explain this more than that person will want to do it." When really a sales note is different than a logistics note. A sales note is meant to get people excited to do the thing you want them to do, and to agree to do it. And only then after they have bought in, does it make sense to share the logistics.

(00:11:57):
So there's an order of operations here. If you switch the order of operations, you will likely get a slow response or just no response, right? We've all put a Slack message in a channel and got crickets and tumbleweed. So really starting off with selling the person and making sure that they know why we're doing this, why this matters to the company, why now, and then sharing the logistics tends to be a lot more effective.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:22):
Is there an example of that that might help illustrate that point or that approach?

Wes Kao (00:12:27):
Yeah. So one of my clients is a head of operations and she was trying to get the rest of her executive team, which she was a part of, to fill in some wins for the week so that they could share this out with the whole company. And this was going to be motivating, it was going to shine a light on folks. And she led with the logistics of which document to send, to put the details in, what time to put it in by, the format that you should put these wins and didn't really get much of a response from the leadership team, which makes sense, right? Because this totally sounds like one of those things that's another item to check off on your list when you already have so many other things to do and here's this other process that like we're all supposed to do now, like yay, right? And so she wasn't really getting response. And that's because she dove straight into logistics.

(00:13:20):
Whereas what she could have done is start by selling folks, selling the other executives on why are we doing this? Well, we're doing this because this is a chance to shine a light on your team members who are doing amazing work, for them to feel motivated and to feel like the rest of the company really sees them and understands what they're doing. And this is all something that is going to motivate your team, right? So sharing why this is helpful and useful and how this is in service of you and your team versus like, "Oh, this is a favor that you're doing for me to fill out this form and fill it out this way and by this date," et cetera, et cetera.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:00):
I know that execs often want the opposite where they're just like, "Okay, I know, just tell me what you want to do. Just like, okay, just get to the point. I don't want time for all this context and background." Any advice on when to spend any time on the sales? Like what are signs that, okay, maybe you don't have them sold yet, or what are maybe contexts where you should probably still try to sell them first?

Wes Kao (00:14:20):
Yeah. So I actually think that you should always do a little bit of selling even for situations where people have generally bought in. Because most of us have a lot going on and we're not actively thinking about whatever you're talking about. So even though I agreed to something two weeks ago, by the time you're telling me about it again, like I thought about a billion other things since then, right? So reminding me of why are we talking about this? Why does this matter? And then getting into it and framing that conversation upfront is way more likely for us to not get stuck in a cold start and not kind of go two steps back one step forward.

(00:14:55):
The other thing is, you can frame a conversation and sell a bit at the beginning very concisely. So I'm not talking about spending 15 minutes out of a 30 minute meeting selling, I'm talking about one to two minutes, even a couple sentences, and then transitioning into the main thing you want to talk about. So I'm a huge proponent of doing that and basically reminding people, why are we doing this? Why are we here today? Why does this matter? And then getting into the meat.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:24):
I love that. So basically you can do this really briefly, it doesn't have to be a whole pitch for half an hour. It's just a reminder, "Here's why we think this is important." And I think that's such a good point because a lot of times it's like a leader is looking at this thing you're asking them to do and they're like, "Why are we even, why am I spending time on this?" And just a reminder of like, "Okay, I see, I forgot this was going to be, this a part of our strategy, this has this much impact potential or here's how it could help our team be more efficient."

Wes Kao (00:15:52):
Yeah. And you can really do that in like 30 seconds.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:56):
Is there like a, I don't know, structure to this? Is it just like why? Is there a kind of a template you like or some way you recommend of selling first? Is it like, "Here's why we're doing this." Starting like that? Anything along those lines?

Wes Kao (00:16:09):
Yeah. I think explaining why we're doing this, why this benefits the business, what problem this is solving. Again, you can do a lot of this in a couple of sentences. And then I also like asking or stating what I need from the other person upfront. So saying, "Hey, we're here today because two weeks ago we were reviewing the product flow and realized that there were a couple of parts that were kind of confusing. So I took a stab at fixing those areas, rewriting the microcopy, and I want to present them to you today, see if you agree with these changes, and then we're going to roll them out. What I'm looking for from you is feedback on the changes and if you agree." So like that was like 15 seconds, right? Super fast. And then now we're all on the same page about why we're here. And you can listen more intently knowing that I'm looking for a certain kind of feedback.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:01):
I would love to hear it that way. I think there's like an implication here that maybe is worth sharing of just, a lot of this is about communicating effectively to execs, which will make you communicate better to most people. But especially with folks up the ladder. They don't have a lot of time, they have a million things in their head. Maybe just share like why this is so important, like what the state of mind of a leader is that you need to kind of break through.

Wes Kao (00:17:25):
Yeah. So I call it the yes, yes, yes, next, next, next mindset where if I'm listening to direct reports present something to me, very often I find myself thinking, "Got it. All right, yes, let's keep going." Right? And you know, on the other side of that, I've often presented to executives where I had a 15 slide deck and execs would do that and I'd be like, whoa, whoa, whoa. Like I have a whole sequence, I have a whole order, you know? And sometimes they would give me buy or make the decision by slide four, you know? And I'd be like, "Okay, well you know, slide 13, I want to show you this great graph I put together." Right? And what was really helpful for me was realizing that I should take the win. Okay, if five seconds already agreed, take the win and keep it moving, move on.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:13):
Yeah. What's that quote like? "If you've sold them, stop talking."

Wes Kao (00:18:16):
Right. Yes. Yeah, you might talk them out of agreeing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:20):
Yeah. Okay. You mentioned being concise. Let's talk about that. You have some really good advice on just how to effectively be concise and not too concise. What's your advice there?

Wes Kao (00:18:31):
Yes. One of my pet peeves is when people are too concise and they equate being concise with brief, being brief. And being concise is not about absolute word count, it's about economy of words. It's about the density of the insight that you're sharing. And so you can have a 300 word memo that's meandering and long-winded and a thousand word memo that is tight and concise. And so not equating concision with briefness I think is a really big one to understand.

(00:19:05):
The second thing is a lot of advice about being concise, I think misses an important point. So we've all heard, "Don't bury the lead, cut to the chase." Main point, put the main point at the top, bottom line up front, right? And all of these pithy aphorisms assume that you actually know what your core point is. So you can't cut to the chase unless you know what the chase is. You can't unbury the lead unless you know what the lead is. And so that I found is the bottleneck to being concise. It's actually not really being clear of what you are thinking, that's what's leading to being long-winded.

(00:19:49):
And you can kind of test this theory because most of us have a go-to story that we've told a bunch of times, right? We're like, you know exactly when people are going to laugh, you know when they're going to gasp or hold their breath, right? And why are you so good at telling that story and why are you so concise about it? Because you've told it a bunch of times, you know all of the beats. So in meetings though, at work, we are very rarely talking about the same thing that many times it's always something new. It's something that we are also probably likely processing ourselves and are in the midst of processing as we are in a quick turnaround time, telling someone else about it, telling our team about it. And so you are basically asking your brain to do a lot of different processes, especially in a real time conversation. You're listening to the other person absorbing, making sense of it, processing it, figuring out what you think and how you would react.

(00:20:39):
And then trying to say something cohesive that makes sense, right? And then trying to be concise about it. So it's just a lot of different processes. And so the only solution I found consistently to being concise is preparation. It's not a very glamorous solution by any means, but the clearer I am going into a meeting, going into a conversation, going into a pitch, the better I am at being concise and being able to bring the conversation back to the most important points at being able to stay flexible, but also firm and preparation. I don't mean spending hours and hours preparing for a weekly meeting, even a couple of minutes really makes a huge difference.

(00:21:25):
Most of us are so back to back in meetings that we're doing zero preparation. It's like the meeting has started 30 seconds in and you're still unwinding from the last Zoom call that you were on, right? So most of us are in that mental state. So if you even take 30 seconds to one minute to ground yourself on why am I in this meeting? What do I want to share and make sure I get across in the time that we have, you're going to go in there so much more focused and so much more able to be concise.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:51):
So the advice there, so this is for meetings and I want to talk about writing also, but for meetings, the advice here is before you get into a meeting, actually think about why am I in this meeting? What do I want to get out of it? Instead of in the meeting figuring out a lot as you go, which to your point, you're just going to ramble and be like, "Oh, okay, here's what I actually want to say."

Wes Kao (00:22:10):
Yeah. And what might I want to share in the meeting too? You know, especially for more introverted folks. Sometimes you need to decide beforehand that you want to speak and you want to make sure you get a certain point across. So even deciding that beforehand makes a huge difference.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:25):
Yeah, I found this extremely powerful just like five minutes before you get into a meeting. And it could happen earlier in the day, right? It doesn't have to happen right before the meeting, or worst case, it's right before the meeting. Just, "Okay, what do I want to get out of this? What am I here? What do I want to say?" And just like giving your brain a little bit of time to prepare. Super powerful. In writing, is there like any tactics you can share for someone to be a little more concise?

Wes Kao (00:22:50):
I think the main tactic is to remind yourself to be concise. And usually when I do that, I end up trimming 20% at least of what I wrote, tightening up some sentences. I also ask myself, how might I be adding cognitive load to whatever it is that I'm saying? So is there a tighter, clearer, cleaner way that I can ask what I'm asking or present the information I'm presenting or make the recommendation that I'm making? And usually if you even ask yourself that, your brain automatically comes up with stuff. You just see whatever you wrote differently and you're like, "Oh shit, I could trim this entire paragraph because that's secondary." And maybe you have your primary message in Slack, and then within the thread add some of the secondary stuff, right? So I find that most of us, it's reminding yourself to be concise. And once you think of it, your brain naturally will see places where you can trim.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:50):
There's a layer of advice under this that you're not saying that I'm going to say, which is actually look at the thing you wrote at least once before you share it. Because I used to be really bad at this. I just like, "Okay, I don't have time. I wrote this doc, send it, get feedback.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:00):
... really bad at this. I just like, "Okay, I don't have time. We wrote this doc, send it, get feedback. All right. Send this email. I don't have time to read this email." And I find just forcing yourself to look at it solves so much of this.

Wes Kao (00:24:10):
Oh, yes, yes, definitely. I was assuming before doing that, but you're right, some people might not be. And yes, definitely reading your own message first is huge. And yeah, I find that even doing that you can often spot a lot of low-hanging fruit.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:31):
Right. You'll find the typos and grammar issues and you'll be like, "Oh, I don't need this word." Along those lines, let me share two books. People always ask me, "How did you learn to write?" I'm like, "I'm not a writer, I don't know what I'm doing." But two books really helped me write more effectively. And one is specifically to help you write more concisely called On Writing Well. I don't know if you've read that.

Wes Kao (00:24:51):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:52):
Okay. And it's basically chapter after chapter of, "Here's what you can cut. And you can cut more. And look what more you can cut and cut this stuff." And he has screenshots of essays that students have written in his class and he's like, "Look at all those words you cut and nothing has changed. It's exactly the same message and even is better with 40% of the words cut."

Wes Kao (00:25:12):
Is this by Sol Stein or another author?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:16):
I don't have it... It's somewhere in my bookshelf. So we'll look it up.

Wes Kao (00:25:19):
Yeah, there's a writing book by Sol Stein that I absolutely love. And I feel like it might be called On Writing Well, but then also I could see there being multiple books called On Writing Well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:29):
There's also Writing Well I think by Stephen King, that's another one that people love, but there On Writing Well is the one I really loved because it's very tactical.

Wes Kao (00:25:37):
Going back to something that you were saying earlier with rereading what you wrote, I think the blast radius of a poorly written memo is way bigger than most people think. So if you're just shooting off a message in a Slack channel with 15 other people and it's confusing and you didn't include information you should have included, there's going to be a bunch of back and forth. All 15 of these people are reading this being like, "Okay, what do I do with this?"

(00:26:05):
Whereas if you had just taken another look at it, those 15 people would be off to the races. They would've read your message and then known exactly what to do next or what their part was or what you were looking for from them. So I think about that a lot too. It's not just me writing this and sending it off. It's, "Who are all the people who are going to come in contact with this message who are going to refer to it and use it? And if I just take 30 more seconds to make sure that it's clean, how much can I unblock from their work?"

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:34):
That's such a good point. I like that, I love that term blast radius. It's such a good point. Just like there's so much negative leverage in writing inefficiently and inconcisely. If you spend like... Inconcisely? I don't know the word is there, but if you just spend three minutes spending a little more time making it more clear just like the impact and leverage that has, that's such a good point. I looked up the books, it's so funny. Okay, so there's On Writing Well by William Zinsser. There's Stein On Writing by Sol Stein, which is what you said you were talking about. And then Stephen King has a book called On Writing. Everyone's got the same.

Wes Kao (00:27:09):
Yeah. Common title.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:12):
Not ideal for SEO but On Writing Well is the one that I love by William Zinsser. There's also one called A Series Of Short Sentences if you haven't seen that one. It's a really good rate too. It's just how to write short sentences and just the power of just keeping sentences short, which I struggle with.

Wes Kao (00:27:27):
Yeah. Yeah, I like that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:28):
Okay. Back to our agenda. There's another framework/tactic that I've heard you recommend. It's called signposting. What is signposting?

Wes Kao (00:27:38):
Signposting is using certain words, phrases, formatting, and an overall structure in your writing that helps guide your reader and signals what is coming in the rest of the post. So, this is especially helpful if you have a long memo. It adds structure to where are we going and what certain sections of paragraphs are about. So some of my favorite signposting words are, "for example," shows that you're about to show an example because shows that you're about to share your logic and rationale behind something. "As a next step," is a great one. People's eyes automatically zoom to, "as a next step." Even "First, second, third," kicking off a paragraph with that, you're not needing to rely on rich text formatting with bolding, italics, underlines and all that craziness. If you kick off sentences with signposting words, you can often signal, "Here's what I'm about to talk about in this paragraph."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:41):
These are power words for clarity. There's this whole concept of power words like, "free."

Wes Kao (00:28:47):
Yeah. "A gift."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:48):
"Gift." Yeah. For copywriting and these are basically power words for helping your brain see the structure and get to the thing you want to pay attention to. So I'll read back the words you just used. "For example," " because," "as a next step," and then, "first, second, third."

Wes Kao (00:29:05):
Yeah. Yeah. You can use signposting in writing and verbally too. So if you're doing a product demo, you might say something like, "The most important part to pay attention to is, blank." Or, "The part that we were most surprised by is, blank." Or, "The part that customers are," et cetera. Right? So it's, you're signaling that whatever comes after this thing is something that you may want to pay attention to. So it's a great way not only to add structure, but to also grab people's attention back if it has strayed some time as they were either listening to you or reading.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:42):
Along those lines, I find I find formatting really helpful here, just bold and bullets. I know you have a pet peeve with too much formatting. How much is too much formatting?

Wes Kao (00:29:51):
I really hate excessive formatting. So, I've seen memos where 30% of the note was bolded. And that just negates the entire point of bolding because if everything is bolded then nothing is being highlighted, right? So I think using formatting in general more sparingly than you think you have to is probably a good rule of thumb. I also dislike when people overuse bullets and sentence fragments, phrases in bullets when they should use complete sentences that actually show the connected tissue between ideas, that show the logical flow of what it is that you're saying.

(00:30:33):
And it feels faster and more concise to put bullets and fragments, but a lot of times your reader on the other end of that is needing to decipher and interpret and guess what you actually meant. So it net, net takes longer. And I also think that it can be a little bit of a crutch, it can be a little bit lazy because you are telling yourself that you're being concise when really, if you had to turn your sentence fragment into a full sentence, a lot of times it actually is harder than you think because you realize that you actually didn't really know exactly what you meant. So as you're trying to turn it into a full sentence, you're actually needing to use brainpower.

(00:31:15):
So that's I think a great litmus test of, "Was that idea fully thought out?" Because if it was, you should be able to really quickly turn it into a complete sentence. And many times, you actually aren't. So I see people like basically think, "Oh, I want to make this easier to read, more skimmable. I'm just going to throw a bunch of formatting and bullets and turn everything into bullets." And it's not quite that easy of a solution.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:41):
This is very much along the lines of the whole Amazon six-page memo where Jeff Bezos just realized, "If you can't write it out as a long memo and explain yourself in prose, you don't actually know what you're saying." And it's a really good filter for helping people actually crystallize and know themselves, "Okay, I see. I don't actually know what I'm doing here." And I love this is a microcosm of that. Can you just make a bullet point a real sentence versus a fragment of a sentence?

(00:32:06):
I'm thinking about as a listener being like, "Okay, how do I actually get better at this?" So maybe let's take a tangent. I know that you teach a whole course, you do all this stuff hands-on with people to help them actually build these skills. For someone that hasn't taken the course or isn't taking it, what's a good way to start practicing these skills and know if what you're writing is getting better, is good. Is it find a mentor, find someone that you think is a great writer and have them review stuff? Any tips there?

Wes Kao (00:32:34):
Yeah. So I have a pretty first principles driven approach for this, which is to think about how long does it take me right now to get to the reaction I'm looking for from my recipient? If it takes a bunch of back and forth and a bunch of friction, then that's my baseline. And once you start practicing some of these communication skills, how does that speed up? If you would have had seven different touch points of back and forth, does that shrink to two to three?

(00:33:08):
Not every point of friction is going to be avoidable, but a lot of it is if you get better at communicating. So I like watching for the reaction and how quickly and how enthusiastically I'm able to get that reaction. And for the things that are working, do more of that. For things that are not working, adjust your execution because it might not be that the tactic doesn't work, it might be your execution of it wasn't great. And keep trying, basically.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:35):
So the advice here is just see how well you're writing/meeting/suggestion goes, how well it does. And if it's not like there's the ideal immediately, "Yes, let's do it." And then there's the, "I don't really understand." There's the spectrum of response. And what I'm hearing is just pay attention to if the speed to getting what you want is increasing in general.

Wes Kao (00:33:59):
Yeah, yeah. I don't think that there's any single shortcut on how to get better besides that. I do think that being fascinated by a topic and being excited about it makes it more likely that you're going to find it fun to try all these different things and try different ways to get through to people. So, I would approach it with a hypothesis-driven experimental mindset and almost like a game. Like, "When I do this, how does that other person react? If I frame it this way, do I get a different reaction? When I try this, am I able to cut through the noise more?"

(00:34:39):
Yeah. So I really think it's about practicing. And I will say that the way not to do it is to try to incorporate 30 different tactics at the same time and then beat yourself up when you don't remember to do them. It's really easy when you are learning a new field or function to get overwhelmed when you're learning a new skill. And the way to build a habit is usually not changing so many different things at once. It's picking one thing that you want to try and keeping that top of mind, trying it in a bunch of different settings in different ways. And getting it better at that thing before moving on to the next thing.

(00:35:19):
So that's like a really common thing I see in my course is people feeling overwhelmed. And I always remind folks that, "You are building a new habit here. And be patient with yourself, take it step by step."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:31):
There's a lot of stuff we're talking about here that a lot of people might be like, "This is so minor. What? I just bullet point sentences, be a little... Tell them the why at the beginning."

(00:35:41):
And I just want to share in my experience the biggest jump I made in my career was actually getting better at these very specific skills. I had this manager, Vlad, who's been on the podcast and I talk about him regularly, who was such a stickler about communicating well and being very clear and concise and thinking and just spending more time on documents and emails, on strategy docs. Just like, "No, this isn't ready. Spend more time, here's something that's not clear." And just doing that was such an accelerant for me.

(00:36:12):
And it's all these little things. That's what's interesting about it. It's like everything seems really minor but it all adds up to a lot of impact because to your point, people see it, "Okay, cool, I get it, let's go." Versus like, "I don't like this idea." And then it's like it all falls apart. So I guess any reactions to that?

Wes Kao (00:36:29):
Yeah. All these little things compound and make a big difference. I often hear people think, "Well, this individual instance, this individual email, the Slack message is not worth spending a couple more minutes on. It's just an email or it's just a Slack message." The problem with that line of thinking is that no one instance of something is ever going to feel important enough to spend a little bit more time on that. And then, but when you zoom out, that's like, "Well that's all your work then. This is literally everything you've touched. This is all your work output then." because any piece of that process you thought wasn't worth spending time on and now this is just the quality of your work and it's not as good as it could be.

(00:37:15):
So yes, these might seem minor but A, it compounds. And also B, all the "big things," everyone else is already doing. So, there's not a lot of alpha in that. Whereas if you are paying attention to skills that people think are boring or too basic and realizing that's a lever that you can pull, that someone else thought, "Oh, we're hitting diminishing returns on that. I'm not going to spend more time on that." But you realize that there's actually more juice left to squeeze there and you decide to squeeze that juice. Well, now, you have extra juice that the other person doesn't have.

(00:37:56):
So yeah, in my experience I find that people claim the point of diminishing returns way too early. And this isn't just for communication, this is for strategies, tactics, et cetera. They'll try something once, a mediocre attempt and be like, "This channel doesn't work. This tactic doesn't work." It's like, "Really? Because it's working for a lot of other people who are getting really creative with it."

(00:38:19):
I'm not saying that everything has to work for you but for you to claim, "This thing just doesn't work," feels a little bit intellectually dishonest. It's more likely that your skill level, your creativity, your execution ability was not good enough. And that's fine. Let's admit that to ourselves because if we admit that, then we can do the hard work of getting better at those things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:42):
It feels like if you really boil this down, all the advice comes down to just spend a little more time on all these things you're putting out.

Wes Kao (00:38:51):
I like thinking about it as a little bit more upfront investment. And it is an investment. It's not just time. It's an investment because yes, it takes a little bit longer to make a Slack message a little bit better, but net, net if you save a bunch of questions and back and forth and people asking you things that you don't think they should be asking, then by investing a little bit of upfront effort, you've prevented all that from happening. So yeah, it is a little bit more time in the moment but reaps a lot of benefits down the line.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:25):
Today's episode is brought to you by Coda. I personally use Coda every single day to manage my podcast and also to manage my community. It's where I put the questions that I plan to ask every guest that's coming on the podcast. It's where I put my community resources, it's how I manage my workflows. Here's how Coda can help you. Imagine starting a project at work and your vision is clear. You know exactly who's doing what and where to find the data that you need to do your part. In fact, you don't have to waste time searching for anything because everything your team needs from project trackers and OKRs to documents and spreadsheets lives in one tab all in Coda. With Coda's collaborative all-in-one workspace, you get the flexibility of docs, the structure of spreadsheets, the power of applications, and the intelligence of AI all in one easy to organize tab. Like I mentioned earlier, I use Coda every single day. And more than 50,000 teams trust Coda to keep them more aligned and focused. If you're a startup team looking to increase alignment and agility, Coda can help you move from planning to execution in record time. To try it for yourself, go to coda.io/lenny today and get six months free of the team plan for startups. That's C-O-D-A.I-O/lenny to get started for free and get six months of the team plan, coda.io/lenny.

(00:40:42):
You mentioned Slack. I have a great quote also about you that I didn't read that I'm just going to read right now from someone that worked with you. She said she searched the Slack channel at the company you worked at for old posts from Wes for inspiration for what to ask you. And she said you had zero half-baked thoughts, 100% complete sentences, perfect punctuation, clear takeaways at the top of every message. It's the kind of thing you don't notice in isolation, but once you see everyone else's messages in a remote-first company, it's a stark contrast.

Wes Kao (00:41:14):
Yeah, thank you. I will also say that as someone who tries to walk the talk, I feel like I get a pretty good response rate pretty quickly for the things that I ask for, for the recommendations I'm making. It's not instant, it's not 100%, but over time I've realized that improving my communication has led to people receiving my ideas better. Ideas that used to be locked in my head that I would get frustrated that no one else understood. People were now understanding and that feels really good. That's very, very exciting and it made me want to do it more and pay more attention to that. So that's going back to what I said earlier about watching for what's working. There's momentum is really encouraging.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:01):
And I totally feel that. If you start getting the things you want, that feels great. I'd be like, "Okay, cool."

Wes Kao (00:42:08):
Yeah, more.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:09):
"Let's do more of that." Yeah, and again, it's like very minor things. It's like a couple more minutes on the Slack message, a couple more minutes on email.

Wes Kao (00:42:16):
Very doable.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:17):
Yeah, which everyone can do. There's no magic here, it's just spend a little more time and use some of these tactics that we're talking about. Speaking of that, let me talk about another tactic. Apparently you have some really good advice on finding the right level of confidence in what you're saying. There's always this question of, "I come to this leader. How confident should I be about, 'This is the answer,' versus, 'Here's a bunch of ideas'?" What do you think? What's your advice there?

Wes Kao (00:42:41):
I find that people tend to naturally be on the spectrum a little bit too confident as a baseline or not confident enough. So people who are too confident might state hypotheses as if they are fact. So that really bothers me. That's another one of my pet peeves, where if you say, "This is X," or, "This will X," that is different than saying, "This could X," or, "This might X," or, "This will increase the likelihood of X."

(00:43:12):
So I'm a big proponent of speaking accurately. You can avoid a lot of problems if you speak accurately about your level of conviction and about the actual amount of evidence that you have for something. It's okay for something to be an initial hunch. Say, "It's an initial hunch." Don't act like this is something that you are super sure about. You've proven out that this is absolutely this way because the rest of your team is listening to you at face value. And y'all might spend real headcount and dollars pursuing something that you have advocated for in a way where you overreached with your level of confidence.

(00:43:52):
So, that's for people who are overconfident. It's equally a problem if you're under-confident. So I have some clients who their CEO asked them to share some recommendations with another team because they've run something before and so they share all this amazing information and at the end they're like, "Oh, but you can ignore everything I just said. Obviously, make your own decision. Do what you think is best. And if you want to just ignore everything, that's totally cool too." And it's like you just didn't have to say that. You could say, "Make your own decision, take all this into account," but you don't have to diminish to that degree.

(00:44:31):
And so again, speaking accurately, if you have really strong reasons to recommend something to the cross-functional team, it's almost irresponsible to act like you are not really sure and it's just this random idea, "Hey, try it if you want to." We might lose a lot of money and time if we don't take this idea, right? So again, speaking accurately is so, so important.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:56):
Is a simple way to think about then the right balance is have a point of view, have a recommendation, present accurate facts, and be clear when you are not? "It's not actually 100% true, but here's a hunch I have, or here's a theory we have."

Wes Kao (00:45:11):
Yeah, I think sharing a point of view, sharing a recommendation, and then backing it up with evidence, with logic, with first principles, with examples, with data, if you have it. Not every situation you're going to have data for, especially if you're building something new. So this is where first principles comes in. Even explaining how you got to where you got to and why you think this is going to work, that all gives your team, your manager, something to push back on, to poke holes on or to align on and say, "Yeah, I agree here, but I disagree on this part."

(00:45:44):
So you can talk about ideas with a lot more specificity when you share your thought process. And you can frame it all kicking off saying, "My initial thinking is," or, "Based on what we know, my hunch is, blank." So speaking accurately and then still bringing up those facts so that we can all make as informed of a decision as we can make given what we know.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:07):
Advice I got that really helped here for me was to try not to be biased with how you frame everything. You have your suggestion for how to do something. It's easy to just bias all of the data to point in that direction. And if people notice that, they're like, "Oh, okay. Well, I can't really trust this because I see you're just like, you clearly have an agenda." So it's a little bit like having an agenda and a POV, but be clear about what is actually true. Be accurate.

Wes Kao (00:46:36):
Yeah. I think anytime people have to discount what you're saying because you are biased in this way is not great.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:45):
Is there an example by any chance that highlights what you're describing here?

Wes Kao (00:46:49):
Yeah, so in my course I talk about not being a single-minded martyr. So single-minded martyr is someone who very much has an agenda, who wants the recommendation to go through and is presenting a bunch of evidence, supporting that direction. And then gets really frustrated when other people are not seeing it or are skeptical. And so one of my clients was a single-minded martyr in a recommendation she was making. So she was on the growth acquisition side of her company. And was having trouble with cross-functional team members lending headcount to her project. And so everyone would say like, " Oh, yes, we believe in this, this is important," but wouldn't want to actually give her half of their engineer for two weeks.

(00:47:36):
And we were talking about it and as we were talking, she revealed that the CEO had at the beginning of the year said that the company-wide goal is retention that year. That their biggest challenges and areas of opportunity were in retention, not necessarily in growth. And once she zoomed out and realized this, she was able to put her recommendation in context. And realized that it's not just-

Wes Kao (00:48:00):
... recommendation in context. And realize that it's not just I'm the only one who cares about this company. Everyone is a hypocrite. They say they believe this, but don't actually want to work on it. Before that was kind of her narrative, but once she zoomed out and realized she was being a single [inaudible 00:48:16], she could better fit her proposal in the context of what else was happening in the organization. I think actually this is a really big difference between more junior people versus more senior people. More junior people are like, "I need to win. I need to get a yes for this proposal and I'm going to keep advocating for it until I get a yes." Whereas really sometimes the best decision for the company is not right now. This doesn't actually fit our priorities right now, right?

(00:48:42):
Or maybe yes, but let's right size the level of investment. So it might look like half whatever the size of what that recommendation actually was, and having the maturity to realize that, to put your idea into context is huge. That took me a really long time to learn and I think that goes under the umbrella of always do what's best for the company, not necessarily what's best for me, my career, my team, my wins. If you prioritize what's best for the company, that helps you have a more right-sized way of still advocating for your ideas, but doing it with a bit more equanimity.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:26):
And also just connecting to what the company is. Just this idea of if the thing you're pitching is not aligned with what is important to the company right now, it's unlikely to be prioritized. It makes sense. This is why leaders choose, here's what matters most. We got to do the things that are going to help us drive this thing right now, like retention or revenue. And so that's just, I think, a sub tactic there is just whenever you're pitching something, connect that to the goal of the person you're pitching to so that they're like, "Oh, I see how this is going to help me. That's great. Let's do it. Great advice."

(00:50:01):
And I think this is something a lot of people run into. It's just, "Why aren't they listening to me? Why don't they want... That's such a good idea. They hate me." It's something, "Oh, I bet they hate me. They don't trust me." When it's just like, okay, this isn't a priority right now. Let's come back to it another time. Okay. I'm going to get to a couple more tactics and then I'm going to shift directions to talk about managers and being manager. You have an awesome framework called MOO. What is MOO? What does it stand for and what is it all about?

Wes Kao (00:50:26):
MOO stands for Most Obvious Objection. M-O-O. And the thought there is that a lot of times we're surprised by the questions that we get, especially in meetings where we feel blindsided, that was unexpected, and then we're on our back foot. When really, if you thought for even two minutes about what are obvious objections that I'm likely to get when I share this, you often immediately come up with what some of those things are. So are you going to be able to anticipate every single objection? No. But can you anticipate the obvious ones? Absolutely. And so this is where knowing your own argument in and out, including counterarguments becomes so important. So knowing your counterarguments as well as you know the arguments for doing the thing. When you do that, when you have prepared in that way, you're less likely to feel caught off guard.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:23):
When you hear you talk about this, it's like, obviously I shouldn't do this, but very few people actually do this, actually spend a couple minutes, " Okay, here's what I'm going to pitch."

Wes Kao (00:51:31):
Even a couple seconds, really. Really, even a couple seconds, your brain will think of something.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:38):
Is there a story or an example of this that you share that highlights this idea of the power of MOO?

Wes Kao (00:51:43):
I use MOO multiple times a day, every day, every single day. Literally whatever I'm about to say I think how might someone disagree with this or what might an objection be? So whatever it is I'm writing, saying, it's a really good mental filter because it encourages you to think a couple steps ahead in kind of a structured way, right? If I'm about to say this, the person may then say this to me. Well, if I take that into account, I can volunteer that information upfront or I can frame it in a way where they're less likely to think that that's an issue.

(00:52:19):
And so it's muscle memory for me at this point, and this might be something we include at the end is something to start with. But putting MOO on a post-it, Most Obvious Objection, what is someone likely to object about? And then just keeping that top of mind. It's a great way to train yourself to empathize with your audience and with your recipient. We all say that and we all know we should do it, but for me this is a really tactical concrete way to do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:50):
I think what's great about a lot of the tactics you're sharing is not only is it going to help you communicate it better, but it helps you actually think and crystallize it better for yourself because you may realize, oh, that's a really good objection. Like, oh, the objection's probably going to be this. Will it drive enough impact for the business? Oh, that's a great point. Maybe I should not pitch this right now.

Wes Kao (00:53:10):
Yeah. It definitely helps shape your own thinking. I think communication and thinking are so much more interrelated than we think. I think people think there's a thinking as phase one and then communicating the thinking, and the reality is a lot more intertwined. And I loved your example there that thinking ahead to what might be the most obvious objection actually then prompts you to realize that maybe there was a gap in what you were planning to present and then you now have an opportunity to strengthen that pitch before you say it out loud.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:45):
There's a quote I have highlighted on this podcast a number of times that I love that is exactly along these lines by Joan Didion. "I don't know what I think until I write it down." I know exactly that feeling. Okay. So there's a couple more things that people have shared that you are amazing at helping them get better at. One is just keeping your cool and staying calm during very high stakes, real-time conversations when things maybe aren't going your way or if you disagree with someone, any advice on that, it feels like you're really good at this.

Wes Kao (00:54:17):
I think one thing that tends to throw people off is putting a lot of pressure on themselves to get the exact right answer. So if they are asked a question and they don't know the answer, a lot of people will then kind of freak out. And I was taught early in my career that if you don't know the answer, you should say, "Let me look into it, I'll get back to you." So that's a fine approach. It's definitely better than making something up, right? So definitely don't make something up. But if you are more experienced and have some confidence in your subject matter area, just saying I'll get back to you, is sometimes a missed opportunity. You can ask for a bit more information to be able to continue the conversation in that moment. So let's say that your exec says what percentage of users came from mobile last month and you don't have that number off the top of your head.

(00:55:20):
So person A says, "Let me look into it and I'll get back to you." Person B might say, "I don't have that number off the top of my head, but in the last quarter the number has been 60 to 70% and it's grown in the past year, so mobile is now a bigger part of our business, et cetera. Are you wondering if we are investing in mobile appropriately or where's that commission coming from, basically? Right? And so being able to answer a similar question in the direction you think the person is asking about and then validating why they're asking that question allows you to still continue that conversation in the moment. I call it the question behind the question, sometimes you get a question, but underneath there's a deeper underlying concern.

(00:56:10):
And many times people don't even know that it's there, right? Subconscious. So it's not nefarious, they're not withholding anything from you. But when you are explaining something and you're kind of getting multiple questions on the same thing, it's a good sign that there might be a deeper question behind the question and it's our responsibility to figure out what might that be. And so probing, asking for a bit more information, answering in that general direction and then validating these are all techniques you can use when you are in the moment without feeling like, oh, I must have every single thing prepared and the moment that I'm caught off guard, everything goes to shit.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:49):
Another tactic along these lines that's very similar to what you're describing, but I'll share that I learned that was really helpful is just if you're not sure what to say, basically just reflecting back their question and just being like, let me just make sure I understand what you're looking for. You want to understand monthly retention for, and then maybe clarify. And that one gives you time to think about it as you're talking. Two, it helps the person recognize, "Oh, he hears me. Great. Okay, this is good. He's thinking about this." And then at the end of that you could be like, "Okay. I don't actually have that specific number. Let me think about it." Or, "I have the quarterly number. Okay. That's what I know." So there's an interim step almost that I'll add into your piece of advice of just reflect back their question, just better understand what they're looking for.

Wes Kao (00:57:32):
Yeah, I love that. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:34):
Awesome. Okay, let's go back to what I said we do. Let's pick one tactic that you think people should try first, maybe one or two. So let me read the ones we've gone through and then see what you think would be a good first step. So one is starting with sales, before getting to logistics and giving people the why signposting using specific words to help people guide the doc and not get overwhelmed. Finding the right level of confidence, having a POV, that sort of thing. Getting better, being concise, MOO, not overusing formatting, something else you shared. And then this idea of when you don't know the answer, not saying I'll get back to you as the default, maybe giving them a different answer, maybe asking them more questions. Across those, which do you think someone should try to like, "Okay. Let me start here."

Wes Kao (00:58:25):
I would start with Most Obvious Objection and also framing your conversation up front. And that kind of relates to using signposting words if needed to help you frame that conversation.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:37):
Sweet. That's such an easy one to remember. Just MOO. Okay. So stick a post it somewhere when you're about to share something in Slack and ask someone for something, present in a meeting, send a strategy, and just think about for a few seconds what might be the most obvious objection to what I'm trying to ask them to do. Great. Okay. So let's talk about management. And there's kind of two sides to it. Being a manager and being a person reporting to a manager, you have a bunch of really good advice here. One is there around managing up. One of my most popular posts in the early days was advice for managing up and just how important it is. What advice do you have for someone to get better at managing up? Why is that even so important? Why do you think people may be under appreciating how important it is to manage your manager, let's say.

Wes Kao (00:59:18):
One of the most common myths about managing up that I definitely felt early on in my career was that I would have to manage up if I were more junior, but eventually I would outgrow it, that I would get senior enough that I would no longer have to do it. And it was a rude awakening that no matter how senior I got, managing up, I not only had to manage up, it actually became more important. So I think managing up is one of those skills that if you invest in learning it, it serves you now and for the rest of your career. And I realize that many senior people are actually the best at managing up. That's partially how they got to be so senior in the first place. But also, the more senior you get, the less likely that your manager is going to give you really well-defined tasks and problems on a silver platter and ask you to solve them.

(01:00:09):
You are going to be dealing with more ambiguity and you're going to be dealing with sometimes a mandate like make this number go up or create this division, right? Where you need to manage up and make sure that your leader, your manager, is in the loop about what you are about to try and what you're about to do and make sure that they're aligned. And so for me, realizing that managing up is something that is ongoing and that it shifts and evolves and looks different as you go in your career, that was a big unlock for me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:44):
Just that even if you become even a VP, if you become a director and still something you want to invest in, any specific tactic or advice for how to manage up well.

Wes Kao (01:00:54):
The biggest one is to share your point of view. So this some people are surprised by because they think I'm going to say do a weekly recap of the tasks that you worked on or what you contributed. And that is a good idea, if you want to do it, you can do it. But I think the more highly leveraged way to contribute and manage up is by being more vocal about sharing your point of view. When you just ask your manager, "Hey manager, what should we do?" You're putting a lot of cognitive load on your manager to need to think about the problem, think about potential solutions, craft the solution, and then tell you what to do. Whereas if you instead said, "Hey manager, here's what I think we should do. How does that sound? Where do you see gaps? Am I thinking in the right direction?" You give them something to build off of and that reduces the amount of mental lift that they have to put forth.

(01:01:54):
And so sharing your point of view more readily, backing it up with evidence, that's a wonderful way of making your manager's life easier. And also showing that you are an active rigorous thinker who is thinking strategically about the business. You're not just waiting to be told what to do, you're not expecting them to figure things out and then tell you you are actively looking around the corner trying to solve problems, forming hypotheses in your mind, observing and noticing things. And again, sharing your point of view doesn't mean that you have the perfect answer. You can share that, "Hey, I've noticed this problem popping up in a couple of different places. Here's what I think might be happening."

(01:02:36):
Or when you share a report, don't only share the report and expect your manager to come up with insights and takeaways. You should look at the report too and point out insights and takeaways. So it's really changing that posture from more reactive and more waiting to be told what to do or kind of staying in this narrow box to being willing to share your recommendation, your point of view, share what you're noticing, and this is something that even junior people could do.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:04):
I was going to say exactly that. I think not only is it something junior people can do, this is a really good way to get promoted and to take on more leadership opportunities. You coming to your manager with, "Here's something I think we should do. Here's a perspective I have. Here's an opportunity." If you were in charge, you're like, how awesome would it be for people to come to me with amazing ideas and have clear recommendations? That sounds great. Everyone wants that. So if you can do that, amazing. Who wouldn't want that? But then what's interesting is similar to how writing helps you crystallize your thinking, you coming in with a recommendation forces you to really think deeply about it because that's putting your reputation on the line. So there's a second order effect of it makes you actually spend more time on the thing and be clear about why you think this is a good idea and do more research. So a lot of wins here.

Wes Kao (01:03:53):
There are a lot of situations where you might have the most visibility into a problem. You might have the most proximity into an issue. And so if you're not speaking up about it and sharing what you're observing, sharing what you're noticing, your manager doesn't necessarily have visibility into that. And so I've heard so many managers say that they want their junior people to speak up more because their junior people have often close contact with customers, with support tickets, with cleaning data, with a bunch of things where the manager would love to hear insights from that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:32):
If you're not having success with this, if you're hearing this and be like, but it never worked, my manager doesn't listen to me, listen to the rest of this podcast we just did, which is basically advice on how to effectively convince someone of a thing. It's like, tell them why this is a problem, be really concise about it, sign post words, all these things. That's exactly what this whole conversation's been about. Okay. Let's see. We have a couple more really cool tactics that people have suggested we talk about. One is how to give feedback well, how to do better, how to be more effective at giving feedback. What's your advice there?

Wes Kao (01:05:05):
I have a framework called strategy, not self-expression. And so the idea here is that most of the time, by the time we are giving feedback to someone, we have been frustrated for a while. I used to be very conflict diverse, so I would wait and try to convince myself that I wasn't bothered by something until I really couldn't hold it in anymore. Then I would schedule a one-on-one with a coworker to tell them the feedback and it would inevitably turn into a venting session where I was in the name of sharing the impact of what they did would share all my frustrations and all the ways that they have basically harmed me and made my life difficult. And this would be very counterproductive because the person would either feel like and feel really demoralized or they'd get really defensive and they'd want to argue with me about how what they did actually was not that bad or it was partially my fault too or whatever.

(01:05:59):
And so I realized that a better way of giving feedback is thinking about motivating the person's behavior change. The goal is behavior change. So if that's the goal, trim everything else that you were about to say that does not actually contribute to that goal and only keep the part that will make the person want to change, help them understand the benefit to them as well as to the people around them. And so usually for me, that's trimming 90% of the initial stuff that I want to say and really keeping only that 10%. And that's made a really big difference. Whenever I am giving constructive feedback of any kind, I always keep that in mind. And when I don't do it, I almost always regret it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:46):
Someone close to me in my life is working on the skill, which is there's just, "I want people to know how they messed up. Justice. I need this to be fair." And what I always recommend is just think about what you want to get out of this conversation, what do you want from them? And then, okay, what's the best way to get that? Versus just making sure they hear you and making sure they understand how screwed up this was. And that's basically what you're saying is focus on the outcome you want to achieve, not something that's useful, something that will make you just feel better.

Wes Kao (01:07:23):
Yeah. I definitely think that having a space to vent and to share those frustrations is important. So you want to get that out before you go into the conversation with your counterpart. So whether it's talking to your therapist or your partner or friend, you want to basically get all that energy out because otherwise you bring it into the conversation and it doesn't take much to set you off. You might have a whole script, you're controlled, you're calm, and then you start talking and the other person raises an eyebrow and is acting a little incredulous at what you're saying, and that's all it takes for you to snap and be like, "You're surprised? You're incredulous? Why are you incredulous?" Right? And then you're off, right? Yeah. Getting that energy out, I would say step one, so that you can go into the conversation clear, grounded, setting that emotional tone that is more positive and that allows you to stay focused on only the part that will get them to behave in the way you want them to behave.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:23):
Such good advice. And I think we come back to are you getting the outcomes you want? If you're not, this is another reason it might be the case is you just need them to hear your mind. I just need you to know. And I think a lesson here is that may not be the best path to getting what you want, but it may feel good. Maybe people are like, "Ah, but I really want them to know this."

Wes Kao (01:08:42):
There's that great Einstein quote about insanity being repeating things that you're doing expecting a different outcome. And I feel like that applies so much to the workplace and to communication. Most of us have certain patterns that we are used to and certain ways of responding, and if you believe that there is untapped upside that whatever you are at is kind of a local maximum and that there's better out there, then that's where switching things up could be useful and not just doing everything that you've been doing and getting the same result that you might be getting.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:19):
This resonates with Toby Lutke when he is doing the podcast, talked about how... He had this quote that I love that just "No human in history has come anywhere near their potential and everyone is way, way, way better than they think are," and these are really cool tactics and really effective ways to actually get closer to your potential. Okay. Two more things I want to talk about real quick. One is your advice on delegating, but also continuing to have high standards. This is something I spent a lot of time on because a lot of people don't delegate because they're afraid it's not going to be as great. I just want this to be really good. I don't trust that it's going to go as well. If I did it my way, it'd be great. So just advice on how to delegate effectively while maintaining high standards.

Wes Kao (01:10:04):
Yeah. I have a framework called CEDAF. C-E-D-A-F.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:08):
Mm-hmm. I love all these acronyms.

Wes Kao (01:10:09):
It's kind of like Cedar, but with an F at the end. I need acronyms for myself. All of these are really reminders for myself because I need a short way to remind myself. So CEDAF stands for the C is comprehension. So have I given this person that I'm delegating to everything that they need to understand what it is that I want them to do. That includes more simple things like logins to all the right software tools that they need to look up, whatever you need to look up. And understanding what the end result should look like, right? So that's all under C for comprehension. E is excitement. Am I explaining this in a way that is making this as exciting as it could be? There are a lot of tasks that aren't inherently that exciting, but by explaining the why behind we're doing this or why it's important to the project we're working on, that makes people more likely to understand and be excited about how this fits into everything.

(01:11:06):
So E is for excitement. D is for de-risk. Am I de-risking any obvious risks from delegating this? So usually when I ask clients this, they immediately think of something. They're like, "Oh yeah, I wouldn't want my direct report to spend a ton of time going in the wrong direction, filling out a hundred rows of the spreadsheet if actually it took longer than we expected." Okay, great. If that's a risk, then maybe you have them do 10 rows, see how long it takes, see if we need all the information that they're actually gathering, and then regroup, right? So what's an obvious risk? Another might be I can see this person misunderstanding and thinking I'm looking for this where I'm really looking for that. Okay, perfect. Just tell them, "When I explain this, you might think I mean this, but really I don't want that. I actually want this," right? So just vocalize it. The A is for align. So am I giving the other person a chance to-

Wes Kao (01:12:00):
The A is for align. So am I giving the other person a chance to speak up and make sure we are actually aligned, that they're picking up what I'm putting down? Because you might be explaining a bunch of stuff, but how much are they actually absorbing? You won't ever know if you wrap up your little spiel and then say, "Okay, go off. Come back to me when you're done." So give people a chance to ask questions to see what parts are resonating, what parts they might be a little bit confused on. Usually, when I do this, it's amazing. Because my team member will say, "What did you mean by this part? How does this part fit in?" I'm like, "Oh my God, I totally forgot to mention this thing." Or, "Oh yeah, I didn't even really explain that well." Okay, so let's go into that.

(01:12:42):
And then F is feedback. How can you have the shortest feedback loop possible? I am a huge fan of shorting the feedback loop as much as possible and then shortening it again. So even within that initial conversation where I'm delegating something, instead of waiting a week, what if we waited a day and checked in on the initial direction that person was going? And let's do it even more. What if after I finished explaining, at the end of that conversation, we brainstormed a couple things that, that person wants to do? So within this same conversation, I'm delegating, I'm already getting a sense of, where do you want to go with this? Once you start, do you see any bottlenecks?

(01:13:24):
And so just really keeping that feedback loop super tight. I found that when I run through the CDAP acronym, there's usually one letter that I could amp up a little bit more like, oh, I didn't really put much thought into making this exciting for the person. How can I connect this to their career goals or to the company's priorities this quarter or to something else? So it's a nice mental checklist.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:49):
So much of your advice comes back to this idea that we've touched on a couple of times. We just spend a little bit more time upfront. Is that how you described it, a little more time upfront?

Wes Kao (01:13:56):
Yeah, a little bit more time. A little bit more of an investment upfront.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:59):
Upfront to save you tons of time later. Okay. So as you described this, I don't know if you're realizing this, but you're basically just helping people work better with AI and agents. This framework is exactly I think what people need to effectively delegate to this future world of this agent world of society of agents doing work for us. Basically, you're going to be delegating to these agents in the future, and this framework is a really cool way to frame it. So think about it. Am I communicating this well, comprehension? So CDAP. Comprehension is, again, can I make this clear? Is that the way to think about that?

Wes Kao (01:14:41):
Yeah. Can I make this clear? Does this person have everything they need to be able to accomplish what I am asking them to do?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:47):
Okay. And then it's communicate why you're excited about this, basically the why. And it's interesting, there's this funny prompt technique I've learned, prompting engineering technique of just telling the AI, "This is very important to my job." Just using that sentence, it does it better.

Wes Kao (01:14:47):
Oh, interesting, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:04):
It takes it more seriously. It's just so weird. I have a post about this, and that's one of the pieces of advice, just tell me why this is important. I think people take it to the extreme as someone will die if you don't get this right. That actually works.

Wes Kao (01:15:16):
That is extreme. Cool.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:18):
It's wild. Okay, so CEDF, comprehension, excited, de-risk, think about ways you can de-risk, which is moot, basically. What's the most? It's a similar concept. Just think ahead to what might go wrong. Make sure you're aligned, which is quite important in the AI space. Make sure you're aligned. And feedback, get a quick feedback cycle. And it's interesting with deep research on some of these AI tools now, it's like, "I'm off for half an hour. See you." And I imagine more and more of them will check in with you as it's going and ask you questions. I used deep research recently and it's really good at just like, okay, let me have five questions for you before I go off and do this work just to clarify what you want.

Wes Kao (01:15:58):
Yeah, I found that AI will often shorten the feedback loop and align with you as well. When you prompt it, when it comes back, it will not do the entire task for me, sometimes. It'll say, "I've done the first part of this. Does this sound right? Is this what you're looking for? If so, I will complete the next section." And then sometimes I'm like, "Do the whole thing. Just stop trying to conserve energy and just do. I want you to do the whole thing." But that's what it's doing, it's breaking it into smaller chunks to de-risk that it's going to use all this bandwidth to process this thing and I'm going to say, "Oh, that's not what I was looking for."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:37):
I'm going to come back to AI real quick, but before I do that, I have one more question for you, but let me just say, I feel like we've discovered an AI version of your course now. Basically, how to delegate well to AI agents that I think people are going to find really valuable, planting a seed. Okay. Before we get back to AI, you have this other concept that I love that I actually learned from you years ago when I was working on my course called the swipe file. Swipe file, what is a swipe file? What is that about? What can it help you with? Why should people be doing this?

Wes Kao (01:17:03):
Yeah. So swipe files are really common for marketers, and I think other functions haven't caught on as much, but I think it is really, really useful. And basically a swipe file is collecting inspiration that you can refer back to later on. So some marketers will collect examples of copy, landing pages, ads, et cetera. For me, I have a file, an Apple Notes, file called Smart Things People Have Said, where I will basically paste in phrases, words, things people have said that I thought were well articulated or sounded really intelligent or sounded strategic. And I don't actually go back and look through my swipe file very often, I think other people do, but for me, even the act of adding it to my swipe file, I've already gotten value from it because it's training me to be more alert to noticing when something is working well.

(01:18:01):
I think there's so much happening around us all the time that your coworker says something smart and you're like, "Oh, that was nice," and then you keep moving on. But when you stop and pause and think, oh, that was really effective, let me add it to my file, and also think about, why was that effective and is that something I can borrow? So in my course, I encourage folks to create a work journal where they can jot down some of these observations, some of these phrases, and basically encourage yourself to be more alert to things you can borrow from other people all around you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:38):
Something else about the swipe file, you use quotes. It could be screenshots of cool designs. It could be strategy docs you found to be really effective. It could be conversion flows that are really cool. It could be just whatever you're interested in.

Wes Kao (01:18:52):
Yeah. And the great thing about that is you can then go back and analyze it and break down the structure, break down the argument, break down why was this so effective? Whereas if you're not capturing it, it's easy to just move on to the next thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:09):
Yeah, cool. And I did this for a while. I stopped, to be honest, but I really want to be doing this. So this is maybe some homework or something, because I know a lot of people stick with it, is just start like a folder or a Notes, note, whatever you use for your note-taking, and just start throwing stuff in there. And it could be messy, right? It's just like, throw it in.

Wes Kao (01:19:27):
It can be super messy. I was going to say, my back end system is super messy and it's fine. It's not a problem I need to be solving. It works. I find things I need to find. So I like having as simple of a process as possible. So Apple Notes, I open it. It's just on my home screen, I just add something. I'm not tagging anything, I'm not putting it in certain rows and filling information out. I'm just including it in a file, and if I want to go back and look at it, it served its purpose.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:58):
Awesome. Okay, so last question. AI, I'm going to just come back to this briefly. We have this segment on the podcast called AI Corner, and we touched on this already, but I'm just curious how you have found AI to be useful in your work or your life, whether it's helped you become a better communicator? Is there anything you can share that might be helpful to folks?

Wes Kao (01:20:18):
Yeah. I love Claude. There are days when I talk to Claude for three or four hours prompting as a thought partner. So yeah, I think that AI is really helpful for an initial draft of something to bounce off of. Sometimes I'll paste in an email that I am not quite sure how to respond to and ask Claude, "Tell me draft reply." And I'll usually give it some direction. So I found that sharing my point of view makes the output way better. If I just give it something and say, "What would you say?" It's just not as good. Whereas if I say, "I am not sure about how to tell this person no, because I previously said yes and so I feel on the hook, but history has changed and so is there a nice way where I can be really respectful of our relationship and also make them feel seen and heard, but decline?"

(01:21:19):
So if I explain, "That's the problem I'm dealing with and here's what I would ideally like to be able to do," Claude comes back to something that's pretty good. And then from there I'll edit it to my voice because usually it's a little bit too formal sounding. And so I'll make some edits and then I'll share it back to Claude and say, "What do you think of this version? Would you make any improvements?" And then we go back and forth from there.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:41):
Wes, this is the most useful thing I've ever heard.

Wes Kao (01:21:44):
[inaudible 01:21:44].

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:45):
I need this and I need this immediately, just nice ways to say no to stuff. This needs to be an extension that I can have in my browser, just, "Help me say no to this, please." Wow, such a great idea. Okay, good one. Okay, great. Wes, is there anything else? We've gone through a lot. I imagine the answer is no, but before we get to our very exciting lightning round, is there anything else that you wanted to share or leave listeners with?

Wes Kao (01:22:11):
No, I feel like we covered a bunch of great frameworks, principles, so lots for folks to get started.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:18):
All the things. And I love that so much of this will apply to being more effective with AI tools and I feel like people can go through this again and just through that lens of, how will this helped me get more out of Claude and ChatGPT? I bet so much of this will actually apply and I feel like there's an interesting course there. With that, Wes, we've reached our very exciting lightning round.

Wes Kao (01:22:39):
All right,

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:40):
Are you ready?

Wes Kao (01:22:41):
Let's do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:42):
Okay. First question, what are a couple books that you recommend most to other people?

Wes Kao (01:22:46):
One is High Output Management by Andy Grove, which is a classic. Another one is Your Brain At Work by Dr. David Rock. And that one is all about better understanding your own brain and attention span so that you can allocate your mental resources appropriately. So that one's great. Ever since reading that, I hide my phone from view because there have been studies that show that even seeing your phone in the corner of your eye, it's distracting. And I do the hardest things earlier in the day when you have more cognitive resources available. So that one's really good. Yeah, those two.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:31):
These are great. I completely get that phone thing. I'm just looking at my phone, I'm like, "Dang, get out of here. Just go away."

Wes Kao (01:23:36):
I will stick it under my pillow on the couch or hide it under a notebook. It's huge. I'm always hiding my phone so it's not in my line of sight.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:47):
I think Arianna Huffington has a product you can buy that's a little bed for your phone that you put to bed before you go to bed in a different room and it has a charger attached.

Wes Kao (01:23:54):
Oh, that's cute.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:55):
So cute, so cute.

Wes Kao (01:23:57):
I don't know if I need a separate bed for my phone.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:01):
But it's like a ritual, I guess, and there's some theory behind it. Okay, next question. Favorite recent movie or TV show you really enjoyed?

Wes Kao (01:24:08):
I love Anything by Harlan Coben on Netflix. Basically, I don't even remember any specific movies or a TV series, but anything he puts out, he's an author and then they've turned a lot of his books into mystery thriller TV series, and anything he puts out becomes number one on Netflix. And I appreciate that he gives the people what they want, that he knows his craft, he knows his genre. And yeah, he just has so many bangers. And I don't remember any specific one, but if it's a Harlan Coben show, I know it's going to be good.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:46):
I'm looking at a list now I just Googled real quick. So it's all scary stuff, right?

Wes Kao (01:24:49):
Yeah, they're mystery thrillers, and I think he does a good job playing with time and revealing information over time. It's usually something about someone's past that is now coming to haunt them, and so he'll skip between present day to the past and then slowly reveal stuff. And there's always a twist at the end.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:11):
There's a page, the Harlan Coben Collection on Netflix. That we'll link to that has all this stuff. I've never heard of this, so this is great. Next question, do you have a favorite product you recently discovered that you really love?

Wes Kao (01:25:22):
I recently started using an electric toothbrush and it's been life-changing. So my husband got one and then a couple weeks later he gifted me one, and I was like, "Wow, this is actually really nice."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:34):
Are you a Sonicare person, Oral-B person, or something else?

Wes Kao (01:25:37):
It's Oral-B but I've not tried any other brand. That was one that our dentist gifted my husband this electric toothbrush because he did Invisalign. And I'm sure Invisalign is every dentist's dream.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:51):
Margins.

Wes Kao (01:25:52):
I feel like every time I get a cleaning, the dentist is like, "So have you thought about, are you interested in Invisalign?" I'm like, "No." And so when they get a yes, I'm sure they're really excited, and then they lock you in, the brand locks you in with these replacement toothbrush heads that are way more expensive than they should be. So it's a whole razor and blades, ink cartridge and printer model here. So I was horrified by how expensive these replacement heads were.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:18):
But you got a free toothbrush. I think the Oral-B is what I use, but I think that's what the Wirecutter recommended, but it's so loud. I don't know. One of them is just really loud. I think it's the Oral-B, but it's better, apparently. I went with Wirecutter, but it's so loud. I feel like there needs to be a Wirecutter for good design and experience...

Wes Kao (01:26:37):
Ooh.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:37):
... versus just the optimal efficient version. Anyway, let's keep going. Do you have a life motto that you often find useful in work or in life that you repeat yourself and share with folks?

Wes Kao (01:26:51):
Yes. I actually have many, but I'll share two. One is everything takes longer than you think. So this applies whether you are calling customer support for something or running an errand or building your career, building skills. I find it's useful to add buffers for yourself. This applies for launches too. Just assume it will take longer than you think and you'll be less stressed.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:18):
That connects to everything we've been talking about. Just spend a little more time upfront to make it. And maybe if you spend more time front, it'll take less time than you think.

Wes Kao (01:27:25):
The other one is a riff on always be closing, like Glengarry Ross. "It's always be selling." This does not mean pawning your wares, but rather putting forth effort into convincing the other person of whatever your recommendation is.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:42):
Love them. Okay, final question. So you've been a long time, I hate this word operator, but I guess that's the way people describe this, where you've just been working at companies, building companies, and you recently left that just to become creative person. Started a course on Maven. You do executive coaching, things like that. Any just lessons or a lesson from that jump that might be helpful to folks that are maybe thinking about that?

Wes Kao (01:28:07):
I think when you are an in-house operator, there's a lot about your role that you have a little bit less control over, basically. There's just certain things you have to do because it comes with the territory. Whereas when you are a solo operator running your own business, doing your own thing, you have a lot of freedom to craft your work around only your strengths, only the part that you are really good at, that adds a lot of value for other people where there's market demand. And so, for me, there was a bit of a shift where when I realized that I could craft my business, my work around only the part that I'm best at, and that can be a narrow-ass slice, that's actually really, really freeing.

(01:28:54):
And so I would encourage folks to think about, what is the thing that you are extremely good at that people find super valuable, the part that you love doing most, if you could not do all the other stuff you don't want to do, and how can you think about doubling down on that?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:12):
That's such an important point. And the Claude tip you shared of how to say no well is such an important ingredient into that, because so many things come at you and are interesting and enticing that it's hard to decline, that you realize, why the hell am I doing this? I can actually control where I spend time and why did I say yes to this?

Wes Kao (01:29:33):
I actually credit you with helping me come to this realization. I mentioned you on a podcast the other day about this because, do you remember when Maven was launching an important feature, I think it was our marketplace or something, and I had asked you if you wanted to go on Clubhouse to be part of the launch?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:56):
I remember that, but I am sure I said no.

Wes Kao (01:29:59):
Okay, yeah. You said no. You said no. And I was like, "Wow. Out of curiosity, what's the thought behind it?" And you said, I'm going to bastardize this, you could correct me, but you essentially said, "I don't really like doing live public speaking type things and I've been fortunate enough to build a career where I can write, I do my podcasts, and work only on the part that I love doing. And so I'm okay saying no to these other really interesting opportunities." And I remember at that time thinking it was so groundbreaking that you could say no to something that was legitimately a cool opportunity and be really confident about it because it wasn't your core competency. It wasn't the thing you are best at. And I've really kept that in mind when opportunities come my way of, am I excited about this? Is this what I'm really good at? Can I shine in this setting? Because when you are solo, you get to choose the settings that you want to be in.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:00):
That's such a cool story. I don't exactly remember that, but I am zero surprised at what I said. And the way I put it now, when folks invite me to stuff like this is I just find the ROI on my time is so not worth doing a talk, doing a fireside thing, doing another podcast. It's just like, if I can spend more time on this newsletter than the podcast, the leverage is so much higher than just doing a talk because that takes so much time. So I just have this template now that basically says what I sent you, that is, that it helps. But it's tough. It's so hard to say no. Sometimes these opportunities are so interesting and the person is like, "Wait, what?"

(01:31:37):
Because I don't think the people asking you for stuff know that I'm getting 10 of them a day, and they're like, "Oh, he said no to my talk. He doesn't want to be on my podcast. What a jerk." That's what I think. I don't know if that's what they think. But anyway. Okay, that's great. Yes, and I think I just had a post about reaching a million subscribers to the newsletter, and actually had this image of the Ikigai concept, which is exactly what you just described, which is you want to try to find the thing that you love doing, that people value, and that you can make money doing. That's the dream. And that's exactly what you have done as well. So thank you for being here, Wes. I actually think we delivered on what I thought we would. I think this is going to be one of the most highest leverage conversations we've had.

(01:32:21):
So two final questions. Where can folks find your course? I know you also do executive coaching. Where can folks learn more? And final question is just, how can folks be useful to you, Wes?

Wes Kao (01:32:33):
You can find out more at weskao.com. I linked my course to my coaching from my main page. I also post on LinkedIn as well, so you can follow me there. And I'm always looking to meet fellow operators who out about communication. So if you put any of these principles into practice, I would love to hear about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:53):
Awesome. We'll do that in the comments. They can DM you. I don't know, what's the best way to reach you on the website or Twitter?

Wes Kao (01:32:59):
Yeah, bunch of platforms.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:02):
All the places. Okay, cool.

Wes Kao (01:33:04):
Website, email, LinkedIn, DM me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:05):
There we go. There we go. Wes, thank you so much for being here.

Wes Kao (01:33:08):
Yeah, thank you so much, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:09):
Very cool.

Wes Kao (01:33:10):
This was fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:14):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Wes Kao (00:00):
I think that most people assume that their boss has to manage them and they feel a little bit resentful that, why should I manage my boss? They're getting paid more. They are my manager. They have more responsibility.

Wes Kao (00:14):
And you can continue to think that way and your career might be fine, but if you embrace that if you manage your boss, they're going to appreciate you much more, you're going to get more opportunities, you're going to have more trust with them, there's all these great things that happen when you decide to manage up.

Lenny (00:36):
Wes Kao is the co-founder of Maven, a cohort-based learning platform that I used to create my own course on product management. But even more interestingly, she's helped folks like Seth Godin start his altMBA course, which is legendary. She's also helped people like David Perell, Tiago Forte, Scott Galloway, and even Morning Brew build their cohort-based courses. She's one of the smartest people I have ever met on the art of teaching and I've learned a ton from her.

Lenny (01:01):
And in our chat, we cover a concept I love called the super specific who. We talk about the state change method and how using this idea, you'll run better meetings. We look at a bunch of advice for why you should spend time managing up and how to manage up effectively. We talk about a bunch of ways to write better, tips for saying no, and a bunch of other really interesting topics. I always have such a good time chatting with Wes, and I hope that you learn as much from this chat as I did. And with that, I bring you Wes Kao.

Lenny (01:36):
This episode is brought to you by Modern Treasury. Modern Treasury is a next generation operating system for moving and tracking money. They're modernizing the developer tools and financial processes for companies managing complex payment flows. Think digital wallets, fiat crypto on-ramps, ride sharing marketplaces, instant lending and more. They work with high growth companies like Gusto, Hype, ClassPass and Marqeta.

Lenny (02:02):
Modern Treasury's robust APIs allow engineering to build payment flows right into your product while finance can monitor and approve everything through a sleek and modern web dashboard, enabling realtime payments, automatic reconciliation, continuous accounting and compliance solutions. Modern Treasury's platform is used to reconcile over $3 billion per month.

Lenny (02:23):
They're one of the hottest young FinTech startups on the market today, having raised funding from top firms like Benchmark, Altimeter, SVB Capital, Salesforce Ventures, and Y Combinator. Check them out at moderntreasury.com.

Lenny (02:37):
This episode is brought to you by Berbix. Whether you're in the business of crypto or renting out vehicles or selling age restricted goods, it's important to have the confidence that who you're selling to is who they say they are. With Berbix, businesses can quickly and easily verify someone's identity through their government issued ID and real-time selfie.

Lenny (02:58):
Unlike other identity verification, software solutions, Berbix takes only seconds to verify an identity helping you maximize conversion and mitigate fraud. With Berbix, you can grow revenue by instantly verifying a customer's drivers license, passport, or ID card. You can also deter fraud by customizing which transactions you want to accept or reject based on triggers like duplicate IDs, expiration dates, or user session location.

Lenny (03:24):
Get started quickly by setting up Berbix with no code, low code, or complete integration in as little as one afternoon. Visit berbix.com/start to get started. That's B-E-R-B-I-X.com/start.

Lenny (03:42):
Wes, I have learned so much from you over the years in so many different ways, while building my course, through your writing, through your tweets. And generally you're just a super fascinating human that I love this excuse to get to learn more about you and for listeners to learn more about you. And so with that, Wes, welcome to the podcast.

Wes Kao (04:01):
Hey, Lenny. Great to be here.

Lenny (04:03):
It's my pleasure. So just to set a little context about the Wes that we know today, your career path has been pretty untraditional for many of the guests that we've had on this podcast. And so I'd love to just hear a brief, high level overview of your career and understand what made Wes the Wes that she is today.

Wes Kao (04:23):
I started my career in corporate retail at the Gap headquarters in San Francisco. So I did a rotational training program, rotating between Old Navy, Banana Republic, Gap, and it was a great foundation in business fundamentals.

Wes Kao (04:39):
A lot of people talk about, should I out of school go to a bigger company, or should I go to a startup? So I went to a bigger company and gradually have gone to smaller companies since then until finally starting my own in the past 15 years.

Wes Kao (04:55):
So I think that getting to see inside what a company that's been around for 40 plus years was like was really, really fantastic training and set me up for success for jumping into tech and other roles since then.

Wes Kao (05:11):
After Gap, I went to a beauty company that was acquired by Shiseido and then was at an ad tech company that was acquired by Snap. And then moved cross country from SF to New York to work with bestselling author, Seth Godin.

Wes Kao (05:26):
And that just changed my trajectory completely. It was just such a transformative experience getting to learn and work directly with for three years, one of the best marketing minds and just most creative minds, I think on the planet right now.

Wes Kao (05:42):
And together we co-founded the altMBA, which I grew from just an idea between me and Seth, to thousands of students, 45 countries, 500 cities, grew our team from just us two to 60 plus people all over the world. So it was just an amazing, amazing experience.

Wes Kao (05:59):
And then after that, I consulted for a couple of years working directly with other course creators who wanted to create their mini versions of the altMBA, and from doing that, really proved out the idea that the format of cohort-based courses was something that was really special, that other experts in other industries, other functions could really leverage.

Wes Kao (06:19):
And then that led to starting Maven because when I was consulting and when I was doing altMBA, during those six, seven years, I realized how janky the tech stack was that everyone was using. And I was shocked that no one had tackled this problem of all of us course creators needing to toggle between half a dozen different tools just to make a live plus async course be able to work.

Wes Kao (06:44):
And so when my co-founder Gagan Biyani and I got together, we were brainstorming what's the future of education and catching up. And we were just shocked that, hey, why hasn't anyone tackled this yet? We should do this because we both really believe that cohort-based courses are the future that [inaudible 00:07:02] want to teach these courses, but it's just too hard from a technical perspective now, but it doesn't have to be that way.

Lenny (07:07):
Awesome. I definitely want to chat a bit about Seth Godin. I've been such a huge fan of his for, I don't know, a decade. I used to subscribe to his newsletter and I don't anymore, because it's an email every day and it's overwhelming, even though he pointed out in one of his newsletters, okay, just ignore it. Why would you be sad that I have so much content? But yeah, anyway I unsubscribed recently, but I'm such a fan. And so I'm so curious, one, how did you connect with him and how did that even happen? And then two, what is he like to work with?

Wes Kao (07:37):
Both very, very juicy questions. So the way that we connected was Seth had put out a blog post saying that he was looking for a special projects lead to help him figure out what to do next. So this was in 2014 when he had just sold off his last company Squidoo that he had been working on for I think, eight years or so before that.

Wes Kao (07:57):
So he was ready for something new, at a crossroads, wanted some fresh inspiration, and I saw this blog post on a whim. And at that time I was at that ad tech company in San Francisco and I thought there are probably thousands of people who are going to be applying to this, so I don't want to get my hopes up. I did want to move to New York. I feel like everyone in SF and California at some time wants to move to New York. And so I thought, all right, I'm going to toss my hat in the ring and not overthink it.

Wes Kao (08:25):
And so the application required a video, so there was a written application and then there was a video. So Seth said, "Take three minutes to talk about what you want to build, what you want to contribute, and what you want to learn," something along those lines.

Wes Kao (08:39):
And I did my video in one take. Normally I would've done multiple takes for sure, but here I just thought there's a very little chance I'm going to get this. And a couple days later to my surprise, I get an email from Seth Godin. He's in my inbox and I'm just jumping up and down in my living room because he's asked, "Hey, loved your video. Let's hop on a call for an interview." And of course I write a very calm professional response and we did a couple rounds of interviews and I get the role.

Wes Kao (09:06):
So I pack my life into six suitcases, get an apartment sight unseen in this little town right outside of New York City, where Seth's office is, it's called Hastings-on-Hudson. And what initially started off as a six month role eventually led to over three years working together and starting the altMBA together.

Wes Kao (09:24):
So that's how we got connected, very serendipitous. But my lesson there is don't take yourself out of the running before you get rejected. Don't reject yourself, basically. I think a lot of us have high standards and high expectations of ourselves and it's almost like, oh, if I can't do the best application, then I just shouldn't apply. If I don't have time to take five takes of this video, it won't be good enough, and so I just shouldn't do it. So for me, that was a great lesson in putting your best foot forward, but putting your foot forward.

Lenny (09:55):
I love that.

Wes Kao (09:57):
So that was how we got connected. And then in terms of what it was like working with him, I think the Seth that people know externally can sometimes be different from the behind-the-scenes Seth. And that I think that's true for all of us, by the way. And so I think externally, he can sometimes be a little bit of a vague Buddha, if you will. He gives great inspiring advice. His insights, I think are amazing.

Wes Kao (10:22):
If you look at his blog, some people try to copy Seth's blog by writing short daily posts, but that is not the reason why Seth's blog is so good. That is incidental, that they are short and daily. The reason why it works is because they are so insight rich.

Wes Kao (10:39):
And in person, he is even smarter and even sharper than he is in writing and online, which is so amazing. I'm just shocked by that because I feel like most people are the opposite. It's like you have time to curate what goes on your Twitter, your website. You have time to manicure this, what you want people to think of you, but when you are live, you're there with the person, you're talking like normal people and you can really get a sense of how sharp or insightful or genuine someone is. And I think he's even more genuine, even sharper, even funnier in person.

Wes Kao (11:12):
So that was kind of high level. I think the other thing is that internally we had really high standards for what we would ship, which is a little bit different, I think, than what you might think if you were a Seth reader. Because before I would read him and just do it, essentially, ship, put yourself out there, don't overthink it.

Wes Kao (11:34):
And you might think that, that means that there's a trade-off with quality, but the thing that I found so surprising about working together was that we often produced work almost always that was high quality, fast, and what's that third thing of that triangle? Cheap, or not cheap, but affordable or economical. Usually it's like, oh, you only get two of these or there's the trade-off between quality and speed, but we worked fast and we produced really great work.

Wes Kao (12:06):
And so I think for me, it really raised the bar on everything for me and on strategies, on tactics, on expectations, on quality, speed. I think the speed that we shipped ... Before I was at a Sequoia-backed ad tech startup and I thought, oh, I know what shipping fast is, I was at a startup.

Wes Kao (12:26):
And the speed that we shipped at Seth HQ was just beyond. It just blew away what I think normal people think of as fast, but it was also still so good. And so I think that rigor and that refusal to accept anything but excellence was just so awesome. And it really spoke to me because I care a lot about craft. I think more people should care about craft and I'm also kind of an obsessed person. I have an obsessive personality and I just loved how Seth was similarly obsessed. And so yeah, learned so much from him that I've taken with me obviously in building Maven now and everything that I do.

Lenny (13:12):
Wow. I've 10 more questions I'd love to ask about Seth Godin, but I should probably try to get him on the podcast. What a coup that would be. I have a sad story actually. I just remembered while you were talking, I saw him mentioned once that he replies to every email he gets. And so I emailed him because-

Wes Kao (13:30):
Just to check.

Lenny (13:31):
... I had such a crush. Yeah, just to test. And he replied and he's like, "Why would I say this if I wasn't doing this? What benefit would that be for me?" I was like, "Oh shit, I pissed him off.

Wes Kao (13:40):
So funny.

Lenny (13:40):
He hates me.

Wes Kao (13:43):
It's hilarious.

Lenny (13:44):
Oh man. Okay. Amazing. One last quick question. You also worked with Scott Galloway, who's a very polarizing figure on Twitter at least, and you helped him create his courses. Maybe just one quick question on him, what's he like and why do people dislike him so much on Twitter?

Wes Kao (14:00):
Yeah, I don't know about people disliking him. He definitely has spiky points of view, which I think are amazing. Yeah. So Section4, Scott Galloway's company was one of the first clients that I worked with after leaving altMBA, and I didn't work too closely with Scott. I worked really closely with his CEO, Greg Shove and their exec team to design the sprint that's now their go-to course format. But yeah, I didn't work too closely with him directly.

Lenny (14:27):
Okay, cool. We won't get too deep there. Okay, so what I want to do with most of the time that we have together is to go into five big ideas. You could call it the five big ideas from Wes Kao, concepts that you've shared in other places that you've touched on your writing and tweeting and things like that have struck and have stuck with me and I suspect many other people, and just go deeper on these ideas. Does that sound good?

Wes Kao (14:49):
Sounds great.

Lenny (14:51):
Awesome. So the first idea I want to chat about is something you call the super specific how. And you wrote a post about this and it really clarified a lot of my thinking on writing and the newsletter and the podcast. And I find myself sharing this post and concept with other writers who are struggling a bit with their content. And so can you just explain this idea of the super specific how, and generally just how it can make folks better writers and thinkers?

Wes Kao (15:18):
Yeah. The idea of the super specific how is that most writers, most course instructors spend too much time on the what and the why and not enough time on how. So if you think about people who are reading your writing, most of them probably already agree with the general premise of what you're saying.

Wes Kao (15:44):
Unless what you're saying is truly controversial, a ground-breaker, or new to your audience, you don't need to spend too much time elaborating on the concept itself and why it matters. People really want to know how do I do this? How do I apply this to my own life? How do I think about the nuances when I'm applying this? What are examples that I can look at that help me better internalize how this really works?

Wes Kao (16:09):
So a good example of this is if you're writing about product management and communication, let's say. So you don't want to spend too much time talking about how communication is important for product managers. Most product managers already know that. That's pretty 101, it's pretty basic.

Wes Kao (16:29):
Instead, you want to spend that time talking about how to get buy in when you don't have positional authority as a product manager, or how to turn chaos into order and be able to communicate effectively across multiple stakeholders, or how to communicate ideas where there're assertions and hypotheses that might not work, but you need to put something forward to get the team going. These are all elements of communication that are juicier and more specific than just saying, here's why communication is important.

Lenny (17:02):
So a lot of it is cutting the backstory basically and just get right to the meat of it.

Wes Kao (17:06):
Yes.

Lenny (17:09):
Ever since you wrote that, I'm like, this is why a lot of my writing seems to work because I try to cut the intro as much as possible and just get right to the meat of it.

Wes Kao (17:18):
I find sometimes in my writing, I'll write and then go back and cut a lot of the preamble. So most people need less context setting and preamble than you might think. And I have a framework that I call start right before you get eaten by the bear. And the idea is that if you're telling a story about camping, don't start talking about going to REI to buy a Patagonia jacket and then booking the campsite and the website had difficulties. And on the drive over, we stopped by this gas station.

Wes Kao (17:48):
No one cares about all that. Start right before your friend left a Clif Bar out in their tent and you all almost got mauled by a bear. Get to the juicy part. And serve a little bit of context right before you get to the juicy part, but that's the idea of start right before you get eaten by the bear is cut out all that backstory scope creep.

Lenny (18:09):
I like that. There's also this element to your thinking that you didn't touch on, which is this, I think you call it the content hierarchy of bullshit.

Wes Kao (18:16):
Yes.

Lenny (18:16):
Can you speak to that?

Wes Kao (18:18):
Yeah. So if you imagine a pyramid, triangle, at the bottom, there's more room for BS, and at the very top of the triangle, there's less room for BS. So what's at the bottom of that triangle? Twitter, podcasts, short articles. It's basically situations that are one directional where people can't really challenge what you're saying. Keynote speech is another great one for lots of room for BS. So those are situations that they're more one directional.

Wes Kao (18:49):
With Twitter at least, it's 280 characters. It's something short that you're saying that's a little bit of a mic drop. You just say it, you leave it there, and then you get to walk away without needing to defend it, without needing to share your rationale or think about counter points, and so there's more room for BS, right? The format encourages or allows it. Let's say it allows it.

Wes Kao (19:09):
But as you move up the triangle of the content hierarchy of BS, there's less and less room for BS. So long form in-depth articles, less room for BS. You have to defend the idea, you have to convince your reader. Books, also less room for BS. And at the top of the triangle, courses, one directional courses like video courses on Udemy, LinkedIn Learning, but especially cohort-based courses where there is live and async interaction, there's very little room for BS.

Wes Kao (19:37):
So if you think about a webinar or a keynote talk or a book, you say the thing and that's it, but in a cohort-based course where your students are right there with you, where they can ask questions, when they can have conversation in the Zoom chat box, if you're saying something that doesn't really make sense, there could be a whole conversation happening in Zoom chat saying, "This doesn't make sense for X, Y, Z reasons." And so you have to be able to defend what it's that you're saying and make sure that what you're saying is rigorous.

Wes Kao (20:07):
And I think that thinking about that content hierarchy of BS is great for holding ourselves to a higher standard, to make sure that we are not allowing ourselves to spew BS, just because a format might allow it. A book, for example, obviously the content of that book, the contents matter more than just the format. And so there are books that could be 10 page blog posts, and there are books where every page earns its real estate. So there's still a little bit of nuance in the hierarchy, but in general, as you move up that hierarchy, there's less and less room for BS.

Lenny (20:40):
I think this framework explains a bit why Twitter's so cringe to a lot of people is these threads that just sounds so wise, but yeah, there's not a lot of depth to them if you really think about it and it's easy to sound smart.

Lenny (20:52):
So one thing I'll add is people are listening and they may be like, "Oh, of course courses are at the top, Wes runs a course company." But having run a course and created a course, I 100% agree that there's just no room for BS in a course, because one, there's just so much content because there's so much time that you have to cover. And so you can't just like, "Here's a wise thought, let's move on." You have to actually get into it and people hold you accountable to that kind of thing.

Lenny (21:21):
And then to your point, people are going to ask questions and you're like, "Oh, shit, that's all I got. I have nothing more to add." That's not going to cut it. And so I totally agree. And that's why courses I think are so powerful and probably a much better way to learn than just reading a blog post or listening to a podcast if you really want go deep on something. So I love that concept.

Lenny (21:41):
Anything else you want to add on that idea before we move on to the next concept?

Wes Kao (21:44):
Let's go. Next concept.

Lenny (21:45):
Okay, let's do it.

Wes Kao (21:46):
Let's do it.

Lenny (21:47):
Okay. So when I was building my PM course with you, you blew my mind a number of times on how to actually teach effectively. And one of the lessons you taught me was around the importance of creating state change in the talk, how to create state change. And so without giving it away, I'd love to just hear your thoughts on what is state change, why is it important, and just, how does it help you, not only give better talks, but also even better Zoom meetings?

Wes Kao (22:14):
If you think about most Zoom meetings or presentations, it's one person talking at you the entire time and everyone else has to listen silently. It's pretty hard to do that on Zoom where your camera's on, you're sitting, you have to sit still, look straight ahead at the camera, control your face and make sure you look focused. And so it's really not surprising that most people find that very draining. They want to turn off their cameras, they get distracted.

Wes Kao (22:42):
So the idea behind what I call the state change method is that you should punctuate your monologues with state changes. So state changes are anything that shakes your audience awake and adds some variety. So it might be asking people to put something in the chat box. It might be switching from gallery view where you see everyone in that Brady Bunch grid and switch over to screen share, to share something and then switch back.

Wes Kao (23:07):
It might be having someone else speak. It might be asking people to unmute themselves and go ahead and chime in. It might be putting people into breakout rooms, so they can discuss amongst themselves and then come back and then do a popcorn where someone shares out and they popcorn to the next person to the next person.

Wes Kao (23:22):
So all these are examples of state changes that help your audience stay engaged with the material that you are presenting. And it's really in reaction to monologues. I'm kind of imagining Salesforce with their no software sticker. If you think about no monologues, try to avoid monologues as much as possible because that puts your audience to sleep.

Lenny (23:46):
What are examples of different states? You mentioned breakouts, chat. What other sorts of things can you do, especially on a Zoom let's say for running a meeting?

Wes Kao (23:56):
So we talked about breakouts, Zoom chat, switching from gallery view into screen share to show something and walk through it and then switch back. There's polls. Before you reveal something, you can ask, what do you all think? Go ahead and guess.

Wes Kao (24:13):
So in the Maven Course Accelerator, the two week course that I teach on how to build a cohort-based course, it's very meta, I will ask people, so what do you think the average attention span is for students? So I could have just told people it's X, but anytime, when you want to just share a piece of information, that's an opportunity for a potential state change.

Wes Kao (24:35):
Have people guess. The more they engage and think about the problem themselves, the more that they are going to remember and also just interact with your material. So I ask people to guess, and then the answers range from an hour or 45 minutes to three seconds. So it's just all over the place. The answer's two to four minutes, according to some research. So that's a ripe opportunity for state change.

Wes Kao (25:00):
And the other way to think about it, I was talking to Nathan Barry from ConvertKit, he was saying that he loves stage change method too, and that anytime he does a presentation now, every three to five slides, he'll put in a state change. So the idea of every three to five minutes, every three to five slides, go ahead and put in a stage change.

Wes Kao (25:17):
We really want to turn this from an art into a science, as much as possible, audience engagement. And if you just force yourself to look through your own material and say, "Oh, have I done a state change in the last couple of minutes?" If not, go ahead and throw one in. And more likely than not, when you look at that material at those intervals, you'll find something that lends itself really well to a state change.

Lenny (25:37):
I'm feeling pressure to create some state change in this podcast. Hey listeners, when was the last time you were in a meeting where there was some meaningful state change? Think about that for a moment.

Wes Kao (25:47):
Love it. Yes.

Lenny (25:49):
Okay. We're pros. Okay, I'm going to try to practice this lesson live. There's also this concept that you touch on, I think it's called eyes light up concept or something like that.

Wes Kao (25:58):
Mm-hmm.

Lenny (25:59):
Okay, cool. Can you speak to that, because I think it relates to this idea of state change in meetings?

Wes Kao (26:03):
Yeah. So the idea behind what I call eyes lighting up is that when you're talking to someone and you're explaining something, you're teaching them, you're sharing your startup idea or whatever the normal response is people will want to be polite. So they'll nod and they'll say, "Oh, okay, that's interesting." But there's usually a moment in the conversation where their eyes light up because they are genuinely actually interested in what you are saying at that moment.

Wes Kao (26:31):
So you, as the presenter, as the salesperson or whatever, that's pitching, you want to make note of the moments when people's eyes light up because their face can't lie. They can say, "Oh yeah. Okay, that's interesting." It's easy to say that and be polite, but when someone's eyes light up, that's a sign that something that you said triggered a reaction in them, a visceral reaction.

Wes Kao (26:54):
And I think so many of us, we like to pretend that, oh, I don't get enough data from people and this person said this, but what do they really mean? And really I think that we're just being delusional. If we just acknowledge reality and this person looks bored, they look bored, that is data. Don't ignore that data. And then, oh wait there, I said this hot key word or this phrase or I explained something this way and all of a sudden, their face change or demeanor change, they're leaning forward, they're wanting to catch what you're saying, that's all data.

Wes Kao (27:27):
So really the principle behind eyes light up is don't be delusional in just taking people's, what they're saying at face value. Really look at their face, look for other clues, the excitement in their voice and watch for these different eyes light up moments, because those are great fodder for content that you might want to write about, for the angle of your sales pitch, for how you might want to explain something in the future. And you really cut out all the parts that make people go dead in the eyes and just say the parts that make their eyes light up.

Lenny (27:57):
Hey listeners, what kind of eyes lighting up behaviors can you think of that show you somebody's really into your content?

Wes Kao (28:05):
Or when are times in recent weeks when you've explained something or given a sales pitch and saw people's eyes light up? What were you saying in that moment? Think about that and jot that down.

Lenny (28:17):
And so the skill here is okay, for sales, that's interesting. So as a salesperson, it'll help you understand what part of your pitch resonates. I imagine for presentation prep, this is a useful skill. Obviously for building courses, probably less useful for meetings, but I imagine there's also just like, oh wow, this person got really excited when I share this thing, maybe spent a little more time on that idea.

Wes Kao (28:38):
I think it absolutely works for meetings. I think it works for internal meetings, for conversations, even with your cross-functional team members, with your boss, with your direct reports. Usually as you're explaining something, you can tell when even your manager is like, "Oh yeah, that." Or you can tell there's more energy in the response for certain parts.

Wes Kao (29:01):
And when you think about it, you can find patterns of, oh, usually, when I share things with this person, they tend to react well when I share these things. So why don't I trim out the other context that they don't really care about and focus on whatever made their eyes light up. And it might be talking about numbers, or it might be talking about upside, or it might be talking about how little effort this is to try. Whatever angle it is, it really gives you great data that you can lean into and flesh out more.

Lenny (29:28):
You mentioned your manager and that's a really good segue to our next topic, which is around managing up.

Lenny (29:35):
If a feature ships, but no one knows about it, did it really ship? Keeping customers and internal teams like sales, support and marketing in the loop on what's changing across your product is surprisingly hard.

Lenny (29:47):
First you have to dig through tickets and pull requests just to see what's been done. Then you have to figure out what's relevant to each person, craft updates, and then share them across all of your channels. Multiply this by the number of things that ship every week and that's basically a full-time job just to keep everyone updated on what's changing. That's why high velocity product teams like Monte Carlo, Armory and PopSQL use Makelog.

Lenny (30:09):
Makelog makes it easy to see what's happening across tools like Jira, Linear, Asana, and GitHub, and then to write bite-sized updates, which you can immediately share with your audience wherever they are, including within your app, on Slack, over email, and even on Twitter. No more long boring blog style change log posts that slow you down, just quick and easy updates that keep your users informed and happy. Try, Makelog for free today. Just visit, makelog.com/lenny to get started.

Lenny (30:39):
I think your most popular tweet you've ever tweeted is around the skill of managing up. And funny enough, I had a thread on managing up years ago and it's also my most popular tweet thread ever. So there's a lot of interest in this topic. And so I want to ask you why is managing up important? Why are people not doing it well and how do you manage up effectively?

Wes Kao (31:01):
Great questions. I think that most people assume that their boss has to manage them and they feel a little bit resentful that, why should I manage my boss? They're getting paid more. They are my manager. They have more responsibility. And you can continue to think that way and your career might be fine, but if you embrace that, if you manage your boss, they're going to appreciate you much more, you're going to get more opportunities, you're going to have more trust with them, there's all these great things that happen when you decide to manage up.

Wes Kao (31:38):
And I think more people are realizing that, hey, as an individual contributor, or even as a manager, we all have bosses. So even as someone who leads people, you still need to manage up. There's no point in seniority where, as you climb the career ladder, that it just doesn't matter anymore.

Wes Kao (31:58):
And I think some people think that senior people don't need to manage up like, oh, once I'm a director of VP, I don't need to manage up anymore, it's only something I need to do when I'm a coordinator or an associate PM or something. But ironically, the most senior people are best at managing up. This is why they got promoted in the first place because they were great at managing up to their bosses to understand what was worrying their bosses, what was keeping them up at night so that they could take that off their plate.

Wes Kao (32:29):
They're great at keeping their bosses in the loop on what's happening so their bosses, aren't constantly having to ask and pepper them with questions every day on, hey, how's this going? Or what's the status of this? Or do we take care of this thing? They're proactive in communicating so their boss knows that certain things are taken care of. And so there's so many benefits that you can reap when you choose to manage up.

Lenny (32:52):
How do you suggest folks do it? I actually have a tip, but is there something you want to share in that?

Wes Kao (32:58):
Yeah. I think one really big way of doing that is keeping your boss in the loop on the kinds of decisions that you're making and what you are working on. It feels almost blase like, well, duh, but actually I think we all know that we should do that, but the way that we execute, I think sometimes your boss doesn't feel like they're in the loop. And so proactively giving the right amount of context for your manager to be able to weigh in on what you're doing and to be able to give feedback, I think that's super, super important.

Wes Kao (33:32):
And then thinking about the right level of context to give them, is this a reversible decision or is this one that is irreversible or difficult to reverse or expensive to reverse? Using your sense of judgment so that you're not necessarily going to your boss for everything and telling them everything. That's overwhelming for your manager who has a lot going on, it's really using your sense of judgment and good common sense to think about, okay, I want to recommend that we do this thing. How do I share enough context about my thought process and rationale so that my boss has enough information to be able to push back if needed or to be able to approve and know that I've gotten it taken care of?

Lenny (34:19):
Awesome. So to build on that, something I did for a long time, that was really powerful, it's really simple is I sent my manager a state of Lenny email every week, just titled the state of Lenny. And it had basically three sections, my priorities currently, blockers that I need their help with, and maybe that was the first thing that I put up just to make sure that they saw that, and then just things on my mind currently that week.

Lenny (34:44):
And that I think is such a simple, but such a powerful way to do exactly what you're talking about, keep people in the loop about what you're doing, make sure you're aligned on priorities, make sure things are getting unblocked, and also just avoid surprise as much as possible. And so there's a little tip.

Wes Kao (35:00):
I love that. I think the avoiding surprises is great. I think in the work context, surprises are generally not great. So I always say, unless you're surprising me by bringing me a snack or something, don't surprise me. Actually, in my personal life too, I don't like surprises. So I think, especially in work, not throwing something over to your manager that just catches them off guard is good.

Lenny (35:27):
I like that general rule, avoid surprises, except for birthday parties and milestones. That also touches on just a general rule I have of working is just over communicate. I find nobody's ever like, "Just, Lenny, shut up. I don't want to know about things." It's always the opposite, why didn't I know about this? Even if they don't pay attention, the fact that they have the chance to see it always goes a long way.

Wes Kao (35:51):
I find especially in remote work too erring on the side of over communicating is just, it ends up being the right level of communication. You think you're over communicating, but to the recipient, it's actually just the right amount. And I've been surprised by how I thought everyone was aligned on a certain strategy or that, oh, we've already talked about this thing three times and then realized that, oh, we actually weren't as aligned as I thought.

Wes Kao (36:18):
So erring on side of over communication is great. And I think also structuring your communication in a way where if someone already agrees with you or they get it, they can get the gist, but if someone doesn't get it, they can continue reading. So that helps people spend their time well.

Wes Kao (36:34):
So I'll usually put the most important point at the top, the TLDR, if you will, the gist and then I'll say context, colon, and then that there might be multiple paragraphs of context below for anyone who wants additional thinking on how did I get to this decision, or how did I think about this. But if they already agree with the decision and know that context, then they don't need to keep reading.

Lenny (36:56):
I actually taught that format in my course. I think it was rooted in the military where they're just like, their emails start with bottom line, here's what you need to know, and then context, bullet point, bullet point, bullet point, bullet point. And so it's a really simple way of just communicating things.

Lenny (37:11):
Although one student used that format with a potential customer where they started off being bottom line, here's where we're at and they were like, "Man, that's aggressive." And so I had to adjust that to be a little softer. Okay.

Lenny (37:26):
So I had this beautiful segue, but anyway, you talked about communication and that's a good segue to talking about writing and you have a lot of great advice on writing and how to write well. We touched on a bit of this, of cutting out the backstory and being super specific with the how, but do you have any other advice for just writing in general? Because a lot of folks that listen to this are trying to write more and you have some great stuff on this. So yeah, what can you share?

Wes Kao (37:55):
I think a lot of people learn writing from mimicking other people and learning by analogy, especially on Twitter or on social, which I think is useful to a certain point, but I also think that there's a lot of benefit in studying the craft of writing off of social. So one of the books that I've been recommending, I think I'm jumping ahead to potentially a lightning round question, but-

Lenny (38:23):
Not allowed.

Wes Kao (38:25):
... it's a book called It Was the Best of Sentences, It Was the Worst of Sentences by June Casagrande, I think is her name. So we'll link this in the show notes. And another one is Better Business Writing by Harvard Business Press. They have a whole series on leadership, managing up, writing, et cetera. And I recommend those two books usually to new team members who join because they cover more of the craft of creating strong sentences, paragraphs, arguments and thinking about the logic of what you're saying.

Wes Kao (39:00):
A lot of times when we write a sentence, there's actually already a point of view or there's a point of view baked in, but you don't want it to be an accidental point of view. I was just talking to my team member about this, she asked me to give her some feedback on something that she wrote and the way that she had written her paragraph was leading for the reader.

Wes Kao (39:21):
It was about an offsite that we have coming up and she talked about whether we should change a WeWork location, something like that. So this is actually super useful, tactical stuff for Slack messages, if you're DMing someone, if you're texting someone, you can use these principles basically everywhere.

Wes Kao (39:37):
And so it was a Slack message about changing WeWork locations and the way that she had phrased it, the obvious conclusion was, oh, well, we should just stick with our current one. And so I asked her, is that your recommendation? Because if it is then great, because you're leading the reader to that conclusion. But if it's not, you're asking a leading question that is skewing the results of this question.

Wes Kao (40:03):
And so it turned out that she was open. She didn't really have an opinion. And so we thought, okay, how do we adjust this so that it'll get a more objective response? And then we talked about it some more and thought it's actually better, if you do share a recommendation here, it's easier for the reader. So how do we then adjust it some more so that the recommendation is intentional within that paragraph?

Wes Kao (40:26):
I know it's not quite a soundbite, but I see this a lot in people's writing is that there's these either sentence structures that add more cognitive load to the reader or have a little bit of confusion, and it's a technical issue actually. It's like the which or some clause explains something directly before it, but they actually meant for that clause to describe something 10 words before at the beginning of the sentence, right?

Wes Kao (40:53):
It's hard without a visual, but anyway, both of those books talk about the mechanics and the technical aspects of writing and the craft of writing really well. And I guess my spiky point of view is that more people should learn the craft of writing and the technical aspects of writing, not just look at what other people are doing to try to get audience engagement, but to actually improve your ability to precisely say what you mean and convey the level of conviction that you have and not accidentally mislead people with your words, because you didn't know that the way you wrote something could potentially mislead them.

Lenny (41:29):
Got it. I actually got that same feedback that you gave this person once when I clearly had an opinion on what we should do as a team, and I gave pros and cons and it was very biased and clear what I thought we should do. And my manager's like, "Don't do that. Just try to be as unbiased as you can or just tell me here's what you think we should do, and here's why." And it helped a lot.

Wes Kao (41:51):
I love that. And I think pulling on the thread a little bit it's because pros and cons lists, the structure of a pro and con list implies that you are giving equal weight to pros and cons, that you are accurately talking about pros and cons or objectively talking about them.

Wes Kao (42:09):
So when you do a pros and cons list, but they're skewed and you are leaving some things out of the cons list, it makes the reader suspicious and they can't trust you anymore, whereas if you do a pros and cons list, but at the top, you say my recommendation is X, here's pros and cons of that, or here's some risks associated with it or whatever, you're building trust with your reader because you were direct in saying, "Here's my recommendation, here's what I'm advocating for. And also, here are some downsides to that."

Lenny (42:38):
Right. This also reminds me of the mental pyramid, which I won't get too deep into, but the concept there is in business, you often want to start with here's my conclusion, and then here's why, versus here's all the things I've done, here's all my thinking, here's all my data points, and then now here's my conclusion at the end of that. In business, people are like, "I'm bored. Just tell me what you think we should do and then help me understand why you got there."

Wes Kao (43:04):
The worst, which happens a lot is mixing all of those things with the action item or decision. So the action items and decisions are kind of interspersed randomly throughout a bunch of context, thought process, factors that you looked at, downside. It's like, it's all just interwoven, and so your reader doesn't know which parts are FYIs or which parts are background versus what is the thing that you want their response on, like what are you asking them to chime in on and what is the decision that we're actually trying to make? So if you do add all the thought process, I think splitting it up and making it clear that you're splitting it up, makes it so much more helpful for your reader.

Lenny (43:46):
Awesome. And we'll link to all this stuff in the show notes, so don't feel like you have to remember all this. Okay, so this is a good time to get our fifth section and our fifth topic, which is around the skill of saying no. I feel like this is such an under-taught skill. I heard that Tim Ferriss was working on a book called The No Book, where he was going to share all the ways he's learned to say no, but I think he shelved it for whatever reason.

Lenny (44:11):
And I need advice on this, because I'm often asked for favors of all kinds and I am not amazing at saying no without being ... I try to be really nice about it and it takes time. And so I could use advice here. So I'm curious to hear your advice on saying no.

Wes Kao (44:28):
Yeah. Saying no does not come naturally for me either as a recovering people pleaser. So I thought a lot about how to say no in ways that feel warm and respectful and respect the other person. So I think there's different ways to say no, depending on the situation and your relationship with that person.

Wes Kao (44:50):
So within work, for example, saying no to your cross-functional team member or to your manager, that's very different than saying no to someone who doesn't know you on the internet, who is DMing you, asking you to help them with something.

Wes Kao (45:05):
And so with saying no with people that you have, let's say long term dynamics with, continuing dynamics, like a manager or a friend, et cetera, I usually like talking about the trade-offs of something. So this is something that I learned from Alex Peck, my coworker at altMBA, who's now CEO of altMBA. He was always great at this.

Wes Kao (45:27):
So when we worked together, he was my design counterpart and I would ask him like, "Hey, can you design this for me? Can you design that? And, oh, here's another thing I'm going to throw over the wall to you." And he was always so good at saying no in a way that felt good for me, the person who just asked him to do something. And I just thought that's pretty different, because usually when people say no, I'm a little irked or a little miffed.

Wes Kao (45:51):
So I thought, what is Alex doing that I can borrow from? And it turns out that Alex would always talk about trade-offs and he'd say, "Wes, yes, I can design this PDF for you. That means that the thing that I was going to work on today, which was redesigning this page on the site, will have to wait until later this week." Or, "This means that I'm going to be deprioritizing this other thing. Does that sound good to you? Or do you want me to prioritize the original design project you wanted me to work on?"

Wes Kao (46:21):
And so for me hearing that it felt like I was in control and able to help him prioritize, basically. So it went from being a conversation about yes or no, are you a helpful person or are you not, are you a team player or are you not into, hey, how do we make sure that the important right things get done?

Wes Kao (46:43):
And so it's great for the person who you're saying no to and it's also great for Alex because whenever we had those conversations, I always thought that he was really thoughtful about making sure that the most important projects that we want to work on stayed prioritized.

Wes Kao (46:56):
So it's a little bit of a work around. So you're not exactly saying no, but you're talking about trade-offs, which gets the result of the no. The reason why you want to say no is we don't have bandwidth to take everything on, but we feel weird about saying no to people because we're afraid that people are going to think we're not cooperative or whatever.

Wes Kao (47:16):
So by talking about trade-offs, you really get the outcome, which is you protect your bandwidth, you protect your bandwidth, you protect your mental health, you protect your ability to do great work without feeling overly stretched, without actually even having to say the word no, which I just think is amazing.

Lenny (47:33):
This is a concept or a related concept that a manager once taught me, which is essentially the same idea, and she called it prioritize and communicate. And the idea here is someone gives you something to do that's not already in your plate, there's a two-by-two you can imagine in your head, there's, you can just prioritize it amongst your priorities and not communicate what you did and where it sits, or you could just communicate and not prioritize and that just means like, sorry, I don't have time for this right now. What you should do is prioritize it, here, it's going to sit in number three in my priority list, and communicate it, this is going to be third on my priority list, does this seem reasonable to you? Would you agree? Should I do this sooner or not? And that's a really good way of dealing with exactly what you're talking about. And so that's the little framework [inaudible 00:48:19]-

Wes Kao (48:18):
I love that. I love a good two-by-two matrix and that is a fantastic one.

Lenny (48:23):
There we go. Sweet. Anything else you want to touch on that topic before we move to our very exciting lightning round?

Wes Kao (48:30):
Let's do the lightning round.

Lenny (48:31):
Okay. Here we go. I need some sound effects, I think, but anyway, until then. Okay, so I'm going to ask you five questions and just tell me whatever comes to mind and we'll go through it pretty quick. Sound good?

Wes Kao (48:43):
Okay. Yes.

Lenny (48:44):
Okay. You already knew this was coming. What's the book that you've recommended most in the past few months?

Wes Kao (48:50):
The two craft of writing books that I had mentioned.

Lenny (48:52):
Can you just remind us real quick while we're on there?

Wes Kao (48:54):
Yes. It Was the Best of Sentences, It Was the Worst of Sentences by June-

Lenny (48:58):
What a great title by the way.

Wes Kao (48:59):
... Casagrande. Yeah, it's so good. And then Better Business Writing by Harvard Business Review or Harvard Business Press.

Lenny (49:06):
Awesome. I got to read these. Okay, number two, what's a movie or show that you've recently watched and loved that maybe people haven't heard of.

Wes Kao (49:13):
There's a show called Doctor Foster on Netflix. I think it's on Netflix, it might be on Prime. It's a British kind of drama, crime thriller that's super good. I love mystery thrillers. So I've pretty much watched every single one out there, but I feel like many people haven't heard of this one. So if you're into that, check it out, let me know what you think.

Lenny (49:36):
Okay. Amazing. I have not heard of that. Great choice. Okay, so I know you've taken a lot of courses, I forget how many, I know you're a course addict. So I'm curious, what's been your favorite course that you've taken?

Wes Kao (49:47):
I really love Suzy Batiz course called Alive OS. Suzy is the founder and former CEO of Poo-Pourri. She's now chairman of Poo-Pourri. She grew her business. I think she started Poo-Pourri in her late 30s or 40s after multiple bankruptcies. And she created this amazing course that it's hard to describe. It's kind of about mindset and overcoming internal blockers.

Wes Kao (50:12):
So it's a little bit on the softer side, but I feel like it was just amazing community, amazing exercises that you go through with your small pod. It led to some really big breakthroughs, including starting Maven as in the company. So at the end of that eight week course, I was debating, should I do this or should I not? And with my small group, I worked through it, talked a lot about just subconsciously how I was feeling about it and stuff. And it was really good. So Alive OS by Suzy Batiz.

Lenny (50:41):
And it's still going?

Wes Kao (50:42):
Yeah. She was one of my clients when I was consulting and yeah, she's amazing.

Lenny (50:45):
Okay, we're going to link to that. While we're on this topic, how many courses would you say you've taken?

Wes Kao (50:49):
Taken and built? A lot, dozens. Dozens that have had hundreds of cohorts within each course, so yeah.

Lenny (50:59):
Wow, okay. That's a lot.

Wes Kao (50:59):
So lots of course.

Lenny (51:00):
It's an expensive hobby.

Wes Kao (51:01):
I love that you said course addict.

Lenny (51:02):
Okay, what's your favorite Maven course right now to give a little plug to Maven?

Wes Kao (51:08):
Ooh, probably Amanda Natividad's course on content marketing. It's called Content Marketing 201. Or, I haven't taken this, but I've heard really good things about Marily Nika's course on breaking into technical product management. She's a technical PM with a PhD at Meta right now. She was at Google before. Her course is fantastic.

Lenny (51:30):
Awesome. Okay. Final question, what's your least favorite fruit?

Wes Kao (51:33):
Probably grapes, but when they're frozen, they're kind of like little popsicles. So they're not too bad when they're frozen, but probably grapes.

Lenny (51:41):
Wow. A surprising answer. Very contrarian.

Wes Kao (51:43):
Oh, okay.

Lenny (51:43):
You're just like-

Wes Kao (51:46):
I love that, that's my most contrarian spiky point of view is that I dislike grapes.

Lenny (51:49):
Might just be. It's just like a explosion of flavor and sugar. Okay, well, we've reached the end of our chat. Wes, if it wasn't obvious, this was incredibly fun. I had so much fun chatting and learning from you. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online, learn more about you and or Maven, and then how can listeners be useful to you?

Wes Kao (52:08):
You can find me at @MavenHQ on Twitter, or at maven.com, or @wes_kao and weskao.com. And in terms of listeners, if any of you are interested in creating your own course and sharing your expertise and your knowledge online, definitely check out our Maven Course Accelerator. It's a free to week course that teaches you everything that you need to know about building a course.

Lenny (52:31):
What a founder, pitching the company Twitter handle versus her own. Wes, thank you so much for being here. I had a blast and I'm excited for people to listen to this.

Wes Kao (52:42):
Thanks Lenny.

Lenny (52:44):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

