April Dunford (00:00:00):
40 to 60% of B2B purchase processes end in no decision. If you scratch on that data, the majority of those aren't saying, "Well, I'm not making a decision to buy something new because the old thing we were doing is better." That's not true at all. In fact, the majority of those is they couldn't figure out how to make a choice confidently. So what they did was they just went to their boss and said, "You know what? Now's not a good time. Let's not do it now. Let's do it next year. Let's just delay it." Because that is the safe risk-free thing for that person who's on the hook to make the decision to do.

Lenny (00:00:39):
Today. My guest is April Dunford. April is the world's foremost authority on product positioning. She's the author of the bestselling book, Obviously Awesome, which is my favorite book on positioning. And this is her second time on the podcast because she just published a new book called Sales Pitch, which builds on her 25-year career as VP of marketing and advisor to companies like Google and Epic Games and many others. The book guides you through a better way to pitch and sell your product. And in our conversation, April shares the framework that she has seen work most often in getting potential customers to get excited about your product and to decide to buy your product.

(00:01:16):
Like I say, at the top of this episode, you'll become better at pitching and selling your product by the end of this episode. And if that's useful to you, which it should be, this episode is for you. With that, I bring you April Dunford after a short word from our sponsors.

Speaker 1 (00:01:32):
This episode is brought to you by Composer, the AI powered trading platform now with retirement accounts. Algorithmic trading has historically been reserved for the hedge fund elite. Now with Composer, you can automate your trading with a library of over 1000 strategies that are easy to understand and tweak using an AI assistant and visual editor. Composer is the first ever algorithmic trading platform where you don't need any coding experience. It includes a full range of trading indicators for you to get creative and a Discord community of 2,500 traders to discuss your ideas with.

(00:02:06):
Composer also has a powerful back tester to see the historical performance of your strategies, and you can then invest with a single click. Once you invest, Composer will automatically trade for you based on the logic of your strategy. With $1 billion in trading volume and over 1 million trades executed, composer already has many big time investors using the platform regularly.

(00:02:26):
Head to composer.trade and use the code Lenny for an extra week of free trial on your composer membership. That's composer.trade. This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation AB testing platform built by Airbnb alums from modern growth teams. Companies like DraftKings, Zapier, click up, Twitch and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern grow team stack. This leads to wasted time building internal tools or trying to run your own experiments through a clunky marketing tool.

(00:03:04):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most about working there was our experimentation platform where I was able to slice and dice data by device types, country, user stage. Eppo, does all that and more delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytic cycles and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic click through metrics and instead use your north star metrics like activation, retention, subscription and payments. Eppo supports test on the front end, on the backend, email marketing, even machine learning clients. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com, that's geteppo.com and 10 x your experiment velocity.

Lenny (00:03:47):
April, thank you so much for being here. Welcome back to the podcast.

April Dunford (00:03:52):
So great to be back. We were talking about this earlier, but it feels like it was so long ago when I did the last one. I was one of the first guests and I feel like, man, you've been running this thing forever. And that was like a year ago.

Lenny (00:04:05):
It feels like a lifetime, but it was about a year ago.

April Dunford (00:04:08):
But what you've done with it is amazing, right? The growth in it, everything else, it's super inspirational.

Lenny (00:04:13):
Thanks April. I appreciate that.

April Dunford (00:04:15):
You're welcome. It's true though. I think everybody looks at your stuff and goes, "What the heck? How does he do it?"

Lenny (00:04:22):
The secret is a lot of work.

April Dunford (00:04:24):
Yes.

Lenny (00:04:24):
That's the get rich quick scheme there.

April Dunford (00:04:28):
Nobody wants to hear that.

Lenny (00:04:30):
Yeah. But it's work that's extremely fulfilling and we get to chat again and you are a very rare return guest, which makes me very happy. And the reason you're back is you've written an incredible new book, which I have right here if you're on YouTube called Sales Pitch.

April Dunford (00:04:44):
That's so cool.

Lenny (00:04:45):
There it is. And it's in your background, too. It's like a inception. The book is called Sales Pitch, How to Craft a Story to Stand Out and Win. And we're going to be spending our time today digging into all of the lessons and frameworks in the book as much as we can in the hour that we have. And my goal for this conversation is for listeners to leave this podcast with better skills at pitching and selling their product. Which I think every product leader and founder will want to do and get better at. How does that sound?

April Dunford (00:05:13):
That sounds great.

Lenny (00:05:14):
Okay, sweet. I was thinking as a way to get into the conversation, we start with maybe a story or an example of a company that you worked with where you applied the frameworks and lessons they teach in the book. And then use that as kind of a jumping off point for digging in further.

April Dunford (00:05:30):
Yeah, sure. So my background is, I do positioning work. And so in the work that I do with clients, generally what we're working on is a shift in the positioning, which is a little bit of a shift in our thinking around, how do we win in the market? So in order to test that positioning, what we want to do is take the positioning and translate it into a sales pitch and then test it live with prospects.

(00:05:53):
And one of the things I noticed right at the beginning of doing this work is that everybody's sales pitch kind of looked the same and they weren't all that great. And for the most part what was happening in the sales pitch is there was no positioning going on in the sales pitch at all. The sales pitch was essentially a product exposition, so essentially a glorified product box room. If there was five dropdown menus, we're going to click on all five dropdown menus and show everybody everything just feature, feature, feature, feature, feature.

(00:06:24):
And so, most of the teams weren't used to doing any kind of pitching in the pitch really. It was just the facts Jack, were just going to show you that. Some would do this really lightweight thing. Here's the problem, we're the solution. Now let me walk you through all the dropdown menus, but it is basically the same thing like that.

(00:06:43):
And so what I wanted to do was build a pitch structure that would reflect the positioning. And so in order to do that, we have to get a little bit into storytelling mode. Not a lot, but at least a little. And when we're talking about features, we shouldn't be talking about features. We should be talking about the value that the features deliver.

(00:07:01):
So let me give you an example and I'll do before and after what this would look like. So I work with these folks, Help Scout, and so they're in the customer service space, so think Zendesk or whatever. They're in that space. And what's interesting about them is they were built from the ground up to serve digital businesses. So businesses that don't have a physical store, they don't have sales reps. And so their approach to customer service was different from the outset. Help Scout said, "Well, you know what? Customer service for that kind of business is really important. It's the only time you ever get to interact with actual customers." And so the data shows that if you give them a really great interaction in service, it improves loyalty, it improves repeat purchases, and it's actually a growth driver. Now, most folks in other industries see customer service as a cost center.

(00:07:49):
So your telephone company for example, wants to get you off the phone as fast as possible. And they want to push you to the self-serve FAQ channels, and they don't care about giving you a good service at all. They don't care about any of that. And so they're all about driving the cost down. So if we look at Help Scout in their positioning, the alternatives to Help Scout are a handful of things. Most folks start using a shared inbox and it's really easy to use and the reps love it. It's easy to use. The problem is, is you start growing and then you want customer service features. You want to be able to do assignments and prioritization and things like that. So then these customers end up upgrading to help desk software and now they're in this whole different world.

(00:08:31):
So the first thing is really hard to use. So we're not in shared inbox territory anymore. And the second thing is that there's this attitude of we're trying to push folks to low cost channels. We don't really care about them. We're going to assign you a ticket number. You're not a person anymore. All this stuff. So that's the situation. So Help Scout, if they did a typical pitch the way I see most SaaS companies pitch, they would just expose the features. Right? So the pitch would look like this. Digital business comes in and they say, "Hi, Help Scout, let me show you how to log in, let me show you all the features. Look, there's a shared inbox thing there that's really great. Oh, look, we can do assignments and prioritization and we can do this other thing and we can do this other thing and la, la la." And I keep going until the time runs out and I don't have any more features to talk about.

(00:09:20):
The problem with that pitch is the customer's sitting there going, "I don't know, man, that sounds a little bit like my shared inbox, but it also sounds like help desk software. Is it different than help desk software? I'm not so sure. And there's overlap in the features there." And so it doesn't really answer the question, why pick us over the other guys?

(00:09:42):
And so a different style of pitch would be one, we would do a little bit of setup to give everybody an idea about how we fit amongst all the other solutions and what our point of view is in the market. And then when we get to exploring the features, we would do that within the context of the differentiated value. So here's how that pitch would look like. Customer comes in and Help Scout says, "Hey, digital business, we work with a lot of companies like you, and I'm going to show you the product. But before we get there, one of the things we think is interesting is that digital businesses look at customer service differently. They look at it as a growth driver rather than a cost center. And so most of the folks we work with see delivering a really amazing experience as a key part of customer service. Would you agree with that?"

(00:10:26):
Yeah, we would. They have a little conversation and then they say, "Great. We you have choices here. So most of the folks we work with start with a shared inbox, and that's great because it's really easy, really easy to use all that stuff. The problem is if you're growing and you probably are, then you're going to outgrow that because you're going to need prioritizations assignments, help desk stuff.

(00:10:45):
And so then your option is to go to help desk software. And so help desk software is great, does all the things. The problem is that it was not designed for businesses like you. It was designed for businesses that want to take the cost out of customer service. So it's going to do some things that are weird. It's going assign your customers a ticket number and it's going to try to drive them to low cost channels. So can we agree that in a perfect world for digital business like yours, we'd want something as easy to use as a help desk, but had all the bells and whistles so we wouldn't have to migrate to something else. And on top of that was built from the ground up to deliver amazing customer service. Do we agree we want that?"

(00:11:26):
Now, at that point, the customer is either with you or you're not. But if they are, then we switch to the actual demo part. If we do a demo and then we say, "Great, we've got those three things. Let me show you how that works. So one as easy to use an inbox. Look, here's the inbox. It's easy to use. Looks just like an inbox. It's amazing. Two, features, so you never have to outgrow it. Look, here's how we do prioritizations assignments, whatever. We can do all the stuff you need as you grow, and you're never going to have to switch platforms. And then last one, deliver an amazing experience. Look, the customer gets to choose which channel that they interact with you with. And look, they get to stay Dave and not ticket number 1479."

(00:12:02):
That sort of thing. So that's how the pitch looks in the after. But that's a really different pitch. That pitch is designed to answer the question, "Why pick us over the other folks?" And so as you might imagine, it is a lot more effective at actually getting clients to get their head around, what is this thing? Why is it different? Why should I pick you? And it just works way better in a sales situation.

Lenny (00:12:22):
Awesome. So just to maybe summarize the framework 'cause you went through each of these pieces, and I think it might be helpful to give people the kind of steps. And I have them here, but maybe it might be better for you to kind work through.

April Dunford (00:12:33):
So you can think of it is... So first of all, the pitch structure has two big pieces. So the first is the setup. The setup piece is not about us, it's about the market, our point of view on the market. The second bit is all about our differentiated value. So why pick us over the other guys? So those pieces aren't equal. In a normal sales pitch situation, we don't want to spend all day in the setup part. We want to get to the meat, which is our differentiated value, but we can't skip that bit. So if I've got a half hour call or a 45-minute call, maybe I spend a few minutes on this upfront, this upfront stuff is really important though.

(00:13:12):
And we could break the upfront into three pieces. So it starts with our insight into the market. So you can think of this as our point of view on the market or kind of like the problem inside the problem, in some ways. So in Help Scout's case, the insight is, " Hey, customer service is just different for digital businesses, and this is really a growth driver, not a cost center. So we need to think about customer service in a different way." That's their insight. So we start with that.

(00:13:41):
The second piece is pluses and minuses of alternative solutions. What we want to do is paint a picture of the entire market and talk about what's good and bad of the other ways of approaching the job. And then out of that conversation, we have a conclusion, which is what I call perfect world. But just kind of like can we agree that if we really wanted to solve this problem and knowing what works and doesn't work in the alternate solutions, can we agree really good solutions should tick these boxes? This is getting the customer aligned with your worldview.

(00:14:14):
If they're aligned, then we switch to the follow through. The follow through has a handful of steps, but the main step is this differentiated value step. So usually what we'd start with is an introduction. "Hey, we're Help Scout. We do customer service stuff specifically for digital businesses." And then we would move on to, "Here's the value we deliver. Here's how we do it. Here's the value we deliver. Here's how we do it. Here's the value we deliver. Here's how we do it."

(00:14:37):
We generally end the sales pitch with a couple of little steps. So one is after we talk about the value, generally there's a step for proof, which is how can we prove that we do what we say we could do. Which is often a customer case study or it might be independent third party verification on stuff. But usually there's a proof step. There's an optional step after that, which is handling objections that haven't come up during the call. So sometimes we'll have a silent objection, "Yeah, that sounds really good, but it sounds really hard to adopt." Or, "Yeah, that sounds really good, but it's probably pretty expensive." Or, "Yeah, that's okay, but it probably doesn't meet our needs for security or whatever."

(00:15:15):
And so we handle that at the end in this special objection step. And then we end the pitch with what I call the ask, which is whatever we want the customer to do next. So it could be just asking for the sale or it could be, "Hey, we want to do a proof of concept. Who do we need to talk to about that?" Or, "Hey, we're going to do a project. Who needs to be involved in defining the project?" Whatever the next step is in your sales process. That's how we end is with dask.

Lenny (00:15:44):
Cool. I wanted to actually talk about objections. 'Cause I imagine going through this, companies often don't agree with what you're saying, and I wonder how you handle that. So you're going in this, do you agree? And yeah, the silent objection is really interesting. I don't even think about that, where they're just like, "Yeah, yeah, yeah, we agree." But they don't really agree. How would you suggest people handle them being like, "No, I don't actually see the world that way." Or the silent objection, which I guess is something you save for the end.

April Dunford (00:16:09):
Typically when we're starting with insight, our insight into the market, if we're doing this well, the insight is generally not all that controversial. So you could think of it this way. So it's kind of the reason you built what you built. So most founders, when you talk to them, they didn't just come up with the idea out of nowhere. They woke up in the morning and said, "You know what sucks about email, this thing sucks about email. And so I'm going to build this different kind of email that solves that problem." Or in the case of Help Scout, it's like, do you know what sucks about customer service? It just wasn't built for these kinds of businesses.

(00:16:44):
And so if you've got a point of view on the world and you're talking to a customer that just fundamentally doesn't agree with that... In the case of a Help Scout, they come in and they say, "No, actually it's a cost center for us. We're just trying to get the cost down." They should disqualify that deal because they can't serve that customer better than Zendesk does. Zendesk is going to win that deal. But if you've done this properly, your insight should resonate for the target account that you're trying to go after. Now, that doesn't mean there aren't going to be other objections, and usually there's all kinds of other objections. But the objections are more on a level of, if I can get you hooked at the beginning in this setup, then we go to the value, which is just proving I can do what we already agreed we wanted to get done. Then the objections tend to be more like operational stuff. "Yeah, this sounds good, but I don't know if we can forward it." Or "This sounds good, but boy, we're going to have to migrate off the old thing or whatever."

(00:17:40):
So mentally they're kind of sold already, but they're worried about, "Well, what's IT going to say? And can I actually get budget about this?" And in B2B, we've got this network of people that we've got to go get agreement from to move forward on this thing. And so often there's objections around that. The beginning of the sales pitch thing... One more thing on that is that part of what we're doing in that setup is what salespeople would call discovery. And so that setup part should not be me talking at you. It should be a conversation between me and the client saying, "Do you agree with this? Is this what you're seeing? Did you start with a shared inbox? What are you doing right now? Did you ever consider using help desk software? Why yes, why no? Do you have any constraints on what you're looking at? What have you tried before? What are you looking at trying right now?"

(00:18:31):
This is part of the discovery that we do in a first substantive sales call that your sales reps would know how to do this. Typically, one of the things we don't have in the pitch decks that I see in SaaS companies is there's no good place to do this discovery. So it kind of happens outside of the structure of the pitch. In this pitch structure, there's a definite spot for discovery. So by the time we get to the end of the setup, we should either be aligned like, "Yep, this looks like a good prospect for us. Yep, we can do something. Yep, they got a problem we can solve. This all looks good." Or we kind of jointly come to the conclusion, "Hey, this just... Our stuff just ain't for you, man." And that's it.

Lenny (00:19:13):
I mentioned a lot of this comes from doing this enough times. You get to understand where people generally agree, this is a problem. We all know this is our problem. And it's unlikely that you're going to have to throw everything out because someone just decides, "No, this isn't for us."

(00:19:29):
I think one of the biggest shift maybe from this framework is that you go into a teaching mindset. It's not just like, "Here's our product, it's going to solve your problem." It's more, "Here's what's happening broadly. Maybe you don't have the time to do the research we've done. Here's what we found." And then that builds trust, I think in you as a company and as a leader, a salesperson. And then they're like, "Okay, see, they see the world the way we do." Or, "I've just realized something new. I never thought of it that way." And then, "Okay, cool. How do they think about the solution to this?"

April Dunford (00:19:57):
Right. One of the key things to think about in all of this stuff that I think we don't think about enough as software vendors is that customers will come to us and they've done their homework. They've Googled around and they've looked at stuff, but that doesn't mean they have perfect understanding of the market. In fact, it's usually far from it. If we think about it, most of the folks in B2B software, most of the time, your buyer has never purchased software like yours before. This is the first time they've done it. And their bosses come to them and said, "Hey, figure this out. Go find us a CRM and look at all the CRMs and figure it out."

(00:20:33):
And the buyers looking at it going, "Geez, I don't know, man. There's a lot of CRMs out there, and I'm looking at all the things. I'm on G2 Crowd and there's 24 CRMs in the top right corner. And I'm looking at Gardner Group and I'm looking at this thing and I'm actually doing my research, but I'm overwhelmed. What I don't have is a clear picture of the market. What are the different approaches to this problem? Forget about products. What are the approaches to the problem? Where do the products fit in those approaches? What's a good solution for me look like? What should be my purchase criteria?" That's really hard for buyers to figure out.

(00:21:10):
And in general, in a sales process, we're not doing anything to help the buyer figure that out, even though we know it. We eat, sleep and breathe this market. We spend all day looking at competitors and thinking about this stuff and whatever. But we've got this idea, "Well, we shouldn't do this because first of all, we can't talk about the other guys that we'd be seen as bashing our competition, and that's bad." The other thing is, even if we did give our opinion, nobody would trust us because we're biased. But if you look at the research on this stuff, the research doesn't support that. The research actually says what B2B software buyers want in a sales interaction is perspectives on the market and help weighing their options. And we don't do that. We're just like, "Here's our stuff. You figure it out, it's up to you. You figure it out."

(00:22:03):
And so as a result, what we get are these buyers come in, they're overwhelmed with all this information. They come in and they sit in our sales process, and we overwhelm them even more with more features and more information. And what they're really worried about is, "What if I make a bad choice here? I've never done this before and I'm going to have to recommend to my boss. And if I make the wrong suggestion to my boss, maybe my boss thinks I'm stupid. Or maybe I buy something and the whole department hates me because awful to use. Or maybe I pick something and it's just bad software and then bad things happen for the business, maybe I get fired."

(00:22:40):
And so the data on this shows that for B2B, 40 to 60% of B2B purchase processes end in no decision. And then when you look at, if you scratch on that data, the majority of those aren't saying, "Well, I'm not making a decision to buy something new because the old thing we were doing is better." That's not true at all. In fact, the majority of the...

April Dunford (00:23:00):
The old thing we were doing is better, that's not true at all. In fact, the majority of those is they couldn't figure out how to make a choice confidently. So what they did was they just went to their boss and said, "You know what? Now's not a good time. Let's not do it now. Let's do it next year. Let's just delay it," because that is the safe risk-free thing for that person who's on the hook to make the decision to do.

Lenny (00:23:23):
I think this is one of the most interesting insights that you share in your book and you also share this in the newsletter post about how buying software you could argue is harder than selling it because people will have learned there's skills and training for selling, but buying is, as you described, extremely stressful. Basically your job's on the line if you make a mistake. Is there anything more you can share along those lines just to help reinforce that buying software is extremely hard and stressful and people don't understand that?

April Dunford (00:23:50):
Once you get into that mindset, I think then you look at the situation a lot different. I think we've seen the statistics on this that says the buyer is 80% of the way through their buying journey by the time they talk to your sales rep. Yeah, maybe, but they might be 80% of the way to saying, "Nope, I'm not buying nothing." And in fact that's true 60% of the time. And so how do we combat that? The way we combat that is not just talking about ourselves, it's actually about trying to be helpful to that person in this very stressful situation that is trying to figure out how do I make a really good decision.

(00:24:27):
So what we should be doing is giving them a way to think about the whole market and say, in the case of Help Scout, "Look, there's shared inbox and then there's help desk software and then there's us. And I don't care who the vendor is, I'm going to put them in one of those buckets." And so you can just think of it that way. So you don't need to know every single feature, every single thing. I'm giving you a bigger picture of the whole market and helping you feel good. Well, if you choose this or you choose that, now you know why.

Lenny (00:24:57):
I think what's interesting about this is a lot of startups fail because they can't convince anyone to switch from the status quo. And I think people always think of that as the current product is good enough and that's why they're losing, but I think this adds an additional wrinkle of it's also the person buying it is just like, "I don't want to add the stress to even decide and make the choice and put my butt on the line to switch." And I never thought of it that way.

April Dunford (00:25:22):
I think that hurdle is a lot more than you think. So we obviously have to compete with status quo, we can't ignore status quo, because sometimes status quo just is good enough and so we can't ignore that. We still lose deals to status quo, but we lose an awful lot of deals to just plain customer indecision, customers being more afraid of screwing up than missing out.

Lenny (00:25:46):
So to try to overcome that, to drill into the things you find most powerful, one is help the customer understand the bigger picture and why essentially they're falling behind, why maybe competition is going to have an advantage because they're thinking in a different way.

April Dunford (00:26:04):
Well, I'll throw something out about that.

Lenny (00:26:06):
Please.

April Dunford (00:26:10):
And I've heard people talk about this a lot that one of the things we could do in this situation when a customer is feeling this indecision is to lean into this FOMO and say, "Look, you're missing out. The competitors are all doing it and you're not doing it." And so this is an interesting question. And so I was super excited, Matt Dixon wrote this book called The JOLT Effect, and in that they studied two and a half million sales calls, they recorded on Gong and they studied it with AI, and then they looked at what happened after the sales call, so were these successful or not successful, did a deal happen or whatever. It's pretty rare that we get a chance to dig into some data like this.

(00:26:49):
And so what his data showed is if a customer is indecisive, throwing FOMO into the mix makes it worse. So they're less likely to close the deal if you throw that in. And the idea is that they're already stressed out and you're just putting more stress on them by pressuring them, by saying, "Oh, this is happening, bad things are going to..." You're like, "Bad things will happen if I do something, bad things happen if I don't do something, what do I do?"

Lenny (00:27:22):
They just put their head in the sand, right? They're just like, "Ah, forget it."?

April Dunford (00:27:24):
So they're just like, "Forget it, I'm doing nothing. Now I'm totally paralyzed." And so there's an assumption that companies are very motivated by this FOMO thing, but I think that that is not always true, and if the customer is actually indecisive, throwing in this FOMO thing isn't going to do it. So what does work in that situation is, one, giving them the tools to make the decision. So that includes paint the picture of the market, teaching them how to buy essentially. So teaching them, look, for customers like you, you just have to worry about these three, four things, and all this other stuff, it doesn't apply to you. That applies to bigger companies, that applies to whatever, so this idea of teaching a customer how to buy is one way to take that stress down.

(00:28:08):
And then there's a whole bunch of other techniques you can use. So one is if it's a really big deal, we can split it into smaller pieces, we can do things like offer you a money back guarantee, we can do things like sometimes we have services and support that are going to help you if things go bad and this is how we're going to make sure. So this idea of being able to take risk off the table is a really serious one if we've got a customer that is actually paralyzed because of this indecision thing.

Lenny (00:28:36):
That makes a lot of sense, basically it's like how do we help the buyer cover their ass if they made a mistake, because what you're saying is that's the main reason they're not buying your product.

April Dunford (00:28:43):
And this FOMO thing is just not going to do it.

Lenny (00:28:43):
That's so interesting. So I really like this framework. I wrote this down, teaching them how to buy, that is a really simple way of just thinking about this whole process.

April Dunford (00:28:53):
Well, it's funny, I was having this conversation with Bob Moesta, he did Jobs To Be Done.

Lenny (00:28:58):
Yeah, I watched that episode.

April Dunford (00:29:00):
So he's just the best. And so one of the things I think of is normally when we come at this we're like, "Well, how can we convince the customer that we do the job that they need to have done?" And obviously we need to do that, but there is this secondary job that the champion of the deal is, and that's how do I make a decision without getting fired? And so we got to help them accomplish that job, otherwise we don't get what we want, which is the money.

Lenny (00:29:28):
It's so interesting. And it's not even necessarily get fired, it's even the performance sufferers or they don't get the promotion, it's did they do a good job. This makes me think of a process at Airbnb we went through to buy community forum software and I just remember these massive teams of salespeople come to the office and pitching everyone on the software and they just keep pushing you to make what's the next step here, who do we need to roll in, who needs to buy into it? And it's just like, "Oh my God, it's so stressful. I have to keep this thing moving." And then there's IT coming in like, "Oh, we got to make sure it integrates with Salesforce." And you start with I just wanted the best community forum software because we were trying to build something really different and unique and you end up with like, "Okay, it's fine, just go with the thing that works with Salesforce. It's all good. I'm just going to move on to another process."

April Dunford (00:30:15):
Well, this is the thing, it's so easy to default to the market leader in that situation. The market leader has this big advantage that you can say, "You know what? Who's going to get me in trouble for picking Salesforce? Nobody." It's so easy to just flip back on that. And so if you're the challenger in this situation, the brand that's number two or number three, you've got to get over all of this inertia and tilting towards the status quo, because it's just so easy, it's the lowest risk decision, besides do nothing is to just pick the leader in the market and we'll just run with that.

Lenny (00:30:49):
I think the classic phrase was no one gets fired for buying Microsoft. I wonder is it Salesforce now that's the default version of that now?

April Dunford (00:30:55):
Yeah, the original one was IBM. [inaudible 00:30:57]

Lenny (00:30:56):
I think you're right. Oh, man.

April Dunford (00:30:59):
Now you totally get fired for buying IBM. I don't know what happens. The other thing you bring up is I think an interesting thing to think about too that really messes people up in these situations is that in B2B, typical purchase process, we have five to seven people involved in making the deal happen and so there's this complexity we don't have a consumer, but a lot of people I think overcomplicate that. In a typical B2B purchase process, we've got someone in that buying team is what we would call the champion. So that person is the person who's been tasked with, hey, pick us the accounting software or pick us the CRM, you figure it out. And so that person is the person that does the initial research, makes the short list, probably sits on the first calls, and then there's all these other people.

(00:31:49):
Now, the other people can't make a deal happen, but they can kill it a thousand ways. So the way this works is your positioning and your pitch needs to really work for the champion, because if it doesn't, you don't even get to talk to anybody else, you don't even get to go near anybody else if you don't make it out of the shortlist and you don't get the deal cooking. But once the deal is cooking it is on you to arm that champion to handle all the objections potentially of all the other groups. So if you're the line of business buyer, let's say you're in the sales department and you're buying a CRM, IT is going to have to get involved at some point, and IT doesn't really care about the value of your CRM, but they do care does it meet the security requirements and does it integrate with the stuff we already have and how much of a pain is this thing going to be to manage, and so we're not actually pitching value to those people, we're just handling objections.

(00:32:46):
And so once we realize that, then we can get really tight on our positioning in our sales pitch. What we're really trying to do is just cook the champion, get the champion, and then once the deal's going we got to arm the champion for how to handle all these objections of all these other groups so that you can get a consensus to get a deal moving forward.

Lenny (00:33:05):
How do you actually do that? Is it ask them what are all the concerns you're hearing? Is it ask the individual stakeholders what your biggest concern is?

April Dunford (00:33:11):
Well, if we're really smart, we already know because we've done lots of deals. So if we're being a good partner in this, sometimes even in the very first meeting in that spot where we're talking about objectives, we're going to say, "Hey, look, IT is going to come in and they're going to be worried about this, this, and this, and don't worry, we got you."

(00:33:32):
So we're SOC 2 compliant, we do this, we do that, we know because we've done 15 deals and we know what these deals are like and we know what the stuff is going to be. You might have the champion come in and say, "Well, I don't know, end users might not like it." And it's like, "Okay, well, here's how we're going to get your end users on board, this is the training we have, this is the stuff we're going to do." The neat thing, if you have a product like [inaudible 00:33:54] on the front end of that, it takes that objection off the table. And you might have other things like you're going to take this to your boss and they're going to want to know ROI numbers, blah, blah, blah, and we've already done that, look, here's our calculator, if you give us this information, we can put this in, here's how you sell your boss.

(00:34:12):
So that's what we're doing. We're trying to arm them because we've done a million deals, they've never bought software like this before. So half the time you'll be doing deals and they don't even know what the purchase process is. And so if we're being good partners, we're like, "Okay, does this need to go to purchasing?" And they'll say, "Yeah, it probably does." Oh, well, here's what typically happens at purchasing. They're going to do this, this, this, and we're going to give you this stuff and that's going to help you get it through purchasing.

Lenny (00:34:40):
The way you're describing it now makes it feel like you need to be a big company for this to be useful because smaller companies don't have all these reps and they may not have the resources to do all these things you're describing. Who is this framework useful for? Can you use this approach if you're just, say, an early stage B2B?

April Dunford (00:34:53):
Well, so it's B2B products. If you don't have a sales team, I still think you can use this structure to build a story that marketing can use and you can use in different ways, and we can talk about that. But in the companies that I work with, they're B2B, they've got a sales team, and so the immediate thing we're doing is we're making a shift in positioning, we're building a sales pitch that reflects that positioning, we can immediately implement that in sales even though it's going to take a while for us to forklift the messaging and do other stuff and change our campaigns and everything else to match this new positioning, but we can tighten up the sales pitch and have an immediate impact over in sales on that. Second thing is that I've worked with tons of companies where the founder is the only sales rep and this works pretty good for that.

(00:35:39):
I don't think we need a ton of resources to do it, but I do think we need to have enough traction in the market that we understand how a deal typically goes. So if we haven't sold anything yet then we don't know yet, it's hard for us to help you buy something if we don't even know how to sell it. But if I've done 10 deals, I know what happens, I got a pretty good guess of what IT is going to say when you try to implement this stuff, I have a good guess of what's going to happen when we go to roll it out, I have a pretty good guess of what your boss might object to or might get excited by. And so I don't necessarily need a research team to go figure this out. This is just me trying to be helpful and help the champion do their job of getting this deal to the finish line.

Lenny (00:36:23):
So maybe the MVP of this approach is a deck that you continue iterating and adjust and restructure, and also bullet points of things you want to bring up like, "Okay, cool, IT is going to ask for these things," a few bullet points that you keep track of.

April Dunford (00:36:38):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:36:39):
I'm also thinking from the perspective of a product team building a product, they don't really sell it themselves. They work with sales, they work with marketing. Is there anything that you would recommend or that you think product teams could learn from this approach of selling that would help them build products in a different way or work with sales in a different way?

April Dunford (00:36:59):
Yeah. So here's what I think, the core of a good sales pitch is really deeply understanding your differentiated value, which is what is the value I can deliver that no other solution can. Often what I see at companies is you got a smart product team and they know a lot about the stuff they're building and why it's important and what the value is to the customer, and they did all this work on that when they were building it, but that information never made the jump to sales, because sales isn't even trying to pitch value. They're just pitching features like here's the dropdown menus, here's what they do. And so the first step in fixing this I think is to have a cross-functional team work on positioning.

(00:37:43):
So if I've got product, marketing, and sales together in the room working on defining what our differentiated value is, then I'm going to get all the good juice out of the product team that deeply understands the product, deeply understand what's differentiated about it, deeply understands value, and then I'm also going to have all the juice from the sales team that understands what the common objections are, what the champion really wants to get done and doesn't want to get done, what the situation is in a typical account, and then all of this cool information sharing happens, which actually you end up with way better definition of your differentiated value in the first place.

(00:38:22):
And so once we've done that work, it is very natural then for us to work together on the sales pitch that reflects that. What typically happens is not that at all. What typically happens is product's working on some stuff, sales is working on some stuff, marketing's working on some stuff. Marketing in their own little bubble comes up with positioning, they might build some stuff for the sales team, heave it over to the sales team. Sales team looks at it and says, "I don't get what any of this stuff is. I disagree with this. This doesn't match what I see," and they just throw it out and they go back to doing the same pitch they've been doing since the year of the flood.

Lenny (00:38:57):
That's a long time. So first podcast episode was all around positioning, and so folks want to get deep into that, they should listen to that, so we're not going to spend tons of time there, but differentiated value is a big part of this process also so I think it's worth spending a bit of time here. Could you maybe share a couple examples of what this is to give people a sense of what does it mean to share differentiated value?

April Dunford (00:39:20):
Yeah. So differentiated value is the answer to the question why pick us over the other alternatives? And so the way we get at that in positioning is we start with putting a stake in the ground of who do we actually compete with? And so if we didn't exist in the market, what would a customer do? And so typically there's some status quo thing, it might not even look like you, it might just be a spreadsheet, or do it with the intern or manual labor, and then there's whatever else ends up on a short list against us. And it's basically the definition of I got to beat all this plus indecision in order to win a deal, so I can stick my stake in the ground. Sales knows the answer to this question. If you have a sales team, they know the answer to this question, what would a customer do if we didn't exist, they know.

(00:40:06):
And then we get to the next step is, well, so what do we have that's different? And that's capability wise, feature function of the product or capability of the company, so it could be features, it could be your pricing model, it could be we have support in a way that the other folks don't. So there's all kinds of things it could be. It could be be the breadth of the portfolio that you have beyond that one product, we can fill whiteboards with this stuff. And then what we do is we go down that list of features and we say, "So what? You got advanced AI, whatever the heck the thing is, so what? Why does anybody care?" And the answer to that so what is your value. And because it came from this differentiated feature, it's generally value that the other guys can't deliver because they don't have the capabilities that underpin it.

(00:40:53):
So if I give you an example, a company I worked with a few years back, they've recently been acquired by Salesforce called LevelJump, and so they're in the sales enablement space, which is terrible. There's a million companies in the sales enablement space and they all look the same. And so LevelJump, so if you look at, well, what's the competitive alternatives, if I look at all the companies in the sales enablement space, you can put them into two buckets in terms of approaches, they're either a CMS like a jazzy content repository where you could make sure that people are using the right content and whatever, or they're an LMS, a learning management system, which I can build the course and certify you on the course, and that's how we're going to train the sales reps.

(00:41:39):
If you look at LevelJump, they're differentiated capability is they're the only one that's built on top of Salesforce. That's the feature, we're built on Salesforce, the other folks aren't. And then who cares? So what? And so when we first had a conversation about it, there was five or six different answers to that so what question, but the big answer was, well, because we're built on top of Salesforce, my sales enablement data is integrated with my sales data. And then you say, "Well, so what about that?" Well, because then that means I can actually tell did the sales enablement improve time to first deal or improve time to make quota? Well, so what about that? Well, if I improve that ramp time, then we get way more revenue faster. So that's the differentiated value.

(00:42:29):
When I go to do that in a sales pitch, I can translate that into my insight. My insight is every day your rep's not making [inaudible 00:42:36] it costs you money. So if we really want to solve sales enablement, don't we really want to have something where we can measure whether or not the sales enablement is working with sales metrics? Yeah, we do.

Lenny (00:42:47):
Interesting. So the differentiated value often informs the insight that you start with?

April Dunford (00:42:52):
It does. It absolutely is. The insight is basically the context that makes your differentiated value important, what is the thing you need to know to understand the importance of my differentiated value? In the case of Help Scout, the insight is, look, digital businesses like customer service is a growth driver, where does that come from? If you look at their differentiated value, it's there. And so we can just reverse it, flip it around. Even if the product wasn't necessarily constructed with that insight, maybe we got there sideways or the roundabout way or whatever, we iterated our way into that. We can look at the differentiated value and then basically reverse it out to the insight.

Lenny (00:43:33):
What's a sign that the differentiated value or insight that you've come up with just isn't clicking?

April Dunford (00:43:37):
If the differentiated value doesn't work in a sales pitch, what you'll get is the company going, "Why would I pay for that? This is not value for me, buddy." The companies I work with, the way I look at it is if you're in market and you're selling and you have happy, engaged customers, there's differentiated value there. That's why they picked you. That's why they love you. That's why they don't turn out on you. It's there. You might not know what it is, we might have to do a little process to get at it, but it's there and it exists.

Lenny (00:44:16):
Awesome. Another question that's been in the back of my mind since we started talking about differentiated values is just how honest should you be about the competition? Obviously there's a spectrum of extremely honest to super biased, what's your guidance on just how honest to be there?

April Dunford (00:44:34):
The posture I think you should assume in a sales situation, I had an old boss used to talk about this, is the posture we should have is calm confidence. So where that calm confidence comes from is we really understand why people should pick us. So this is differentiated value, we really understand it and we really understand who that's a really good fit for, and we don't even bother trying to chase anybody else.

(00:45:03):
So we should be able to come in and say, "Look, we're sales enablement that delivers results. If you don't care about those results, you shouldn't pick us. You should pick someone else." And so generally what we're trying to be is extremely honest. We're trying to come in and actually give credit where credit is due with the other approaches, because typically the other approaches work just fine for other kinds of companies. If you're really small and you're not growing e-commerce business, use a shared inbox. It's free, it's easy to use, there's no problems there, just use it. If you're really worried about bringing the cost down in a customer service center, maybe you should use Zendesk. And so I think the more we can act as a guide in this situation and come in and say, "Look, these guys are good for this, these folks are good for this, and we're good for this. And you might not care about that, and if you don't care about that, we're not the one for you. You shouldn't pick us." But I think that...

April Dunford (00:46:00):
We're not the one for you. You shouldn't pick us. But I think that this calm confidence idea is that where we know the client should pick us, we should be unafraid to fight for that business. But we should totally walk away from business where we're not the best fit. We shouldn't be chasing that business at all.

Lenny (00:46:20):
And this comes back to teaching them how to buy again and again. For these cases where you're like, "This is not a fit." Ideally you know that before you fly to their office and pitch them.

April Dunford (00:46:29):
Yeah, generally you've had some kind of qualification happen upstream, and so that qualification could be done in lots of different ways. If you've got some kind of product like growth motion in the beginning, you're looking for signals in that. And if the signals aren't there, then you're not talking to them. And so if you've designed your signals right, then you already know there's intent there. You already know you're a fit. You already know stuff. The way a lot of companies do this is they'll have inside sales do a qualification call before they set up a first call with a sales rep. In that qualification call, you're trying to make sure is this the right person? Do they have a need that we can actually meet? Is this actually a good fit for what we do? And if they're not, they don't even make it to the call.

Lenny (00:47:10):
Mm-hmm. Imagine a place where you can find all your potential customers and get your message in front of them in a cost efficient way. If you're a B1B business, that place exists, and it's called LinkedIn. LinkedIn Ads allows you to build the right relationships, drive results, and reach your customers in a respectful environment. Two of my portfolio companies, Webflow and Census, are LinkedIn success stories. Census had a 10x increase in pipeline with the LinkedIn startup team. For Webflow after ramping up on LinkedIn in Q3, they had the highest marketing source revenue quarter to date. With LinkedIn Ads you'll have direct access to and can build relationships with decision makers including 950 million members, 180 million senior execs and over 10 million C-level executives. You'll be able to drive results with targeting and measurement tools built specifically for B2B. In tech LinkedIn generated two to five x higher return on ad spend than any other social media platforms.

(00:48:09):
Audiences on LinkedIn have two times the buying power of the average web audience, and you'll work with a partner who respects the B2B world you operate in. Make B2B marketing everything it can be and get $100 credit on your next campaign. Just go to linkedin.com/podlenny to claim your credit. That's linkedin.com/podlenny. Terms and conditions apply.

(00:48:32):
Another question around this idea of differentiated value and just alternative approaches is there's a certain previous guest who was very big on creating a category being extremely important, and that potentially being the only way to build a legendary business. I know you have a different perspective on that because in theory if you go that direction, there's no alternative. It's like "We're the one." What's your take on that?

April Dunford (00:48:55):
Well, so here's a few things. So one, obviously creating a category is not the only way to create a legendary business because the vast majority of legendary businesses did not create the categories that they're in. So Google did not create search, Facebook did not create social network. There's so many of them. It's actually more of an exception to the rule that the company is creating a category than the other way around. So I think it's a bit disingenuous to say the only way. It is a way to build a big business, no question about that. But it's absolutely not the only way. In fact, it is not the most common way, but it is a way and it does work. So that's one thing. The second thing is that category creation is interesting. Like most companies, if you look at their arc, even the category creators that are successful, they did not start out as category creators.

(00:49:53):
So they started out as a niche play in an existing category, and that's because that's generally the easiest way to get traction for a company early because what is the job of the market category? The job of a market category is to help answer the question, what is this thing all about? If I'm positioning an existing category, I can say, "Well, I'm CRM for very small businesses." That was Salesforce's initial positioning. I didn't have to explain to you what a CRM was, that already existed. There was already billion dollar company in that space. We know what a CRM is, and I could say "We're CRM for very small businesses. The reason you can use in this very small businesses is we don't have any software. So you don't have to have an IT department to babysit it. It's fantastic."

(00:50:34):
So most companies start there. Now what happens is that if you become the dominant player in that space, which again, category creation folks talk about this like no category creator has ever lost the market. In fact, most category creators wins their market. Like what happened to MySpace? What happened to Ask Jeeves? It didn't work out so good for them. Most category creators actually get overtaken by fast followers. So if we look at the CRM market, Siebel was the big dominant player there and now they're not. So now we've got Salesforce. Once you're the dominant player in that market, a cool move to do is to actually extend the boundaries of the category so that you can continue to grow. And most of the category creation examples we see are companies that when they were 200, 300, 400 million revenue dominating their space, then decided to move the goalposts and say, "Well actually now we're expanding into all these other areas and we're going to call this category something. And that's what it is."

(00:51:38):
And there's loads of examples of that. Like Qualtrics for example, is a company that a lot of people talk about very successful category creation. Well, they were survey software up until there were 300 million revenue just like everybody else in an existing category. So that got them there and that worked just fine. Oh, well, once we're dominating it, now we can say it's whatever, it is, customer experience software, whatever it is. Snowflake. Another good example like data warehousing in the cloud, they were that data warehousing, an existing market, were data warehousing for the cloud. That is not category creation. And that took them all the way up to the point where they were about to go public and now they're cloud data, which is their attempt to expand and say, "Well, it's not just data warehousing, it's actually data lakes and all other data stuff."

(00:52:22):
And so that's a smart move for them because they're now very well known in that space. I'm not saying category creation is a bad thing. There are examples of company that came right out of the gate and successfully created a category and then survived to own the category longer term. But a more common thing that happens is that the company does the hard work of creating the category and in exactly the moment where the category starts to take hold, fast follower can come in with fresh funding and a lot of it and learn from all your mistakes and come in and knock you off the peak right when you think you've made it.

(00:53:01):
So I think category creation is, again, it's good, it works, but I think we have to be very careful when we're thinking about doing that at an early stage business or a business that isn't already dominating the category that they're in. It's much more common to see companies come in, shave off a piece of the market, dominate that, and then successfully branch out. It's what Jeffrey Moore called bowling pin strategy. Almost all successful companies follow bowling pin strategy.

Lenny (00:53:29):
Wait, what is that? Let's touch on that real quick.

April Dunford (00:53:31):
Oh yeah, you remember that thing. It's funny how many times I've talked about bowling pin strategy in the last two months. So this comes from a bunch of work that was done around the way innovation gets adopted, blah, blah. So there's a bunch of research done on this stuff, and I'm going to misquote it because Jeffrey Moore stuff, I've been reading it for decades. But bowling pin strategy goes like this. The easiest way to take over a great big market is to define a segment of the market that is underserved by the market leader.

(00:53:59):
And so if you think about a bunch of bowling pins, we're going to circle around the lead pin, which is this little piece of the market that's easy for us to go get, and the market leader probably doesn't care about it. And so we knock over that pin and knocking over that pin enables us to get to the three pins right beside it. And so now I'm established here as a beachhead and I can go get the next three pins, I'm going to knock those over, and eventually I get big enough to challenge the market leader and then I overtake them.

(00:54:28):
So the example for my early career was I worked at this company, we thought we were enterprise software. We narrowed it down to CRM for investment banks, and so we literally drew bowling pins for our investors and said, "Lead pin is CRM for investment banks. Once we knock that over, then we're going to go to retail banking, then we're going to be CRM for banking. And then once we knock that over, we're going to go to insurance, then we're going to be CRM for financial services. Once we knock that over, then we're going to be a great big company and we're going to challenge Siebel to be CRM for enterprise software." Instead we got acquired by Siebel for like $1 billion, but whatever. So most companies, if you look at the history of them, they actually start that way. And so yeah, if we just fast forwarded to when they were 300 million, we can say "Category creation's the only thing to do," but it's like, well, what happened before then? That was something different.

Lenny (00:55:21):
Awesome. Let's come back to your framework. I'm looking at the list of bullet points. So we've covered a lot of this already actually. So there's the insight where you helped them understand what's happening in the world and what's changing and why this is important. Then you talk about what the alternative approaches might be, pros and cons. Then there's this third step, which we haven't talked about yet, which is sharing the perfect world characteristics of a perfect solution. Can you talk a bit about that and why that's important?

April Dunford (00:55:47):
So this is the conclusion of the setup phase. So if I'm Help Scout for example, the conclusion is we say, "Look, you really want customer success software that's as easy to use as an inbox. You're never going to outgrow it, but it was built from the ground up to be deliver an amazing service." And so it's this part of the pitch where we actually get agreement with the customer that we are aligned in terms of our point of view on the universe. So it's where I say, "Okay, we've had our little discussion about the pros and cons of the other alternatives," and we say, "So look, so are you with me, man? Can we all agree that a really good solution for you would have A, B and C?" And the customer is either like, "Yeah, right," or they're not. And so if they're right with you on this definition of the perfect world, then I've got you. I've already won the deal and I haven't even talked about us yet because the way I've set it up, I'm the only one that can deliver that.

(00:56:49):
So if you say, "Right," all I got to do is prove that I can do that and get you over the hurdle that it's possible for you to adopt it.

Lenny (00:56:59):
Sounds too easy.

April Dunford (00:57:01):
Yeah, I mean...

Lenny (00:57:02):
It's like you lure them in.

April Dunford (00:57:04):
If all of this was easy, Lenny we would be on a beach drinking out of a coconut.

Lenny (00:57:09):
Oh man, let's make it happen. Okay, so that's the setup. What do you call the second part again?

April Dunford (00:57:14):
It's the follow through-

Lenny (00:57:14):
The follow through.

April Dunford (00:57:15):
... which is really focused on differentiated value. So in the second part, the first step is usually we introduce our stuff, which is where the market category is important. So we come in and we say, "Okay, can we agree that a really good solution should tick these boxes? Yes. Okay, good. Now let's talk about us. Okay, so we believe that. That's why we build what we build."

(00:57:36):
So here I am, I'm Help Scout, we're customer service software for digital businesses or whatever our market category is. So we introduce it just to get people straight in their mind about what it is, and then we move to here's the value, here's how we do it. If we think about a typical sales call, like let's say a sales call is half an hour, 45 minutes, I would expect to spend more than half of the time in the sales call in this differentiated value phase. So if we're doing a demo, that's the demo, and we're saying, "Okay, step one, let me show you how we do this. So easy to use as an inbox. Here's the features. Never have to outgrow it, here's the features. Delivers amazing customer experience, here's the features." And so that's where we're getting to the meat of what you thought you were getting when you clicked on the button that said, "Give me a demo."

(00:58:25):
So that's what we're doing there. And then we end with these three little pieces. One is generally I got to show you some proof that I can do what I say I can do. So if I'm claiming this thing delivers an amazing customer experience, how do I prove that? Well, I can prove it by other customers saying it was amazing. That's one way to prove it. If I had some independent third party data that proved whatever I was claiming, I could show that there too. But a lot of times what we're doing is we're like, "Let me show you how this worked in a company that used our stuff. So this is what the before looked like. They did this thing, here's the after." And so customer case study is usually good way to do that, but there's usually a step called proof, which is, I showed you the value, now here's the proof that I can actually deliver on that value and it's not just me blowing smoke.

(00:59:16):
And then the step after that then is this optional objection step where they say, "Oh yeah, sounds good, but IT is never going to go for it," or "Sounds good, but maybe it's going to be too expensive," or something. And so you're going to handle that objection as best as you can. And then you finish with the ask, which is whatever the next step in your sales process is. So it's, "Hey, so what we have to do to get a deal cooking here, do we have to get IT involved? Does IT need to see it? Would you like us to come in and present with you with IT or do you want me to just help you work on some stuff for IT?" It's whatever your next step in the sales process is.

Lenny (00:59:56):
Awesome. So let me read through this just to have it also succinctly here in case people are taking notes or trying to remember the stuff. So there's the setup, there's the follow through. Within the setup, you have the insight, the alternative approaches, pros and cons, in the perfect world. And then you introduce your product, talk about the differentiated value, share the proof of why it works, potentially handle objections, silent objections, and then the ask of what comes next.

April Dunford (01:00:21):
That's right. That's it.

Lenny (01:00:22):
In terms of knowing if this is working and if your differentiated value works or if your insight works, do you have kind of a heuristic of a success rate that feels right? How often should this work for you to feel like "I think we have it?"

April Dunford (01:00:34):
Well, so generally if the sales pitch isn't working, it's because the positioning was weak.

(01:00:41):
And so companies that jumped straight to building the new sales pitch without going back and really making sure that they really nailed the differentiated value, who knows? Maybe it works, maybe it doesn't. And a lot of times it doesn't, I think. And so in the work I do with my clients, we go all the way back to the beginning. So we go right back to let's work on the positioning first. Now, if I've got the smartest people from the company in the room and we've done enough deals that we are pretty knowledgeable about how customers buy and what they like and what they don't know. If I've got the senior executive team in the room and they've got a reasonable amount of customer experience, we can pretty much feel good that the positioning we come up with if we're following a process will be good.

(01:01:25):
Then it's just a matter of taking that positioning, mapping it to the sales pitch and then going to test it. So I think there's a bunch of things in testing that are really important. So one is we absolutely need sales involved in building the pitch. If we don't have sales involved in building the pitch, the pitch is never going to stick. The rule with sales reps is even if they don't like their current pitch, they're comfortable with the current pitch and they know it and they've memorized it and they have a little joke they tell on slide three. So they're not going to give up the current pitch without a fight. So you got to get sales management involved in building a new pitch, and then I would never just build the new pitch and then heave it over the wall and say, "Good luck, Chuck." Because what'll happen is they'll come up with all kinds of excuses why they can't use this pitch.

(01:02:07):
Instead, what you do is you take your best sales rep, your best one, and you bring your best sales rep over and you train them on the new pitch. They got to learn it, they got to pitch it to you, pitch it to the head of sales. We do a bunch of repetition on that, and then we have that rep test the pitch with qualified prospects. So we don't go to existing customers. They've already been polluted with the old positioning and the old pitch, and this needs to work with a qualified prospect, so let's do it in the way it was intended. We're going to take qualified prospects and work that new pitch with them. Usually what we'll do is a test period where after every pitch we'll huddle and say, "What worked? What didn't work? Maybe that word is tripping people up. Maybe we need to move this slide from here to here," and so we'll tune it.

(01:02:53):
And then after we've done a bunch of pitches, one of two things happens. And so in this test structure, I am very much relying on the expertise of my best rep to know what's good. So after the best rep is comfortable with the pitch, done a bunch of pitches, re-twizzled it, at some point the rep will say, "Okay, I think we're done optimizing this pitch, and I'm not going back to the old pitch. I'm sticking with this pitch because I think this one works better." An experienced sales rep will know that, whether the pitch is better than the old pitch, if you give them the opportunity to feel comfortable with it, work with it a bit and pitch a bunch of new prospects with it.

(01:03:38):
So if your best sales rep says, "Oh, this is way better than the old pitch. I can just feel it from the way people react to it and the number of times we've been able to convert people over into actual opportunities from a first call." Then what you do is at that point I call that pass. So then we take that rep, we can film them doing the pitch for training, and then we can take that rep, go back to the rest of the sales team and have that rep sell everybody else on it. So that rep goes back and says, "Listen up people, you're stupid if you're using that old pitch, which sucks. This new pitch is way better. Trust me, I'm the best rep on this whole team. By the way here's the list of deals I have cooking in the pipeline that I got using this deck. You should go do it and I'm going to teach you how to do it."

(01:04:24):
Now I got sales, teaching sales, teach and sales instead of marketing, sort of throwing something over the wall and crossing their fingers and saying, "Hey, I hope this works." What we should see is an immediate uplift in what happens after first call. So most of the time what that is we get a higher percentage of deals converting into opportunities after that first substantive calls. Sometimes depending on the quality of the pipeline we had coming in, we're actually disqualifying more. But sometimes that's a good thing.

(01:04:54):
But what we should see is an immediate uptick. It's stuff coming into the pipeline. It's a neat trick to pull, especially right now when everybody's budgets are really tight and you're just trying to squeeze more juice out of the lemon. It's a really easy way to get some more juice out of the pipeline. Just go in, tighten up your positioning, tighten up that sales pitch. And we can have instant impact with that because we can roll that out in a couple of weeks and start getting better deals flowing through the pipeline because these customers are understanding your value better, understanding why to pick you better. It's just easy, low hanging fruit to do when the economy's bad.

Lenny (01:05:32):
To give people a sense of maybe how easy that might be, how long would you suggest people spend on maybe tweaking their positioning and then also on this pilot, how much total time could it take to potentially significantly increase sales?

April Dunford (01:05:45):
So in the customers that I work with, when we do the positioning stuff, the positioning stuff takes a week. We're beginning and we're done in a week. We're all about speed on this thing. We're trying to get the thing happening fast. So we're in and out on the positioning in a week. It might take you, it depends on the company, the bigger the company, the slower this is, but some big companies are actually quite fast, and if you're motivated, it shouldn't take long for us to take that pitch and make it real.

(01:06:11):
Then we got to find a rep, train the rep, and then how long it takes us to test it really depends on how much deal flow you've got. So if you're working on monster deals and you don't actually get that many qualified prospects to pitch, that might take a few weeks. But if you've got a lot of prospects coming through the door, and you can get through this fairly quickly. So I've had companies do it start to finish. We got new pitch out the door and people using it in two weeks. That's about as fast as you can get it done. Most folks, I would say take about a month.

Lenny (01:06:39):
Cool. That is a very short-

April Dunford (01:06:40):
Sometimes you're like IBM and who knows when you get to it, right? But most folks could get through it if everybody's motivated, we can get it out and have it running a month.

Lenny (01:06:50):
You mentioned marketing and earlier you said that marketing is involved in this process in some way. What's your advice to just how to involve marketing, where they fit in?

April Dunford (01:06:58):
Yeah, so usually marketing is going to end up being the stewards of the positioning once the positioning is done. So they're going to end up being positioning police after this because a lot of the positioning stuff is going to take the form of marketing things. So they're invested in this. So when I was the VP marketing, I was the person that would instigate the positioning thing, let's get everybody together and work on the positioning. And then I would usually be the person that is driving, getting the sales pitch figured out, but it's me and sales and product working together. And then once the sales pitch is done, depending on the size of the organization and whether or not you have sales enablement or somebody inside sales that can babysit the pitch. Usually me and the head of sales would work on, "Okay, this is the pitch and this is locked down and we're not actually going to change this pitch until something happens that requires us to change the positioning. And then that's when we'll re-look at the pitch."

(01:07:55):
So we would look at recertifying the reps every quarter on the pitch and all that kind of stuff. And that would be generally, me in partnership with the head of sales. But it depends on how you do it. I don't think it really matters who owns it. If you have a good product marketing organization, good product marketing organization generally is very concerned with the positioning and the pitch, and those two things sit in their purview, but depends on how you define it. I can't wait till you get Airbnb. Tell us how this stuff works. They're different because they're a consumer, but companies are arranged in all different ways. So if you have product marketing, it looks one way. If you don't, it looks another way. Somebody's got to kind of be the owner of this thing though. And so we have to decide who that's going to be.

Lenny (01:08:38):
Just a couple more questions. One is to motivate people to do this. What kind of impact have you seen at companies that invest this time and rethink the way they pitch?

April Dunford (01:08:49):
Well, so people don't like me to talk about revenue stuff. Hugely what we've seen though is again, the immediate impact is felted sales, and everybody's very jazzed about that.

April Dunford (01:09:00):
Impact is felt in sales, and everybody's very jazzed about that. Because sometimes what the worry is, is we've got this old positioning and they came in through the pipeline that way. So they were exposed to our marketing somewhere with this old positioning, and then we hit them with the new positioning with this sales pitch. And aren't they going to be all like, "Oh, you moved my cheese." And usually it ends up not being a problem at all. So usually what we see immediately is an uptick in what's happening in sales. And so I've had a couple of companies tell me they've doubled the number of deals that they're bringing from first sales call to opportunity just by tightening up the pitch and getting that going. I think that's not unusual. I worked at a company where we did it in-house where I was the VP marketing, and we, within two quarters, had doubled the revenue just by tightening up the pitch. Just tighten it up.

Lenny (01:09:53):
Holy shit. All right.

April Dunford (01:09:54):
Tighten it up.

Lenny (01:09:54):
No big deal.

April Dunford (01:09:54):
Yep.

Lenny (01:09:54):
Okay. So-

April Dunford (01:09:56):
It was a big shift in positioning, I'll tell you that. Not small. Most of the time, we're not doing that. Most of the time, it's a tightening. We're not saying, "Oh, we used to be this and now we're this." Most of the time, it's a tightening, but usually the pitches are so bad. I'm telling you they're so bad that there's this low hanging fruit there that if we could improve it even a little bit, it actually has this big impact on how much stuff survives down the pipe.

Lenny (01:10:25):
And again, if folks want to go deep into the positioning step, your first book Obviously Awesome, is a great guide, and our first podcast episode goes through this. Plus you have a guest post in my newsletter where you give them a quick start guide. So there's so many tools to help you through this process.

April Dunford (01:10:38):
So many tools.

Lenny (01:10:39):
The other thought I've had in the back of my mind as we've been chatting is a previous guest, Andy Raskin, has a different framework, feels similar, but I know they're different. His framework starts with a shift that's happened in the world, and then here's who's going to win in the shift, here's who's going to lose. And then he goes into why this product is the best. What's your perspective on that approach versus this approach and the big differences?

April Dunford (01:11:01):
So the thing with that framework is I do think it works in certain conditions, but again, I think the conditions might be kind of edgy. So there's a couple of things that I think are lacking in that structure for a sales pitch. So the first one is there's actually no concept of differentiated value in that pitch, which for me is a giant miss. So in that pitch, it assumes that new is inherently valuable and old is inherently bad, and sometimes that's true. So sometimes there's just you versus the status quo and the status quo is some terrible old thing, some legacy thing or it's manual processes or something, and you're the only thing out there, then you can get away with that. But most of the time, we don't have that. Most of the time, there's multiple new ways of doing something and you just can't say, "Well, I'm the only new and the rest of you are old and bad."

(01:11:55):
So usually I've got to thread the needle. And so that's the first thing. The second thing is that for most companies, if we really understood customer and decision, old is good, it's safe, it's not risky. And does anybody ever say, "No, I'm not going to buy Salesforce. That's the old stuff,"? I just don't think that happens. So in a lot of cases, I don't think you can rely, it's lazy to say, "Buy this because it's new and new is better." Most of the time, the customers are going to want to know, well, what's better about it? Tell me what the value is that I can't get anywhere else. And you're going to have to get more specific than just saying, "Trust me, it's new and new is good." So that's the first thing. The second thing is this idea of starting with a trend. On the surface it looks kind of good, but the problem is often the trend is not unique to you. So everybody else sees the trend too. And so you are starting in a way that any of your competitors could start the same way.

(01:12:59):
I did this for years where I was taught to do problem solution. We would define the problem like a trend. We'd say, "Well, the change in the world." I was selling databases and I'd say, "Change in the world, data is exponentially growing." It's like, no shit. We all know that. All of my competitors could say that, and all of my competitors deal with the trend in the same way. So unless you have a particularly unique take on the trend, well, then it's not the trend at all really, is it? It's your insight into the trend. So I don't think trend is that great because it's not always unique to you. And ideally what we want is something that we can say that none of our competitors can. And typically a trend is something outside of our control. It's out in the world and everybody else can see it too.

(01:13:47):
So I don't think it's great. I think that structure looks a lot like the structure we use in a VC pitch or an investor pitch because we're talking about much longer timelines and we can say, "Look, the world is really changing and 10 years from now there's going to be chaos and destruction and the only one standing is us and therefore there is no competition." And because the timeframes are longer and we're talking about disruption of an entire market, which is pretty theoretical, we can get away with a lot of that stuff in investor pitch. In fact, we want to go there in investor pitch. Sales pitch is all about right now. Sales pitch is like, okay, I'm going to exchange my money for right now. You can't get too far into the future. Otherwise, all I'm doing is giving everybody a reason to delay, which they're likely to do anyway because they're indecisive about what they should do.

Lenny (01:14:39):
I feel like I need a debate version of this podcast where people come on and-

April Dunford (01:14:43):
I know, but here's the thing that I think people should think about when they're looking at all this stuff because it's terribly confusing if you're trying to figure this out. The one thing I really dislike about the category creation folks is they say that's the only way that you can be successful. And in general, that's just not true about anything. There's lots of ways to do everything. And so I think people should mess around with stuff. And for any of these frameworks, I think they should look at it and see if it works for them and their situation. And maybe it does, maybe it doesn't.

(01:15:16):
And I think they should steal things from wherever they can steal it and figure out what works in their own situation. My stuff, I like to think is a starting point, folks should use it as a starting point, but people shouldn't be slaves to it. There are lots of things that work at a market, and I think the only thing that we know for certain is that we can't say, "Well, this is the rule and it always works like this." If it was that easy, again, this wouldn't be so hard. We wouldn't have podcasts and newsletters and all kinds of things trying to figure this stuff out.

Lenny (01:15:49):
Extremely true. Well, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

April Dunford (01:15:54):
Oh yeah. Lightning round. Oh gosh. It gives me stress. Okay.

Lenny (01:15:58):
Okay, question number one. What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

April Dunford (01:16:04):
Well, that's an easy question. So right now I'm really into Matt Dixon's work right now, which we've mentioned him a couple of times on the podcast, but Matt Dixon's new book called The JOLT Effect is really great just because there's all this data and the things that he discovered with that data, a lot of it go against what we would consider accepted sales wisdom. And so I think that book is full of juicy nuggets and everybody should look at it. His previous book, The Challenger Sale, and there was a companion book to that called The Challenger Customer. Those were also excellent and based on a deep set of research. And those books are older now, but what we see in The JOLT Effect is all the stuff holds true. All the stuff from The Challenger Sale has not changed in 10 years. So I think those books together are really cool.

(01:16:54):
The other one that I always recommend is the original book on positioning, which is the book by Ries and Trout Positioning: The Battle for Your Mind. I have my copy of it, is dogeared. I probably read that book 100 times and I still see stuff in that book that I didn't see before. So I think if you really want to go deep on this positioning stuff, my book is the how to book. Their book is what is it in the first place book. And I think everybody that's interested in positioning should go read that.

Lenny (01:17:19):
Amazing. By the way, I have your first book somewhere behind me there. I don't know where it is, but it's there.

April Dunford (01:17:23):
I got mine right here so I can do this gag. There it is.

Lenny (01:17:23):
Nailed it.

April Dunford (01:17:27):
There's the new one, there's the old one.

Lenny (01:17:27):
The YouTube audience can see that trick that you've learned. Second question, what is a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

April Dunford (01:17:36):
Oh man, I'm going to get in trouble for this. So you know Bong Joon-ho is the guy that did the movie Parasite?

Lenny (01:17:47):
Yeah.

April Dunford (01:17:47):
So [inaudible 01:17:48] before Parasite, there was this book called, this movie called Snow Piercer. It's really old. I think it came out in-

Lenny (01:17:54):
I've seen that. Is that with the train?

April Dunford (01:17:54):
2013. Have you seen it?

Lenny (01:17:54):
Yeah.

April Dunford (01:17:57):
So I love this movie so much. So recently I went on a train trip with my dad and before I went to the train trip, we got talking about trains. And then we all had to go watch Snow Piercer again. Like me and my daughter watching Snow Piercer. We're really into this movie. And it's funny, when it came out, I was working at a startup and the CEO came and said, "Seen any good movies lately?" And I was like, "Oh man, you got to see this movie Snow Piercer." And he went on a first date with a woman and he came back the next day and he was so mad. He was not just kind of mad. He was really mad at me. He was like, "That was the worst movie I've ever seen." I was like, "Dude, you should have told me you were going on a date. I didn't know."

Lenny (01:18:40):
Yeah, that is my experience with that movie. I did not enjoy it, but I think you have to go into it [inaudible 01:18:46]

April Dunford (01:18:46):
It's polarizing. You either think it's amazing or you're like, that was terrible. What did I just watch?

Lenny (01:18:52):
This explains your taste in movies. We learned a lot about you, April. That movie is something else.

April Dunford (01:19:00):
Did you see Parasite? That was amazing.

Lenny (01:19:02):
That was amazing. Very different. Not what I imagined. I didn't realize it was the same person.

April Dunford (01:19:06):
Oh yeah.

Lenny (01:19:08):
All right. Okay, cool. That's two movies for people to watch. I'm curious how people think of Snow Piercer.

April Dunford (01:19:13):
Be warned don't go on a date with this.

Lenny (01:19:16):
Oh man, I still think about that movie sometimes. Next question, what is a favorite interview question you like to ask people that you're interviewing? Usually this is for when you're hiring, so whatever this comes up for you.

April Dunford (01:19:28):
So back when I was running teams internally back in my VP marketing days, I felt like a lot of marketing folks came with a certain amount of bad habits, particularly startup marketing folks. It's a bit of the wild west in marketing. And so sometimes they'd come in and you get into somebody new and they'd be really smart, but they learned something at the previous company that you're like, please never do that here. It's not going to work here. And so I developed a thing where I was just looking for attitude. Were you enthusiastic? Are you super into what we're doing here? And I can teach you pretty much anything. The only thing I can't teach you is persuasive writing. And I think that's a learnable skill. I think people can learn how to do persuasive writing.

(01:20:12):
I just don't have time to teach it to you myself. And so I used to give people a writing test, so I'd say, "Look, think of something you bought recently and write me two paragraphs and just sell me on it." And I used to love that test because people could either do it or they can't. And there's just so much stuff we end up doing in product marketing and marketing that involves a little bit of writing that it's kind of a foundational skill. And if you don't have that, that was the one thing I couldn't teach you.

Lenny (01:20:42):
Wow, that is fascinating. I've never heard of that as an interview question. And I love it. I feel like product managers-

April Dunford (01:20:47):
I stole it from a company that made me do it before I got hired, and I was like, this is a really smart thing. I'm [inaudible 01:20:53] stealing it. My thing was I got anxiety and I couldn't decide what product to write about, and I had literally just bought a new pair of running shoes. So I wrote two paragraphs about my new Brooks distance running shoes. But it was good. I got the job.

Lenny (01:21:09):
It is an excellent segue to our next question, which is, is there a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really like?

April Dunford (01:21:15):
Right now I'm kind of into, I don't even know how to describe this category of things, but things that are kind of low tech but are awesome. And so one of the category of things that I really love right now is I'm really into fountain pens. I don't know if you've ever written with a fountain pen. [inaudible 01:21:35]

Lenny (01:21:35):
I haven't, but I know what they are.

April Dunford (01:21:36):
And so there's this company, Lamy, they're based in Germany, and they make the world's greatest fountain pens. They're beautiful, they're amazing. Some of them are really expensive. If you want to spend a lot of money on a pen, you can. But they have this one called the AL-Star, which is not an expensive pen. It's 20, $30. It may be expensive for a pen, but it's not so much money that you wouldn't feel bad if you lost it. So Lamy AL-Star. That's my great product lately. I don't have one right here. I should, it'd be a great prop to pick it up, but I actually don't have my bag here and it's in my bag. But Lamy AL-Star. You Google it. These are beautiful pens. And then if you haven't written with a fountain pen, it takes a minute to get used to it, but then it's like, gosh, it just feels great. You'll never write with a ballpoint pen again.

Lenny (01:22:22):
I was going to ask, is it the feel of the writing that you really enjoy about it?

April Dunford (01:22:25):
Feel. Totally different. Yeah. Amazing.

Lenny (01:22:29):
I use Muji pens. I don't know if you know these pens.

April Dunford (01:22:31):
Oh yeah, these are actually really good. They're like roller ball pens, roller ball pen, very good, but not as good as the fountain pen.

Lenny (01:22:31):
It's no fountain pen.

April Dunford (01:22:38):
The Muji pen is pretty good.

Lenny (01:22:39):
Then do you have to dip it in ink and stuff? How does that work?

April Dunford (01:22:41):
No. You actually, they either come with a little cartridge that you stick in or if you feel bad about the environment, you don't want to be throwing out cartridges all the time, there's a refillable cartridge, so you basically just stick another thing and it sucks it up and yeah, you don't dip it in ink. That would be crazy. I can't take that on the airplane, man.

Lenny (01:22:58):
Confiscate your ink. All right, questions get a little more challenging potentially or really easy. Do you have a favorite life motto that you like to repeat to yourself, you like to share with people, that you find useful to come back to?

April Dunford (01:23:11):
My thing lately is, and maybe this is just an old person thing, but my thing lately is nothing's a big deal. Nothing's a big deal, nothing's a big deal. And so you'll have stuff that you think is a really big deal, positive or negative, and you'll be like, wow, if this thing happened, it'd be so great, and then it happens and you're like, yeah, it's pretty great, but things are good otherwise, or it'll be the opposite. Like, oh, if this thing happened, it'd be so bad. Then it happens and you're like, that wasn't that bad. And so I don't know if this is good or bad, but lately I'm in this zone of I'm in this kind of chill zone where I'm like, nothing's a big deal, man. Everything's cool.

Lenny (01:23:56):
That super resonates. And as much as you say that to yourself, it's still hard to convince yourself of that sometimes. But that is a really good motto. I'm going to steal that myself. I kind of say that to myself often in different way.

April Dunford (01:24:08):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:24:10):
What is the most valuable lesson your mom or your dad taught you?

April Dunford (01:24:15):
Yeah, it is funny because it's a little bit related to that. So my dad ran a business, so I grew up in a really small town and my dad and it's cottage country in Canada. And so my dad ran the local toys for tourists, like boats and motorcycles and ATVs and that sort of thing. And he ran that business for years and years and he sold it a few years back when he retired. But it's a neat thing to grow up in entrepreneurial family because you kind of see this highs and lows. The business is really good. Then the business was really bad and then we were all broke and then the business was good and we were not broke. So there was this thing, and my dad used to always kind of have this attitude of you just got to grind it out.

(01:25:01):
You're just going to grind it out. There's going to be good stuff, there's going to be bad stuff, but the key is to just keep going, just keep going. And so he ran that business for whatever, 30, 40 years. I don't know. His motto is the home of fun since '71. So he started it in '71. I think he sold it three, four years ago. So a long time.

Lenny (01:25:21):
Wow.

April Dunford (01:25:22):
It all worked out good in the end. And so I don't know, I think there's something cool about growing up in a family where you can see the highs and lows and then again be like everything's we're just grinding it out over here. Nothing's a big deal.

Lenny (01:25:34):
It's clear where all that comes from now.

April Dunford (01:25:37):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:25:37):
Final question. You do a lot of traveling, you do a lot of speaking, you go to a bunch of cities. I'm curious just what is your favorite either city that you go to that maybe people may not know about or venue that you speak at?

April Dunford (01:25:49):
It's such a cliche, but I love Paris. I just love it. But for me, Paris is like a particular vibe. So when I was in university, I did an exchange when I was in engineering and I did third year engineering at a school just outside of Paris. And so I spent the whole year there, learned a bit of French. My French was pretty good at the end. My French is really bad now. So I kind of get Paris. I like Paris. And so when I go to Paris, I just have the best time. I have my set of restaurants I want to go to. I have my handful of places I want to go shopping. I put my butt down in a cafe, look at the beautiful people, drink my nice coffee. I just really dig the whole vibe of Paris and people are starting to know that now. So French companies will call me and they'll say, "Do we get a Paris discount? We hear you like coming here." And I go, "Okay."

Lenny (01:26:50):
Now this is going to [inaudible 01:26:51]

April Dunford (01:26:51):
There's a great product management conference there called La Product Conference run by these folks at Tega, shout out to Tega. So I've been there a number of times for their conferences and they do an amazing job and the venue is really great. It changes around. But last year, the last time I went there, which was two years ago, it was at an old theater in [inaudible 01:27:13]. Absolutely beautiful. And that was a pretty great venue in a great city with a great conference. So yeah, shout out to French people.

Lenny (01:27:22):
Oh man. That sounds dreamy. Paris. I see how that could be a favorite. April, I think we accomplished everything we were hoping to accomplish. I think everyone that has listened to this podcast is going to be better at pitching and selling. It feels like even if they take one element of this framework, say starting with an insight or focusing on different value will make them better. And so I'm proud of us. Thank you so much for doing this. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and how can listeners be useful to you?

April Dunford (01:27:50):
So where can people find me? I'm aprildunford.com. The only social media I'm doing these days is LinkedIn. I'm a bit social media-ed out. I'm experimenting a little on threads and Instagram, but LinkedIn is a good place to find me if you just want low lift way to follow my stuff. But I'm doing all the things now, Lenny, I got a podcast, it's called Positioning with April Dunford. I got a newsletter that's also called Positioning. You can find that if you go to, it's on Substacks, you can find it there, otherwise aprildunford.com/books and you can sign up there. But those are the big things. And then there's the books, obviously, if you want to learn more about this stuff. Everything I know is in the book. There isn't stuff that I know that isn't in the book to be honest.

Lenny (01:28:34):
Amazing. And then how can listeners be useful to you? Just check out those things.

April Dunford (01:28:37):
I guess so. You know what? I'm in this phase. I think, again, I think it's an old age thing. I am in this kind of philosophical phase where I'm not going to be doing this forever. And what I'm trying to do right now is get everything that's useful out of my head and out in the world before I'm done. And so right now I'm very focused on delivering useful things for other people. I didn't think I needed to write a book about sales pitches, but then I got the idea in my head, everybody's sales pitch is so bad and there isn't a book on how to build a sales pitch. And I'm not saying mine's the world's greatest thing, but it's better than nothing. So this is what I'm trying to do right now. I'm trying to be useful to other people because pretty soon I'm not going to be doing anything, I think is the idea.

Lenny (01:29:29):
Arnold Schwarzenegger's new book is called Be Useful. And I feel like that's the perfect description of how to be successful and especially in the work that we do, just helping people. But I keep coming back to that. It's just be useful.

April Dunford (01:29:41):
I think this is a really important thing. When I wrote the first book, people started writing back to me and saying, "Oh, your book was so great." And my reflex action was to say, "Oh, I'm glad you enjoyed it." But then I stumped myself and I was like, you know what? I don't actually care if you enjoyed it. This isn't entertainment. I'm actually trying to create something that's useful. So what I really want is for people to read this stuff and come back and say, "That was useful. We were struggling with this thing, and that unlocked something for me and that was useful." And that's what I'm trying to do right now.

Lenny (01:30:11):
April, thank you so much for being here. This was amazing.

April Dunford (01:30:14):
Thanks so much. It's always good to be here.

Lenny (01:30:17):
Always good to have you here. And we might do a V3 when you do a third book if you ever-

April Dunford (01:30:21):
No, not happening.

Lenny (01:30:25):
Okay. All right. Well, bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny (00:00:04):
If your product isn't doing well, there's a chance that it may not be the product that's the problem, it may be your positioning. And there's no one I've learned more from about how to very practically and tactically think about your positioning than from April Dunford.

Lenny (00:00:17):
April is the best selling author of the book, Obviously Awesome, which many consider an industry bible on product positioning. She's also led teams at seven successful B2B startups, worked with over 200 companies, helping them nail their positioning, and has almost certainly done more positioning work than any human alive.

Lenny (00:00:34):
Also, April's guest post in my newsletter, A Quickstart Guide to Positioning is still one of the most popular posts of all time in my newsletter and one I share often with founders. I had a total blast speaking with April, and I hope you learn as much from this conversation as I did.

Lenny (00:00:52):
This episode is brought to you by Amplitude, the number one product analytics solution. Amplitude helps product teams, growth teams, marketing and data teams build winning products, faster and turn products into revenue.

Lenny (00:01:05):
Amplitude has everything you need, including an integrated CDP, self-service analytics and even an experimentation platform to help you better understand your users, drive conversions and increase engagement, growth, and revenue.

Lenny (00:01:18):
Amplitude is built for teams that want to learn as fast as they ship and ship as fast as they learn, ditch your vanity metrics, trust your data, work smarter and grow your business. With over 1,700 customers like Atlassian, Instacart and HBO, Amplitude is helping companies build better products. Try Amplitude for free. Visit amplitude.com to get started.

Lenny (00:01:40):
This episode is brought to you by Flatfile. Think of the last time you imported a spreadsheet. Did it work the first time? Chances are it did not. You probably got some weird error, had to try a bunch of things like removing the blank title rows above your column headers, or Googling how to save with UTF-8 encoding.

Lenny (00:01:56):
What even is UTF? Who cares? You're just trying to get your file where it needs to go so you can do your actual job. Your customers run into the same issues when it matters most, right after signing up for your product. Enter Flatfile.

Lenny (00:02:08):
Flatfile is the data onboarding platform built to take the acute pain out of importing customer data into your product so they can see the magic that you promised them. Flatfile is SOC type 1 and 2 certified, GDPR compliant, and even HIPAA complaint, ensuring your customers, no matter where in the world they're located are sharing their data securely and in compliance every step of the way.

Lenny (00:02:29):
No more emailing files back and forth, no more help articles that just don't land, just clean data on day one, when it matters most. Get started importing millions of rows of customer data in minutes at flatfile.com/lenny.

Lenny (00:02:50):
April, thank you so much for being here. You're a legend. I am humbled to chat with you and to learn from you, and honestly I am. And your guest post on-

April Dunford (00:03:00):
Lenny, you're the legend around here, not me.

Lenny (00:03:02):
No, no, no. Let's not-

April Dunford (00:03:02):
You're the guy. You're like Madonna. You're just a one-name guy now. You're Lenny, the Lenny.

Lenny (00:03:09):
I don't know what to do with that. I'm just going to move on. I appreciate it. Anyway, welcome to the podcast.

April Dunford (00:03:17):
So good to be here. Thanks for having me.

Lenny (00:03:19):
Of course. I was also going to say that your guest post on positioning on my newsletter is still in the top 20 most popular all-time posts. I keep coming back to it. People keep telling me how useful it is. I keep sending it to founders. And so I'm just excited to dive a lot deeper on this topic.

April Dunford (00:03:32):
Cool.

Lenny (00:03:33):
All right, let's do it. So for listeners who maybe aren't super familiar with your background and how you came to be such an expert on positioning, could you just briefly share your journey to what you do today?

April Dunford (00:03:44):
Yeah, sure. So my background is I didn't study marketing in school, I studied engineering. Straight out of engineering school, I got a job, a product marketing job at a startup. And I've been doing this a long time, so this was back when startups weren't even cool and we just called them small companies.

April Dunford (00:04:01):
So I got a job at a little company and then that company, I was assigned to a product that was kind of a loser and we weren't selling very much. We ended up repositioning it and the thing took off, it got hugely successful. That company got acquired, my boss quit and they made me the vice president of marketing. I still have no idea why. And then I decided, well, this is my jam, this is what I do now.

April Dunford (00:04:24):
And in particular, we had a handful of products there, the positioning also seemed kind of weak. And so I embarked on this journey of, hey, positioning seems to be really important because when we get it wrong, everything sucks, and when we get it right, we all make all kinds of money, so I should figure out how to do this properly.

April Dunford (00:04:43):
And so I read a bunch of books, took a bunch of courses and what I discovered is that positioning is this foundational marketing concept, but we didn't really have a methodology for doing it. And so from that point forward, I became a repeat vice president of marketing at a series of startups. So I think I did seven and six of those got acquired.

April Dunford (00:05:04):
So I repositioned a lot of products across that and positioning became my specialty. Basically, if you were looking for a vice president of marketing and I came into the interview, the reason you hired me is because your positioning was crappy and I could talk intelligently about how we were going to fix that.

April Dunford (00:05:21):
And then about five, six years ago, I decided I wanted to go do something different and so I made the switch to consulting and now that's all I do. So I basically do positioning. Even more specifically though, I really focused on, I only do tech companies. I only do B2B companies, because my background is all really B2B and I don't really get consumer.

April Dunford (00:05:43):
And mainly I work with startups. For the most part it's what I would call a growth stage startup, post series A, series B, but occasionally I do some really, really big companies that have weird positioning stuff going on, like they've acquired a bunch of things and they're trying to turn it into a business unit or something and there's no story around that. So that's how I got here.

Lenny (00:06:04):
Awesome. To set a little color, I guess, how many companies have you worked with at this point and helped with positioning?

April Dunford (00:06:10):
It's around 200-

Lenny (00:06:11):
Wow.

April Dunford (00:06:11):
... I think. I think, I suspect that I have done more positioning than anybody on the planet.

Lenny (00:06:18):
I was just going to say that.

April Dunford (00:06:19):
That's my suspicion. I certainly have positioned more B2B tech companies than anybody. I don't know how anybody's going to get me on that one.

Lenny (00:06:27):
I would not be surprised. Okay, so I'm excited to learn a lot from our conversation along those lines. I'm curious, what's the most interesting or unusual company that you've worked with around positioning and what happened there?

April Dunford (00:06:39):
The fun part about positioning is that when you do this kind of work, you get to dive into a market that maybe you haven't thought very much about. So it's like, I'm going to drop some names, but this week I'm working with Epic Games on a product that they have called Twinmotion, which is absolutely mind-blowing tech. You should look at it.

April Dunford (00:07:01):
I don't come from that world of doing three dimensional graphic stuff, and so it's fun to just do a big, deep dive on that and look at everything in the space and look at what's possible and what isn't possible there.

April Dunford (00:07:12):
And so I've done everything from stuff like that to I come from databases. And so I have a lot of companies doing deep data stuff and data analytics stuff, which I find really interesting and cool, but then occasionally you'll get one that makes you think about your life differently.

April Dunford (00:07:28):
I did one a year or so ago and the company's called Bluelight Analytics. And what they do is technology for helping certain kinds of dentistry instruments work better. And so I didn't really think much about what happens in the dentist office until I went to do this workshop.

April Dunford (00:07:47):
And then we spent the whole time talking about it's terrifying actually, half the stuff that a dentist does in your mouth is very likely to fail because the equipment is terrible and the way they actually do things like cure fillings is actually really terrible. And so sometimes I learn things in these workshops that I wish I didn't know. I'm a little bit scared going to the dentist now.

Lenny (00:08:07):
Oh man, sounds like they-

April Dunford (00:08:08):
Sorry to the Bluelight guys, but yeah.

Lenny (00:08:09):
I thought Bluelight was going to be like not getting exposed to blue light when you're trying to get asleep.

April Dunford (00:08:14):
No. No. I wish. That would make me not make me so scared of the dentist.

Lenny (00:08:21):
Also a problem. How do you know that you have a positioning problem and that you should focus on positioning?

April Dunford (00:08:26):
So this is a thing that people ask me this a lot. And I think what people want, and I want this too, what I wish we had was a metric that I could say, "Hey, when you start seeing this metric go in this direction, then you know the positioning is bad." But unfortunately, weak positioning gets you all the way across the pipeline.

April Dunford (00:08:47):
Weak positioning hurts you in the early stages of pipeline in that people don't really get what you are, so they're not responding to your marketing the way they should. And you'll get this sluggishness in the middle of your pipeline, particularly if you have sales people. The light doesn't come on until they've had three calls with the sales rep and then the light comes on.

April Dunford (00:09:06):
And then sometimes what you'll get is your sales team is actually really good at selling the stuff, but the positioning's wrong, so you close a lot of deals, but then people get using the product and they're like, "Wait a minute, this isn't the thing that I thought it was or it doesn't do what I expected it to do," and then they churn out on you.

April Dunford (00:09:20):
So all your metrics look bad and you can only tell they look bad by comparing them to your own metrics. And so it's really hard to measure if the positioning isn't working or not.

April Dunford (00:09:31):
Back when I used to be VP marketing, what I would do to assess this is I'd be the brand new VP of marketing, I'd come on board and I'd say, "Well, I'm just going to go hang out with sales for a bit." And you can really hear it in sales calls, particularly in an initial sales call with a client.

April Dunford (00:09:49):
And what you'll hear is things like the customer comes on, your sales rep comes on, and your sales rep's doing a great job pitching the product like, "Oh, we got this thing and it does this, that, and the other thing."

April Dunford (00:10:01):
And they'll get a certain way through the pitch and you can see the customer's just like, "Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Just back it up and pitch it to me again." That's probably the most common one I get is, "Huh? Could you just say that again? Could you just back up to the beginning and do that thing from the beginning?"

April Dunford (00:10:15):
So there's this confusion. Sometimes what you'll get is the even worse one is the customer thinks they know exactly what you are, but you ain't that. So you'll get people who say, "Yeah. Yeah. I get it, you're just like Salesforce." And you're like, "Oh actually, no, we're nothing like Salesforce. Sorry. No, that's it. Let me back up and start from the beginning."

April Dunford (00:10:34):
Or you'll get this and this one is actually terrible where people will say, "Well, I get it. I mean, I totally get it. I totally get what you do. I just don't get why anyone would pay for that. I can do that in a spreadsheet. I don't get it." So they think they get what you do, but they don't really understand the value.

April Dunford (00:10:50):
And so if you start hearing stuff like that in an initial sales call, those are usually good signs that the positioning is weak.

Lenny (00:10:58):
That is really helpful. Backing up a little bit, we jumped right in. I'm curious how you even describe positioning, what the heck is positioning? And broadly, just why is it important for people to think about?

April Dunford (00:11:08):
In my opinion, it's really misunderstood, which is funny because it's not a new concept. We've been talking about positioning since the '80s, but like a lot of things in marketing people have stretched the definition or there's different definitions, even among marketing people. If I had a dozen vice presidents of marketing together in a room and said, "Hey, define positioning," we'd get a dozen different definitions.

April Dunford (00:11:30):
But I think about it this way, positioning defines how your product is the best in the world, delivering some value that a well-defined set of companies care a lot about. So put another way, it encompasses a lot of things, it defines what are the alternatives to what you do? How are you different? What value can you deliver that no other product on the market can?

April Dunford (00:11:56):
And oh, by the way, who cares a lot about that value? So who is it that you're trying to target? And then it also encompasses the definition of your market category or what market is it that you intend to win.

Lenny (00:12:08):
That is such a succinct, simple way of thinking about it. Something that I've been thinking about is this isn't something just founders should care about. PMs on teams that are building a product should think about this, leaders, GMs of business units. This applies across the board, basically to any product, whether it's the entire company or just one feature.

April Dunford (00:12:24):
Well, this is one of the things that where I think people get into weak positioning. One of the things that happens in companies, and I see this a lot where the founder has an idea what the positioning is, but then you go to the marketing department and it's a little bit different, not a lot different, but a little bit different.

April Dunford (00:12:42):
And then you sit in on the sales pitch and that's a little bit different again. And then you walk over to the product team and they're thinking about it slightly differently. So I think a lot of weak positioning comes from the fact that we don't have perfect alignment across the team on all these piece parts of positioning.

April Dunford (00:13:00):
So in the work I do, and even back when I was a VP marketing, if we're going to fix this thing, we can't just have the marketing department or just the product managers sit down and cook up new positioning and then heave it over the wall to everybody else, it actually needs to be a group effort. It's a team sport.

April Dunford (00:13:19):
So if we're going to do positioning well and then actually have that positioning stick and get adopted the way we want it to across the company, if we're going to do a positioning exercise, ideally we've got marketing, product, sales, customer success, and anybody else we need from the executive team, particularly the CEO, together in a room when we're building it.

April Dunford (00:13:41):
So that we can all bring our expertise to the table, bring our understanding of what customers do and our product to the table, thrash around on it a little bit until we get agreement on it. And then now that we've all got agreement and alignment around it, then we can all go execute on it and we're all singing the same song.

Lenny (00:13:59):
That's so interesting. How often do you find that the problem is misalignment within the company versus just they don't actually have the right positioning and that's the problem?

April Dunford (00:14:07):
Well, a lot of times it's misalignment. I would say the majority of the time it's misalignment, because what it is a piece of the company has it right, but the other pieces don't. So I get one of two things are happening.

April Dunford (00:14:21):
So sometimes what I'll get is the founder comes to me and the founder says, "I know exactly how to tell this story. You put me in front of a customer, I crush it every time. I know how to position this thing. I know how to do whatever. But we've gotten big now and I got a brand new VP marketing and I got a brand new VP sales and I just hired somebody to do product and they don't understand it the way I understand it."

April Dunford (00:14:43):
"And when I listen in on a sales call, what I hear is all wrong, that it's not it. When I look at our marketing, what I see, that's not it. And I've tried to get everybody in alignment and I can't. And so I need you to come in here and facilitate a thing where we can all get in alignment." That happens a lot.

April Dunford (00:14:58):
The other one I get is kind of the opposite of that, where you've got a founder that used to run sales, used to do all the deals, used to do everything, had their arms around this market very tight at one point and then the company's grown, often very quickly. They've hired a bunch of very senior people to run pieces, but at the same time, the market itself has shifted a lot.

April Dunford (00:15:20):
And so I'll get approached then often by the head of product or the head of marketing that comes in and says, "I don't think we have this right. I think we're actually positioned for what the market used to be. And I'm having a hard time getting the founder, having their heads around it and everybody else on the team, because we're all coming at it with different information."

April Dunford (00:15:41):
And so sales sees what's happening in sales. Marketing sees what's happening in marketing. The founder's getting pulled into certain deals, but not all the deals. Product's seeing what's happening in the thing. And so again, there's pieces of it there, but we're not all in alignment and agreement. And so we got to get everybody together and then work through it.

Lenny (00:15:59):
What does it look like when you've nailed it, when you are maybe in a good place with positioning? And also just along those-

April Dunford (00:16:05):
Yeah-

Lenny (00:16:05):
Go for it. Go for it.

April Dunford (00:16:06):
... it's interesting because when it's working really well, it feels like magic and really great positioning feels obvious. You pitch it to people and they're like, "Well, of course that's it. What else could it be?"

April Dunford (00:16:22):
One of my favorite companies, this is a company I worked with a little bit a couple of years ago is Postman. You know these folks?

Lenny (00:16:28):
Mm-hmm.

April Dunford (00:16:28):
So they basically have an API platform, a platform for building and using APIs. And just how I described that right there is so simple, it's so simple, of course that's what it is. But it was not simple getting there and that's not the way they were always describing themselves. And if you run that back three years ago, that's not at all what you would have gotten as the pitch for Postman.

April Dunford (00:16:51):
But really, really great positioning just feels like it's so clear, it's so simple, of course that's what it is, of course, and of course we need one of those. If we're serious about APIs, why would we not have a platform for building and managing APIs? Of course we need that. And so it's hard to judge sometimes from the outside.

April Dunford (00:17:11):
The other thing is that positioning is somewhat like messaging in some ways in that it's not a static thing, it changes over time. Your product itself doesn't stay the same, the market doesn't stay the same, and so things will shift over time. And so you can have good positioning that suddenly becomes bad positioning and it's not great positioning anymore, or good positioning that goes sideways or whatever, then you got to come back.

April Dunford (00:17:36):
And so usually I think there's value in checking in on your positioning because it's really hard. Again, I don't have a measurement to say yes or no, the positioning's working. And so I think there's no harm in checking in on it, going through a process to walk through it and just check in and see, could it be better? Maybe we could tighten this up. Maybe this could be a lot better than it is right now, but we've never sat down and actually deliberately looked at it.

Lenny (00:18:03):
Just to make it even a little more concrete, what are just some examples of good positioning statements or just the positioned companies?

April Dunford (00:18:11):
So one thing is a lot of times people will send me a link to their homepage and they'll say, "What do you think? Is this positioning good or not?" And the problem with B2B tech companies is, well, unless I'm your buyer, I'm not the right person to ask.

April Dunford (00:18:26):
So you can have companies, people will say, "Well, I looked at the website and who knows what that is?" And it's like, well, it doesn't matter if I can understand what it is or not. If I'm selling a deeply technical thing to deeply technical buyers, it's okay if your grandmother doesn't understand what it is when they get there. What matters is, does it resonate for your buyers? And when they land there, do they go, "Oh yeah, I get what this is, and that seems like a thing I should have."

April Dunford (00:18:53):
And so a lot of the companies that I really love the positioning of, you would go and look at it and say, "I don't know, man, I'm not even sure I really understand what that is." If you didn't have anything to do with APIs and you didn't know what the fuck an API was, whatever, you might land on Postman's page and go, "I honestly don't get that." But that's okay, you're not a person building the APIs, so you don't have to understand it. That's all right.

April Dunford (00:19:18):
Particularly, I've worked a lot with companies doing deep AI stuff, deep, deep digital analytics and deep data stuff and you can't tell from looking at the website, whether it's working or not. The true test of whether the positioning's working or not is, if I'm sitting across from a qualified prospect and I tell the story, does the prospect get excited and want to buy something? That's the real test of it.

April Dunford (00:19:41):
Any other test I think is we're bringing our own baggage into it and saying ... I pick on these guys a little bit, but in Canada, there's a big startup conference, it's great, it's called Startupfest. It's in Montreal.

Lenny (00:19:51):
I've been to that.

April Dunford (00:19:52):
But every year they have this thing and it's called Pitch the Grannies. And you go in and you're a startup and you pitch the grandmothers and the grandmothers decide whether or not your pitch was any good. And this infuriates me because I'm like, "This is a terrible judge of pitching." Maybe if we're doing the VC pitch, in which case you're saying the VCs and the grandmothers are exactly the same, that's a little insulting.

April Dunford (00:20:16):
But certainly, if the pitch is a customer facing pitch, I don't care whether the grandmother understands it or not. Unless I happen to be building the thing for grandmas, I really don't think that matters at all, so yeah.

Lenny (00:20:28):
Hopefully no B2B startups are pitching to grandmas, don't think that would go well.

April Dunford (00:20:32):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:20:32):
Okay, so say that you're a PM or a founder that's ready to start figuring out their positioning for their product, what's the first thing that you do?

April Dunford (00:20:41):
So I've done a lot of thinking about how should we actually do positioning. And so a critical piece of positioning is your differentiated value, what's the value that you can deliver that no other company can deliver?

April Dunford (00:20:56):
And so how companies get this wrong a lot is they'll say, "Okay, well, we want to look at our positioning, so let's get everybody together." Or sometimes they'll say, "Let's just sit in the marketing department and think about the value."

April Dunford (00:21:07):
But sometimes folks will get a team together, they get a team together and then they'll say, "Okay, so why does everybody love our stuff?" And this is a terrible way to go about it because what you'll get is just a bunch of opinions and we don't really know how to measure is that good or not.

April Dunford (00:21:20):
So I actually think the first step in a good positioning exercise is to really understand, what do we have to position against? So put another way, it's like saying, what do I have to beat in order to win a deal? So in positioning work we call this competitive alternatives.

April Dunford (00:21:36):
Now how people mess up this first step is I say competitive alternatives and they think competition, so things that look exactly like me. But in B2B, we have two sets of competitors. We have status quo, which is whatever the company is doing to attempt to solve the problem right now, even if it's crappy and not great.

April Dunford (00:21:56):
And then there's if the company does decide they're going to buy something different, they usually make a short list, so it's whoever else lands on the short list. So I need to be able to put a stake in the ground and say, "I got to beat all that in order to win a deal."

April Dunford (00:22:10):
Now, most folks will discount the status quo, but they shouldn't because in B2B we lose about 40% of our deals to quote-unquote, "no decision," which actually means we lost to the spreadsheet, we lost to pen and paper, we lost to interns. And if we're not positioning well against that, we're never going to get the customer to come off of that.

April Dunford (00:22:31):
So I got to win against status quo, but I also have to win, if it's ... Most of the time, if it's B2B, you don't just buy the first thing you come across, you make a short list of alternatives and I got to win against those as well.

April Dunford (00:22:44):
So step number one, what am I positioning against? Once I have that stake in the ground, then I can start thinking about what makes us different. So the easiest way to do this is okay, this is what I have to position against, what have I got capabilities wise that the alternatives don't have?

April Dunford (00:23:01):
So feature, function, or even capabilities of the company, which could be pricing or professional services or other things that you've got, but also capabilities of the product. What have I got that the alternatives don't have? And I can make a giant list of these things.

April Dunford (00:23:15):
And then I can translate that stuff into value by going down the list and saying, "Okay, we have this great feature, so what? Why does a customer care about it? What is the value that feature enables?" And when I do that mapping over to value, what generally happens is I end up with two or three value buckets or value themes.

April Dunford (00:23:36):
And quite often those value buckets or value themes are different than what I would've gotten, if I got all the smart people in my company together and said, "Hey, why does everybody love our stuff?" When I do it this way, I'm ensured that those value themes are differentiated and not just things that are generally valuable, but any alternative could get it done, so why are we even talking about it? So in my mind, that's how we do it.

April Dunford (00:24:00):
Once I've got differentiated value, then I can start thinking about, well, look, I could sell this product to any company that has this problem, but not everybody cares about this value the same way. And so what are the characteristics of a target account that make them really, really care a lot about that value? If I do some deep thinking about that, that's going to be my definition of a really best fit customer.

April Dunford (00:24:22):
And then the last piece of positioning of course, is market category. And so again, a lot of people will just start with market category and then try to back up, which I think is crazy, because then we don't have any way to judge the goodness of a market category.

April Dunford (00:24:35):
But if I've got, look, this is the value only I can deliver, these are the kind of people that really care a lot about that value, if I start thinking about positioning as the context I position my product in, then the best market category is the context I position my product in such that this value is obvious to these people.

April Dunford (00:24:57):
This is my long-winded way of doing it, but this is the only way I know how to get positioning done.

Lenny (00:25:02):
So you just basically went through the steps and the bullet points of things you've got to figure out your position. Could you just briefly summarize that just for people to have that in their brain?

April Dunford (00:25:10):
Yeah. So it works like this. I start with competitive alternatives. What do I got to beat in order to win a deal, status quo, things on the short list. Once I've got that, then I can make a list of differentiated capabilities, what capabilities do I have that the alternatives do not? I can then translate those capabilities into value, the so what for the customer. And while I'm doing that, these things will theme out. So I'll end up with two, three value themes, value buckets.

April Dunford (00:25:37):
Once I have that, then I can ask myself the question, well, okay, what are the characteristics of a target account that make them care a lot about that value? So that next piece is best fit customers or target customers, who am I going after for this thing? And then the last bit's market category, so what's the context I position this thing in that makes my value obvious to the people I'm going after?

Lenny (00:25:59):
Super helpful. What if we pick a company either that you worked with or that's just out there and think through what they would do for each of these steps to make this super real?

April Dunford (00:26:09):
Sure. I'm going to do Help Scout because I like these guys.

Lenny (00:26:11):
Sounds good.

April Dunford (00:26:12):
And I was just talking to the CEO not too long ago. So Help Scout's a good example in that they're a startup. I would call them a growth stage startup. They're not super big, but they're not teeny-weeny either. And they're in what would appear to be a terrible market, which is they sell software for customer success. So their competitor's like Zendesk. There's actually a million companies in this space, but the gorilla in the market is Zendesk.

April Dunford (00:26:39):
And so if I put the stake in the ground and say, "Well, what do I got to replace?" Well, their customer's a lot of small, medium businesses, a lot of direct to consumer E-commerce businesses. And so they obviously have to beat Zendesk and the other folks that are out there, but sometimes they're replacing just email or even a rudimentary shared inbox. That's who they got to beat.

April Dunford (00:27:04):
And so when you look through what Help Scout has that's differentiating, they've got a whole bunch of features that are really around delivering really amazing service to the customer. So they do a shared inbox. They were the first ones to do a proper services-oriented shared inbox to make sure that nobody gets missed and the right people get assigned to the right thing and you don't get conflicts.

April Dunford (00:27:27):
But they do a lot of other things like their whole philosophy about how they treat a customer in the service process is really different from Zendesk. So you get assigned a ticket number, you get assigned a person and things like that. And so they do all the neat, integrated things like they'll do a chat bot thing, but it only appears when there's an actual person to chat with you. They don't try to pretend they're a machine, things like that. So they want to guarantee a really high level of service.

April Dunford (00:27:52):
So when you map that to value, the value is one, I'm delivering this extra amazing service for customers. I'm not trying to push customers to a low cost channel. I'm treating them like a person. So their value is really around delivering amazing customer service that's going to deepen your relationship with the customer. That's the value.

April Dunford (00:28:15):
And then you say, "Well, who cares a lot about that?" Well, not everybody. So there are businesses out there, I would argue maybe your phone company doesn't really care. They have a giant call center and all they care about is reducing the cost in their call center and driving you to low cost channels.

April Dunford (00:28:33):
They don't actually see customer service as a way to build a relationship with you versus a lot of direct to consumer brands or E-commerce brands. This is almost the only way that they can interact with their customer. So they actually see customer service as a way to really drive growth through customer loyalty. And so those are the kind of companies that are a really good fit for Help Scout.

April Dunford (00:28:57):
So I go through that process, that's my positioning. Then the next thing you got to do is okay, now that I understand all that, how do I weave a story around that? So how do I tell the story about that, if a customer comes to me? And so what we want to do with our positioning is turn it into a sales narrative that clicks with the kind of customers we know we can sell to.

April Dunford (00:29:19):
So the way Help Scout delivers the story, if you come in, you're a qualified prospect, it starts with this idea that customer success is a growth driver. Modern E-commerce companies see customer success as a way to deepen customer relationships, increase repeat buying, show it as a growth driver. And they have a bunch of great stats that prove that this is true.

April Dunford (00:29:40):
And then they go look at all your other alternatives. All your other alternatives treat your people like a number. They give them a number. They try to drive them to low cost channels. They try to do these things. They are not treating this like a growth driver, they're treating it like a cost center.

April Dunford (00:29:57):
And so being able to tell that story that takes your differentiated value and puts it into context is the way all this stuff comes together and the rubber meets the road. So I don't know if that's a good example.

Lenny (00:30:07):
Oh, that's an amazing example. That makes it so real. Is the output of this process a doc with these bullet points, plus this story that you train sales on? Or how does that look?

April Dunford (00:30:18):
Yeah. So we do two things in the workshops that I do. So first we get the gang together. So I want representation from sales, marketing, product, customer success, CEO, everybody in the room together. And then we're going to work through the five piece parts.

April Dunford (00:30:33):
So once we've got, here's what we compete with, here's how we're different, this is the value we can deliver no one else can, these are the kind of people that really love our stuff, so here's who we're going after, this is the market we're going to win, then we can document that in a document.

April Dunford (00:30:46):
And for the marketing people, that's a good starting place to then go and build messaging because we've got an idea what our value props are. But if we end there and we just stop there, then what usually happens is the rest of the team goes back to normal and they go, "Yeah, we did this thing." And conceptually they get it, but they don't know how to tell a story. It's super important in sales because if sales can't tell the story, they can't pitch it, if they can't pitch it, they're going to make shit up.

April Dunford (00:31:12):
And so what we want to do then is, okay, we've got this positioning, now let's put it together into a sales narrative that we can then take and test with qualified prospects and make sure it works, but we've also got something that the sales team can pitch and oh, by the way, everybody else knows how to tell the story too. So product knows how to tell the story, customer success knows how to tell the story, CEO knows how to tell the story.

April Dunford (00:31:35):
So the last thing we do is we map this positioning to a sales narrative. So what we do in the workshop is we storyboard it out. And then after the workshop is done, the team's going, usually it's marketing and sales together, they take that storyboard and then turn it into an actual pitch, which is like a deck, a demo, a script. And then they can use that to test the positioning as well.

Lenny (00:31:57):
This episode is brought to you by Productboard. Product leaders trust Productboard to help their teams build product that matter. From startups to industry titans, over 6,000 companies rely on Productboard to get the right products to market faster, including companies like Zoom, Volkswagen, UiPath, and Vanguard.

Lenny (00:32:14):
Productboard can help you create a scalable, transparent and standardized process so your PMs understand what their customers really need and then prioritize the right features to build next.

Lenny (00:32:25):
Stakeholders feel the love too with an easy to view roadmap that automatically updates so everyone knows what you're building and why, make data driven product decisions that result in higher revenue and user adoption, and empower your product teams to create delightful customer experiences. Visit productboard.com to learn more.

Lenny (00:32:44):
Got it. So the output ends up being an actual pitch or a story they tell on sales calls, forms the way they marketing position or talks about the company. There's two questions I want to ask. I want to make sure I don't forget.

Lenny (00:32:55):
One is about messaging versus positioning. But maybe before that, it's interesting that positioning starts with focusing on your differentiator. Is that essential for a company to always figure out a differentiator and be different? Or are there examples where maybe you don't need to focus on that?

April Dunford (00:33:08):
Well, what you want to do is you want to take a customer's viewpoint on this, right? So let's think about how customers buy. We don't talk about this a lot, but let's think about how customers buy. Typical B2B buying process, this is what it looks like.

April Dunford (00:33:22):
Somebody, VP sales wakes up in the morning and says, "You know what sucks? The way we track our pipeline sucks. It's stupid. I can't deal with this anymore. We need to get a tool in here. We should have a CRM, man." And they go to the office and they don't actually go look for the new tool. They find some sucker in the office like John, you, get out there, manager of sales ops or whatever, find us a CRM.

April Dunford (00:33:45):
And John's panicked. John's like, "Oh my God, you're kidding me." Maybe John's used some CRMs, but he's not an expert on the CRM market. He doesn't know what's possible and what isn't possible. So John's like, "Oh God, I don't even know." And then he Googles and what does he get? A fire hose of information.

April Dunford (00:34:04):
He goes on a G2 Crowd and Software Advice and all these places. There's 9,000 companies listed, they're all in the top ranked quadrant. There's like a thousand of them. Some of them are for big companies. Some of them are small companies. I have no idea how to make a short list, freaking out.

April Dunford (00:34:17):
And so somehow they figure out how to make a short list and that person has got to justify this choice to their boss, so there better be something there. I'm not allowed to just throw the dart at it. I'm not allowed to just go back to my VP and say, "I just like the rep better, man. They're all the same. I picked this one by spinning the wheel." No, you got to go back and tell your boss why you made a smart choice.

April Dunford (00:34:43):
And so we have to be able to give customers that when they get on the sales call with us. The best thing we could do is say, "Look, buddy, there's lots of CRMs out there, and let me tell you how this market shakes out. These ones are really good for big enterprises. These ones are really good, if you got this. These ones are really good, if you got this. But look, if you're this, this and this, you really need these four things and we got that and that's why you should pick us."

April Dunford (00:35:08):
Because we need to make that customer feel comfortable they've made a good decision. Otherwise, what happens? No decision, that's what happens. If they can't figure that out, they go back to the boss and say, "You know what? All the CRMs are shit. We should just keep using the spreadsheet. It's fine. Let's just allay this." And 40% of the time that's what happened.

April Dunford (00:35:26):
So if you can't help the customer figure out how to justify this decision and make this decision and basically come back and say, "I decided this was the right approach to the problem and I picked this one for this reason," then you're not going to get the deal and nobody's going to get the deal.

Lenny (00:35:41):
And in your experience, the fact that here's why it's different from maybe the incumbents or other options ends up being really important? Basically, it's really hard to win by just saying we're better, say better than Slack or better than Zoom. It needs to be-

April Dunford (00:35:58):
But better how? You got to be able to articulate better. So sometimes it's like they have more bells and whistles, but we're simpler and you don't actually need all those bells and whistles. So we're better because we're easier at it, less training, easier to get stood up, whatever.

April Dunford (00:36:10):
Or you might say the opposite of that, we have all the bells and whistles. It's super customizable. You could do whatever you want. Those other things are Mickey Mouse play things. You're a big mature company, you need all the bells and whistles. We're better.

Lenny (00:36:21):
Great.

April Dunford (00:36:22):
And so that better has two pieces to it, what's the value and who cares about that value? Because better means something different to different segments in the market. So better for a small company is not the same thing as better for a large enterprise.

April Dunford (00:36:36):
Your trick in the positioning is to be able to articulate, why are we the best kind of solution for this particular type of customer? That's it. And if you could nail that, then you sell lots of stuff, you beat the other guys, you win deals all the time.

Lenny (00:36:51):
I love that. That's going to be our soundbite from this episode maybe.

April Dunford (00:36:54):
Oh great.

Lenny (00:36:55):
There it is. I want to go back to the messaging versus positioning. What's the difference between those two concepts?

April Dunford (00:37:02):
So they get confused a lot and a lot of people will say, "Well, I don't like our messaging. So can you come in and help do messaging?" I think they're really distinct because I see positioning as a fundamental input to messaging.

April Dunford (00:37:18):
Most of the time when people say messaging, what they mean is this is the text on the homepage, which is really different from what is my definition of competitive alternative? How do we win in the market? Where do we win in the market? So positioning's all about defining that and then things flow out of that. So I can't write the messaging until I understand, well, who's the message for, and what's our value against who? And so once I understand all of that, then I can understand how to write messaging.

April Dunford (00:37:46):
A lot of people get confused between positioning and branding as well. And folks will sometimes use those words interchangeably or they'll talk about brand positioning, which really bugs me. I mean, there's positioning and there's branding, those two things are different.

April Dunford (00:38:00):
But if I was going to work on branding, again, I can't figure out what I want the brand to stand for until I understand, well, who's my target buyer and what's my differentiation from the other alternatives in the market because I want that brand to be distinct.

April Dunford (00:38:17):
So I need to have positioning figured out first and then practically everything I do in marketing and sales flows downstream from that.

Lenny (00:38:24):
Are there any companies out there that you think need help with their positioning that maybe have an opportunity to work with someone like you?

April Dunford (00:38:32):
There's some companies that I think you can tell they've not really thought about it. And a lot of times you'll see it in companies where they're brand new and the tech is really spectacular, but you can tell they haven't quite figured out well, so what?

April Dunford (00:38:49):
So when Magic Leap first launched that stuff was so mind blowing and it was like, oh my gosh, and all their demonstrations, the thing with the elephant and the guy's hand and all that stuff, and you're like, "Wow, that's amazing."

April Dunford (00:39:04):
And I read this really in depth interview with the founder and he was talking about the tech and this guy's view on the market, it was so interesting, but it was like, so what? What am I actually going to do with that? Who's your target market for this? What is the value of this? We all get it's cool, but what is the actual value of this?

April Dunford (00:39:26):
And you can see now, which I don't know if people know this, but if you go to the Magic Leap site, and I do because I'm interested in Magic Leap because I've been following their story since the beginning, but they've now gotten much tighter on their positioning.

April Dunford (00:39:42):
And they're actually selling B2B now, into manufacturing and they're talking about wide frame of view and all this stuff you can do, that's really differentiated than you could with other types of traditional VR things. And so if you look at their positioning, now, it's getting much, much tighter, but at the beginning it was like, what?

April Dunford (00:39:58):
And I felt the same thing about Google Glass, when it first came out. It was like, I get why people get excited about it, I just don't get why anybody would buy. I get what it is, but why do we need one of those? I don't see the value in this thing at all.

April Dunford (00:40:11):
And then again, if you see the applications for Google Glass now, there's a lot of very specific B2B use cases that they're now doubling down on. And they're coming back to the consumer use case a little bit now for some augmented reality stuff that actually sounds like it's useful. But a lot of times what we'll get is the initial launch of something will be this gee-whiz, it's so amazing.

April Dunford (00:40:34):
The archetype of this is the launch of the Segway. So there's been a couple of books written about it, but it's fascinating. The original founder of the Segway was the Elon Musk of his day. He had done three or four other companies, they were all wildly successful. When he got the idea for the Segway, he literally lifted his little pinky and raised a hundred million from Steve Jobs, Jeff Bezos, and a who's who of Silicon Valley venture.

April Dunford (00:40:59):
And then he kept positioning the thing as a revolution in human transport, but he didn't want to let the cat out of the bag, what it was, so he just kept saying that. And he was in the news all over and he's like, "Revolution in human transport." And people were getting so excited because they were like, "What's a revolution in human transport? It's a flying car, man. We're finally getting flying cars."

April Dunford (00:41:18):
So everybody's studying his patent filings and all this stuff, and they were like, "Oh my God, we're getting flying cars. It's going to be amazing." And there was such hype around this thing when they launched it that he actually got invited to Good Morning America.

Lenny (00:41:31):
I was watching that. I was watching that live [inaudible 00:41:33]-

April Dunford (00:41:33):
Yeah, to come on Good Morning America, do the thing and everyone's like, "Oh my God, we're getting flying cars." And then he comes out on the Segway and everyone's like, "What the fuck? That's not what we were promised, man."

April Dunford (00:41:45):
And the interesting thing about this Segway was that refusal to position it at a micro level, left it up to the customers to decide what it was. So even when we saw it was like, "Okay, so it's human transport. We get that, but what should I compare it to? Should I compare it to a car or a bicycle?"

April Dunford (00:42:05):
And so a lot of the early users were saying it was the worst thing to have a Segway because nobody knew where you were supposed to drive it because they didn't know what it was. So if you were driving on the road, cars were honking at you and they're like, "Get that stupid thing off the road." But if you drive it on the sidewalk, then the ladies with the baby strollers are like, "Get that stupid thing off the sidewalk."

April Dunford (00:42:26):
And the thing was a colossal failure eventually. The patents are still amazing. The patents just got sold last year or the year before to some company that does these hoverboard things. But the tech was way, way ahead of its time, but there wasn't good positioning to answer the question, who's this for? Why do they care? So what?

Lenny (00:42:46):
That's a really good segue to a question I wanted to ask you is when-

April Dunford (00:42:48):
Segue, ooh.

Lenny (00:42:49):
Wow. Unintentionally intended. When does it make sense for a company to bring in someone like you to go deep on positioning?

April Dunford (00:42:59):
I think most companies can do positioning on their own. That's my belief. Some companies I think lack a methodology to follow to go do it. So I wrote a book called Obviously Awesome, and that was the purpose of that book. If you want to do positioning and you just want to start a little exercise and do it yourself in house, you can use my methodology and my way to do it. And I think most companies can get it done that way.

April Dunford (00:43:24):
But most of the ones that come to me have attempted to do that and it hasn't worked out for one reason or another. So sometimes it's because, and this is not unusual in startups, we got an executive team full of A type people and we're all pretty opinionated and we just can't get to agreement on stuff. And it makes a lot of sense to bring an outside person in to help facilitate that conversation, particularly one that's got a lot of experience in positioning.

April Dunford (00:43:49):
So sometimes I get brought in for that reason. Other times I get brought in as companies just feel like they really got to nail it because there's a lot at stake. I've done a lot of work with companies that they're about to hire 10, 15 people in sales or they're about to make a really big investment in marketing and they just want to make sure they really nail it and not have to maybe do a not so great version and then redo it and then redo it again. If you bring me in, then we're going to nail it. There's no way we're going to get to something that isn't good.

April Dunford (00:44:17):
So sometimes people bring me in because they feel like there's a lot at stake. And those are generally the companies that bring me in. Some bigger companies I think bring me in, again, a bit more of a security blanket. We know we could do it ourselves, we kind of got it ourselves, but we'd feel better if we had the expert in here just to make sure we nail it once and we don't have to come back and do this again right away.

April Dunford (00:44:39):
So those are the kind of companies typically I work with, but I think a lot of companies could get it done with my book or some methodology, get the gang together and just bang it out themselves. I think everybody should start there.

Lenny (00:44:50):
That's awesome. How long should it take to do this kind of process either on their own and then with you? How long do these things take?

April Dunford (00:44:57):
Well, so the work that I do, we do it as a week long sprint. Now there's a bunch of prep that happens before that and there's some stuff we do afterwards, but the actual exercise itself is a series of sessions spread out over a week. I've seen companies do it on their own and they do it in a couple of days. They trap everybody in a room over a couple of days.

April Dunford (00:45:17):
Assuming you've got the right information to go and start with it, it shouldn't take you too long. And it really depends on how contentious things are because again, what you're trying to get to is agreement and alignment across the team. You're not done until everybody thinks what we've come up with is good.

Lenny (00:45:33):
So it sounds like you work mostly with larger companies and later stage companies. I mentioned this to you before we-

April Dunford (00:45:39):
Yes and no.

Lenny (00:45:39):
Okay. Okay.

April Dunford (00:45:40):
Yes and no. It depends on how you define that really. I've done a lot of companies that are around 5 million revenue, 10 million revenue in there. So they're beyond seed stage, but I wouldn't call them a large company quite yet.

April Dunford (00:45:55):
But I will say this, I do get a lot of calls from companies that are super early stage and where I don't think they're ready to actually really ... Well, they're not ready to bring in someone like me, and I think in general, they're not ready to really over tighten their positioning.

April Dunford (00:46:12):
So I think about it this way. So I've got this new thing, I'm either about to launch it into market or I've got it in market, I've got a handful of customers. At that stage, what I think you've got is a positioning thesis. And so the best thing you could do is deliberately go through a positioning exercise, document the thesis.

April Dunford (00:46:30):
And so the thesis says, we think we compete with these folks. We think this is differentiating. This is the value we think we can deliver that no one else can. These are the people we think are going to get really excited about that. Therefore, this is the market we're going to win. But it's just a thesis.

April Dunford (00:46:43):
And so internally it's good for us all to be in alignment internally, but when I go to launch that externally, if I don't have any customers yet, it's very likely, and in my experience, 100% of the time, the thesis is partially incorrect. It's based on a bunch of assumptions and our best guess at it, based on what we did in customer discovery or all our research we did before we built the thing.

April Dunford (00:47:05):
But we always, we're never a hundred percent correct. And so in these cases, I actually think it's better in the early days of a product to keep the positioning a little bit loose and allow the market to pull you maybe in a direction that you didn't think it was going to.

April Dunford (00:47:23):
So here's my terrible analogy I use all the time, but I'm going to use it here. But it's like I designed a fishing net and my thesis is this thing's amazing for tuna. It's a tuna fishing net. It's the world's greatest tuna fishing net.

April Dunford (00:47:35):
So I could launch that and say, "It's just for tuna, only tuna. Don't use it if it's not tuna." And maybe it works for tuna, maybe it doesn't and I don't really know. And if it fails, it fails hard.

April Dunford (00:47:47):
A better way I think is we know internally that it's the tuna fishing net. That's why we built it. That's what it is, but let's just at the beginning, let's put it out there and keep it a little loose and we say, "It's a net for fish, big fish, all kinds of big fish, any kind of big fish. And then let's just see, let's let the fishermen try it out. Let's see what they pull up."

April Dunford (00:48:06):
And maybe what we discover is, you know what? This thing's actually amazing for grouper and we just didn't know, because we're not grouper people. We didn't really think about grouper. And then once we've got enough of that signal and we start seeing the pattern in who loves our stuff and why, then we can really tighten it up and run at that market.

April Dunford (00:48:22):
But at the beginning, I think it's actually okay if your positioning's a little bit loose. And so I think you can worry too much about positioning in the super early days of a product when it's impossible to tighten it up, because you just don't have the data to do it.

Lenny (00:48:35):
I know that you touched on this a bit, but what does that transition look like between, okay, it's okay to keep it loose and see where the market pulls to, okay, we got to start taking this seriously? Is there a trigger that's like, okay, let's get into this?

April Dunford (00:48:47):
Yeah. It's one of those things that usually like you know when you know. But what you want is you want to start feeling comfortable that there's a pattern and it isn't just like, hey, I got one customer in this segment and one customer in this segment and one customer in this segment and I don't really know.

April Dunford (00:49:06):
What it usually starts at the beginning is it starts with, you'll say, "Gosh, all kinds of people like our stuff. All kinds of people like our stuff for all kinds of different reasons." And if you're seeing that you don't see the pattern yet.

April Dunford (00:49:19):
And eventually what happens is the pattern starts becoming clear that it's like, oh, all those customers look differently but there's actually this thread through them. Look, they all have the same marketing automation tool. Isn't that interesting? Or they all have the same number of sales people on their team. Isn't that interesting? I've done enough of these pitches now to know if you've got this, this, and this, this pitch is going to go good, and if you don't, it is not going to go good.

April Dunford (00:49:47):
So once you start feeling like I got the pattern here, it's starting to come into focus, then I think you're ready to really tighten things up, smash your foot on the gas and say, "We're just going to run at that because we know we can sell here. We know we win pretty much every time when we meet these conditions. Let's go do that."

Lenny (00:50:06):
I'm really glad we touched on this topic. I mentioned to you earlier that I was at a meetup last night and I was talking about this podcast that I'm starting and I asked who they'd love to hear on this podcast, and your name was the first name this guy brought up. And so-

April Dunford (00:50:19):
That's awesome.

Lenny (00:50:19):
... he's a huge fanboy. And I asked him what question he would ask you.

April Dunford (00:50:22):
I have fans. That's so cool.

Lenny (00:50:26):
You're out there. You're out there at meetups. And this is what he wanted to know actually is around just how do you think about this for startups and early stage stuff. So I'm glad we touched on it.

April Dunford (00:50:32):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:50:33):
The last topic I want to make sure we chat about, and this is what led to our conversation, we had a Twitter exchange about this was around segmentation versus personas and just how people confuse these things and how to think about these topics. And so I guess I'd love to get your take on just what's the difference between say segmentation and personas.

April Dunford (00:50:51):
Right. So you know how I said earlier marketers, we're really bad with definitions on things? And so everything in marketing is poorly defined and the marketers are always fighting over what do we mean when we say brand and things like this? So personas and segments, oh my gosh, terrible.

April Dunford (00:51:10):
So now this I think stems from if you go to marketing school, a lot of what you learn in marketing school is very consumer oriented, like consumer product oriented. And so if you're selling to consumers, a lot of the ways a consumer market gets segmented ... So segmentation is the way you split up a market.

April Dunford (00:51:29):
So the way you would segment a consumer market is you might say, "Well, I've got this toothpaste. And this toothpaste is for men under the age of 16 that want to get a date or something like that." And that would be how you would segment the market, which coincidentally sounds a lot like a persona.

April Dunford (00:51:51):
So personas are about people and it's characteristics of a particular buyer, a particular type of buyer. And so we'll do personas to try to get really deep understanding of, who is this buyer? What are they care about? What are their hopes and dreams? What makes them scared? What makes them excited? What are they trying to get done? This kind of stuff.

April Dunford (00:52:10):
Now we go to B2B and that's not how we segment a market. We're not talking about 25 year old down to the age of whatever, whatever. We're segmenting the market on different things. And in fact, in B2B, we can segment a market on almost anything, but typically there would be what we call firmographics, like how big's the company? How many employees? How much revenue? What geography is it in? But then we often do segmentations on things that are nothing to do with that.

April Dunford (00:52:35):
So if we really want to target a set of customers, often we'll say, "You know what? My product is really good for folks that have a creative team with more than three people and a budget of this and they use this particular software package." We win all day, if we have that.

April Dunford (00:52:56):
And that's a very actionable segmentation, I can go find companies that have that, I can make a list of companies that have that. And that's who my marketing and sales is going to go after. If sales needs to make a list of companies to go chase, that's that. And so in my mind, this is super important.

April Dunford (00:53:13):
Coming back to the previous question, when we were talking about, I'm starting to see the patterns in who loves my stuff and why, I'm not talking about the person there, I'm talking about the kind of company. What is common amongst the companies that love us, that I can segment the market and say, "Look, if your company is this size, you have this software package, you have this and this," I'm going to win all day.

April Dunford (00:53:35):
And so I need to understand that deeply in order to build my whole go-to market strategy, in order to have marketing campaigns that resonate with those kinds of companies, in order to make a list, if my sales are doing outbound, or if I'm doing target account selling, or ABM, how do I make that list of who I'm going after, that kind of stuff.

April Dunford (00:53:53):
Then we have personas. Now again, if I'm selling a consumer thing, maybe all I care about is personas, all I care about is who's this person who's the buyer. B2B, everything's a little bit more complicated than that. So in a typical B2B purchase process, particularly if it's what we would call enterprise software, even if it's not very expensive enterprise software, typically we have between five and seven people are involved in what we call making the decision for what gets bought.

April Dunford (00:54:24):
So if I come back to my example earlier where the VP sales decides they need a CRM and they pick on poor John, and then John's got to go figure it out. John, that persona, let's say he's the sales ops manager, we would make a sales ops manager persona that would capture that person, but there's other people involved in this deal.

April Dunford (00:54:44):
So as part of figuring out which CRM to buy, when he got in the later stages of the deal, he probably consults some of the sales reps, because they're going to be the end users of this thing, and so he doesn't want to pick something that they're all going to hate.

April Dunford (00:54:56):
He's probably got an IT department and IT probably gets to say about, well, does it meet our security and compliance stuff? And we're going to have to take care of it. Does it integrate with what we need to integrate with? Can it suck in data or push out data to our data warehouse or whatever? So that person has a say.

April Dunford (00:55:14):
There might be a purchasing department. There might be legal involved. There might be head of security involved. There might be chief security officers. Somebody gets their nose in there and gets involved in that. So five to seven people involved in this deal.

April Dunford (00:55:26):
And so here's where I think we go off the rails in marketing. So what I see marketing teams doing is they'll do personas for all those people. So they'll have this sheet and the sheet will say, Eric, the IT person doesn't like talking on the phone, who really likes video games. And they'll have this stereotype of Eric, the IT person. And then they'll say, Janet, the sales rep really outgoing, loves talking to people on the phone. Doesn't know what a video game is, that sort of thing.

April Dunford (00:56:01):
So for positioning work, I'm going to say something that is contentious, but I don't think it is at all. Think about how the deal gets done. Here's how this actually happens. Vice president says to John, "Go figure it out." John then does all this research and figures out how to get a short list.

April Dunford (00:56:18):
And then John might actually go all the way through to having calls with sales people and all this sort of stuff with all the vendors. And then John's really getting down to, okay, I'm going to pick this thing over this thing and then starts bringing in the other people.

April Dunford (00:56:30):
So by far the most important persona that matters is that one. We call this the champion in the account because this person, their job is to get consensus and champion the deal across everybody, including their boss, who's the actual economic buyer, the person that writes the check.

April Dunford (00:56:49):
And so if our positioning doesn't resonate for that champion, we're dead in the water. We don't even get on a short list. We don't even get to care about all the other personas, if we don't nail it with John because John's a gatekeeper.

April Dunford (00:57:03):
So my positioning needs to crush it with John. And at some point way down the road, I need to arm John to be able to sell IT, to be able to sell purchasing, to be able to make sure everybody is cool on the user side and to be able to sell their boss, who's the economic buyer.

April Dunford (00:57:22):
And so I think there's really only one persona that really, really matters in this, which is the champion in the account. And we should be very thoughtful and we should really have our arms around that persona. And then later in the deal cycle, we need to figure out how to arm that persona to go sell to all the other constituents in the deal. But if we don't nail that champion persona, we got nothing.

April Dunford (00:57:46):
So I think it is an utter waste of time for marketing to build these stupid little one pager persona things for these 17 million personas and treat them like they're the same as the champion, when the champion matters times a thousand and all we really need to do is figure out how to arm the champion, because the champion's going to do this, the heavy lifting of selling IT. We're likely not even going to get all that involved. Gee, that's my [inaudible 00:58:12].

Lenny (00:58:13):
That was amazing. I've never heard it described so directly and clearly. And so I think that's actually a good way to just wrap things up. I feel like I've sucked up enough of your time. Where can folks find your book, contact you if they want to work with you, anything like that?

April Dunford (00:58:29):
Sure. The book's called Obviously Awesome, and you can Google me and find that wherever books are sold. And then there's an audio book, if that's your jam or an E-book or whatever. And then my website is aprildunford.com, so you can find me there. I'm on LinkedIn, I'm on Twitter. I'm @aprildunford on social media, but I don't really do any social media except Twitter and a little bit of LinkedIn these days because I'm feeling less certain about the future of Twitter, but yeah.

Lenny (00:58:56):
Your tweets are great by the way. I highly recommend following April on Twitter.

April Dunford (00:58:59):
Oh good. Yeah, follow of me on Twitter.

Lenny (00:59:01):
How can listeners be useful to you?

April Dunford (00:59:03):
That's a great question. I don't know. Well, one thing I will say that I really love about Twitter is I use Twitter a lot to clarify my thinking on things. And so I really appreciate smart interactions with people on Twitter because sometimes I'll have a half-baked idea. And it's one of the things that I really like about Twitter versus LinkedIn, if I have a half-baked idea, I throw it out on LinkedIn and everyone goes, "That's great April," and that's it. Whereas if I have a half-baked idea and I throw it out on Twitter, people aren't shy about telling me I'm wrong.

April Dunford (00:59:36):
And I appreciate it because I think that's how your thinking gets clearer. I mean, I'd like you to be nice about it if possible, but I like it when people jump in and they go, "Well, actually that doesn't really work if it's this, this and this." And you're like, "Ooh yeah, actually, you're right. Never really thought about that before."

April Dunford (00:59:52):
So people that follow me on Twitter are really useful that way. And then I think I have this really engaged, thoughtful bunch of people following me on Twitter, people that are really interested in this stuff. And so I think it's kind of fun to be able to bat some deeper ideas around on stuff and not just have everybody go thumbs up, yay, April. That's kind of boring to me.

Lenny (01:00:12):
Radical candor, that's what you need.

April Dunford (01:00:13):
Oh yeah, I appreciate the thumbs up. Give me the thumbs up, but if that's all I was trying to do, then I wouldn't be throwing out as much half-baked, sort of controversial hot takes on Twitter as I do.

Lenny (01:00:26):
I use Twitter in a very similar way, and so I completely understand that aspect.

April Dunford (01:00:30):
Yeah, it's great for that.

Lenny (01:00:31):
It's amazing for that. April, thank you so much for making time. I learned a ton and I really appreciate your time.

April Dunford (01:00:36):
All right. Well, thanks so much for having me and congratulations on the new podcast. I'm so excited for it.

Lenny (01:00:42):
Me too. Me too. That was awesome. Thank you for listening. If you enjoyed the chat, don't forget to subscribe to the podcast. You could also learn more at lennyspodcast.com. I'll see you in the next episode.

Arielle Jackson (00:00:00):
So over time, a word can come to mean something that is beyond what that actual word means. Like Disney means magic today. Volvo means safety. Those names are not good. If I just put it in a spreadsheet or one of those lists, no one would pick it. So that's kind of what I mean, that the name is just part of the overall marketing or the overall brand and a bad name with a really great company with great company strategy, great marketing is going to be great over time. And a good name is just going to help you, but I don't think a bad name is going to kill a good company.

Lenny (00:00:42):
Arielle Jackson spent nine years at Google, where she helped grow Gmail in its early days, taking it from just a side project to a product that is now used by hundreds of millions of people all over the world. Then she went on to Square, where she was one of the first marketers and helped launch and scale the growth of Square reader. She's also worked with over 100 early stage companies, helping them nail their brand and marketing efforts, including Patreon, Loom, Front, Eero, Maven, Sprig, just to name a few.

Lenny (00:01:12):
These days, she teaches a super popular course on startup brand strategy and she's a marketer in residence at First Round capital. In our chat, we cover primarily three things, naming strategies for your startup or your product, a framework for developing your brand, that includes your purpose, your positioning, and your personality, and also getting PR for your startup. I can't wait for you to listen to this conversation with Arielle. And so with that, I bring you Arielle Jackson.

Lenny (00:01:41):
Hey, Ashley, head of marketing at Flatfile, how many B2B SaaS companies would you estimate need to import CSV files from their customers?

Ashley (00:01:49):
At least 40%.

Lenny (00:01:51):
And how many of them screw that up? And what happens when they do?

Ashley (00:01:54):
Well? Based on our data, about a third of people will consider switching to another company after just one bad experience during onboarding. So if your CSV importer doesn't work right, which is super common, considering customer files are chock-full of unexpected data and formatting, they'll leave.

Lenny (00:02:13):
I am 0% surprised to hear that. I'm consistently seeing that improving onboarding is one of the highest leverage opportunities for both signup conversion and increasing long-term retention. Getting people to your aha moment more quickly and reliably is so incredibly important.

Ashley (00:02:28):
Totally. It's incredible to see how our customers like Square, Spotify and Zuora are able to grow their businesses on top of Flatfile. It's because [inaudible 00:02:38] data onboarding acts like a catalyst to get them and their customers where they need to go faster.

Lenny (00:02:45):
If you'd like to learn more or get started, check out Flatfile at flatfile.com/lenny.

Lenny (00:02:53):
This episode is brought to you by unit. What did Gusto, Uber, Shopify and AngelList all have in common? They've all decided to build banking into their product. According to AngelList head of product, banking makes every single feature more interesting. With it, our platform functions as financial mission control for our customers. Without it, we're just another software tool in a big messy stack.

Lenny (00:03:15):
Embedding banking into your product, not only adds differentiation, but also helps you acquire, retain and monetize your customers. Unit is the market leader in banking as a service combining multiple bank partners with a developer friendly API to empower companies of all sizes to launch accounts, cards, payments, and lending in just a few weeks. Unit is trusted by leading brands, such as AngelList, [inaudible 00:03:39] Invoice2go And Roofstock.

Lenny (00:03:41):
To hear more about how Unit enables companies like yours to build banking, visit unit.co/ lenny to request a demo or to try their free sandbox. That's unit.co/lenny.

Lenny (00:03:58):
Welcome to the podcast, Arielle.

Arielle Jackson (00:04:01):
Thanks so much for having me. It's great to be here.

Lenny (00:04:03):
It's absolutely my pleasure. I've read so much of your writing online. You've done a lot of writing, which I found really helpful. And so I'm really jazzed to be digging into all kinds of really good stuff. Before we get into some of the meat, just a couple questions that I had in my mind. You've worked with so many amazing companies, Google, Square, Loom, Patreon, Front. So many others. I don't want to keep going. What's been either your favorite or most unusual project that you've worked on?

Arielle Jackson (00:04:35):
Gosh, it's like asking me to choose my favorite son. I'm like, gosh, I can't really like pick one.

Lenny (00:04:40):
That'll be the next question.

Arielle Jackson (00:04:41):
I would probably say that my favorite project, and this is because they get reminded of it on a daily basis was working at on the Square stand at Square. It was the first time I ever worked on hardware and our joint Square was 140 people. We had no marketing function. We had a couple marketing people. We had no product managers and the hardware team was running the show on launching this new product that was supposed to get us up market into brick and mortar.

Arielle Jackson (00:05:05):
And anyway, I was running event marketing at the time and giving away a bunch of those readers that you stick into a phone for free and having a lot of small merchants use. I volunteered to run the launch of this product as a product marketer for the first time. And it was just so fun, doing everything from positioning it, figuring out how we were going to talk about this beautiful new piece of hardware that would turn your iPad into a real point of sale.

Arielle Jackson (00:05:31):
We had people fly around the country and get cool coffee shops and brick and mortar businesses seeding it so that they would all use it. We had I think 15 Metro areas covered with the coolest coffee shops and donut shops and everything at launch. And you know, there was a lot of fake it till you make it. I was negotiating a deal with Best Buy in the Apple store. Never done anything like that before.

Arielle Jackson (00:05:53):
Designing packaging was really awesome. There was just so much to it launching a physical product. And at the time it was at a pretty high price point for a company that had always had one free product and helping that company go up market. And I remember I was 30 something weeks pregnant when we launched. We got all the blue bottle stores to use it. And we had this launch event where Jack, our head of hardware, Jesse unveiled this product at the blue bottle in Mint Plaza. And I was super pregnant and super proud. And I still get kind of excited every time I pay on one of those, which is all the time.

Lenny (00:06:30):
Super pregnant and super proud. I love it. And that product that was the POS stand, the iPad thing that you kind of swivel and sign.

Arielle Jackson (00:06:39):
Yeah. And there's been new versions of it since, there's a contactless version of it, and there's one with an integrated screen that I think is Android based, which you don't have to have an iPad, but that product's still around. I still pay on that original Square stand all the time. I drink a lot of coffee. Those independent coffee shops around LA. So they're all still using it.

Lenny (00:07:01):
We're going to talk about positioning a bunch, but while we're on the topic, what was the positioning of that product while we're talking about it?

Arielle Jackson (00:07:07):
Yeah, so at the time Square was mostly used by farmer's market vendors and event vendors. I made jewelry in a past life and that's how I got to Square was being one of those vendors. And the positioning was really that it was for brick and mortar businesses, particularly quick serve coffee, donuts, sandwich shops that kind of quick serve brick and mortars. And it was up against your ugly old point of sale. Your cash register effectively. That was our foil. And the benefit was turn your iPad into a point of sale. And the differentiator was about one unified experience that you can do everything you can on your cash register and more, and you'd be proud to have it out on your counter.

Lenny (00:08:01):
So you said that you were creating jewelry and that's how you got into Square to work on this product. I need to hear more about that.

Arielle Jackson (00:08:08):
Yeah, sure. So I was working at Google before Square and I'd always had this hobby of making jewelry and I used to sell my jewelry in a few different like boutiques around San Francisco and LA. It was a very small side hustle, but it was my creative outlet. And I sold at craft fairs around Hanukah/Christmas time. So I used to sell and just take cash. And then I got a Square reader and I sold at a craft fair that year. And it was awesome. That Square reader, it helped people buy more, it helped me sort of look cool. It was just really great to accept credit cards. I'd never done it before.

Arielle Jackson (00:08:49):
I used to take PayPal invoices and be on my computer and send someone an invoice and they'd get it. It was painful. All the reasons that people use Square, I experienced it. And two people I knew from Google, Megan Quinn and Kyle Dink had gone to Square from Google. And so after I had that experience, I think I sent them both an email just being like, this thing's fucking awesome. I make jewelry. It was great. I sold I think it was 50% more than I did last year because I accepted credit cards and I can't remember which of them wrote back first, but they were like, come interview. And so that was basically how I ended up at Square.

Lenny (00:09:27):
Wow. I bet that helped you a lot through the interview, actual have personal experience.

Arielle Jackson (00:09:32):
Having been a merchant, I think it helped me understand the small merchant that initially we were marketing to.

Lenny (00:09:38):
And so today you are marketing expert in residence at [inaudible 00:09:45] capital. I was going to ask what does that mean and what is it that you do day to day these days?

Arielle Jackson (00:09:51):
Sure. So after I left Square, I went to a tiny startup that was seven people. They were funded by First Round and I helped them with everything that a tiny startup that's trying to grow needs.

Lenny (00:10:06):
What startup was that?

Arielle Jackson (00:10:06):
It was called Cover. They were acquired by Twitter. It was an Android app that could get you the right apps at the right time based on where you were by changing the lock screen on your phone. And so that company and that experience of working at this tiny startup that was seven people, I really liked it. And then they got acquired by Twitter, but I had just left Square. So I decided not to join Twitter with the rest of the team. And instead I just decided I was going to help a bunch of other small startups. And I emailed a few friends from past lives who had small startups, which was like, Hey, I'm not going to Twitter with the rest of the team. You do need marketing help. And every single person wrote back and said, yes. And that's basically how I started consulting.

Arielle Jackson (00:10:49):
I guess it was about eight or nine years ago. At the same time, First Round had reached out and said, hey, who did you use for marketing comps for cover? And I got connected with Brett from First Round and he's like, would you help our companies? And we did a three month project for one day a week, nine years ago. And I'm still there. I work halftime at First Round. So I do everything I do for other companies, but for First Round companies on First Rounds time.

Arielle Jackson (00:11:17):
So the way it works is if you're funded by First Round and as part of your onboarding, we offer a lot of value add services and I'm one of them. And those services can be everything from, we have someone who's really good at compensation and HR stuff and we have someone who will help you with pricing and I'll help you with marketing. And what that means when you're a seed stage startup is everything from naming to positioning, to developing a brand identity, a website and your initial launch, and eventually hiring a marketer. So that's sort of the bread and butter. That's what I like working on anyway. So it's a good fit because we invest in a lot of seed stage companies at First Round, I get to help almost all of them.

Lenny (00:11:58):
That's an excellent segue to what I wanted to get to next. What I want to do in our chat is cover three broad topics. Things that I know are very near and dear to your heart, naming for products and startups, your brand development framework and how to hire marketers. Does that sound good?

Arielle Jackson (00:12:15):
Awesome. That's what I like to talk about. So yeah, let's do it.

Lenny (00:12:19):
Let's do it. Surprise, surprise. Okay. So with naming, I've actually heard from a few founders that you were really helpful to them in naming their startups. Folks that have maybe been on this podcast that will go unnamed. So for founders trying to come up with a name for their company or their product, two questions. What makes a good name for a product or a startup, and then just how do you come up with a great name?

Arielle Jackson (00:12:44):
I love naming. I think I've named just over 30 companies at this point. And actually when I mention how I got into consulting when I emailed some friends and asked them if they needed marketing help, I think I'm allowed to talk about this one. So one of those companies was some friends from Google, Adrian and Carl. They had left Google, gone to Facebook and then started a company it's now called Seesaw. It's an ed tech company. That was the first company I named post Google Square, all of that.

Lenny (00:13:09):
It's an awesome name.

Arielle Jackson (00:13:10):
It is an awesome name and I'll use it as an example. So seesaw is a ed tech company. They had a really bad name before that and we did this whole naming process and ended with that name and why I think that's a good name is when I say Seesaw, you don't really know what it is, but when I tell you, oh, it's this ed tech company and it's an iPad app and it helps the work that elementary school students do go between the teacher, the parents and the student. And you're like, oh, well, Seesaw makes sense for elementary school, it's something that goes back and forth. It has that sort of nostalgic feel. And it makes sense that it's an ed tech company.

Arielle Jackson (00:13:48):
And I personally tend to like those kinds of names that are suggestive or evocative, where when I tell you what the company does, you're like, oh, that makes sense. But it's not that what the name is tells you exactly what the company does. So that's an example, I think of a good name. I don't know, during COVID and when my older son's school was closed and they all used Seesaw and I got to tell my son, oh, that's my friend's company and we named it back in the day. And he was like, oh, that's cool. That name makes sense.

Arielle Jackson (00:14:21):
That's the reaction you want. It also has a little bit of emotion to it. It has some nostalgia. It's fun to say it's short, it's memorable. I think all of those things make a good name. Another company that has a good name that you and I have both worked with is Maven. So they're a First Round company. Gogan has talked about this publicly. We named that company together. Maven is a Yiddish word that means one who understands and it means specifically one who understands because they've done something, they've acquired the skills or knowledge over time.

Arielle Jackson (00:14:58):
And I just think that's such a cool name for a platform that allows X operators or current operators to teach their skills to other people through cohort based classes. You want to be a Maven, instructors are Maven's, it's short, it's easy to say, when I tell you what that company does, that name makes perfect sense. So I tend to like those [inaudible 00:15:17] of names myself, but I also, I don't know, I like other kinds of names for other kinds of products too. I think it really comes down to what is your product? What is your company? What is the name trying to achieve and really getting clearer with those criteria. So we can talk about the criteria that always apply, the criteria you might add and a process to get there.

Lenny (00:15:38):
That sounds great. Yeah. I'm really curious about a process. If one exists, that'd be really cool. So another question in my mind is just some names are just nonsense words like Yahoo and I don't know Google, I guess. What's your take on that as a name, that approach?

Arielle Jackson (00:15:51):
Yeah. So words like that are empty vessels, they really don't mean anything. If you think about the name Yahoo, it's actually like really silly. It's like Yahoo. I always hear it like that. Google has a meaning for people in the know with the one followed by as many zeros. It's like a big number and it's a misspelling of that. So that one's a little less silly to me than Yahoo. My take on empty vessel names is they can be really memorable and they can be evocative of the emotion, but you have to do a lot more marketing work over time to make it mean something.

Arielle Jackson (00:16:25):
So if I say Yahoo today, we know it's that search engine we use before we all switch to Google and we have the purple color in our head, and we think about what it meant at the time that we might have used it, but it took a lot of marketing dollars and a lot of time for that word to be in that. So they're doable. I worked on a company Eero. That has kind of what is almost an empty vessel name. Eero is for Eero Saarinen who was a designer. He did like these really beautiful buildings, architectural buildings. And then also some tables. You can get a Saarinen and table at Design Within Reach, but that name, nobody knows that unless you're in the design community. And so that name is effectively an empty vessel and they have to spend a lot and be consistent about making that [inaudible 00:17:16] mean a wifi system.

Lenny (00:17:17):
I want to get to the process, but another question is why is it important for the name to kind of connect to the company and what they do? Is that just it feels nice to people or is there some kind of a bigger reason?

Arielle Jackson (00:17:30):
Yeah. So it doesn't have to, and examples like Eero and Yahoo, it doesn't. Even if you think about Apple, it doesn't. Apple has nothing to do with Apple computers. It's a word we all know. There's a lot of words where there's no meaning behind it. If there is a meaning behind your name, your name is doing a little bit more of your marketing work for you. So if your name is Internet Explorer, RIP, I know exactly what you do.

Arielle Jackson (00:17:56):
If your name is Chrome and you're a designer on the web, you kind of might be like, oh, that makes sense. That's the area around the browsing window. If your name is Firefox, I have no idea what you did. You just took two words and put them together and made something up. And now you have to spend, and you have to be consistent over time in making that word mean something for people. But all three of those browsers were successful at a time. And I don't think the name had anything to do with Internet Explorer's demise.

Lenny (00:18:25):
Got it. So it's kind of ideally you can find an easy mode. If that doesn't work, then you go hard mode. You come up with your empty vessel name and then you just have to do a lot of work.

Arielle Jackson (00:18:33):
That's my personal preference.

Lenny (00:18:35):
Okay, cool. That makes sense.

Arielle Jackson (00:18:37):
My personal preference is if you think about there's descriptive names, the Internet Explorer, there's suggestive names like Chrome, then there's evocative names, which I would say Seesaw and Maven fit into there where they're like in between suggestive and evocative, and then there's empty vessel names or fanciful names. There's a spectrum. And when you do your brainstorm, we can talk about this in the process, you want to think across all of them, but you might have in your naming brief, we want a suggestive name, or we want a descriptive name. You might go into it with that. And so there's times and places for all of those names across the spectrum. My personal bias is I tend to like suggestive names.

Lenny (00:19:16):
Makes sense. Okay, let's get into it. What should teams do when they're trying to name something?

Arielle Jackson (00:19:22):
Yeah. So the first thing is to do your product positioning. I really believe that positioning dictates so much of your marketing and should always be the first thing you do. I had a student in my last class that I taught through Maven. I teach a class on brand strategy and he was I think a second or third time founder, who had never taken a class on brand strategy. He worked really hard. He was awesome. Anyway, at the end of the class and you kind of do this closing thing. And he goes, I'll never write a line of code without doing positioning first. And that was music to my ears. I think positioning comes first, but in any case, you do that first, and we'll talk about that in a little bit. And then you write a naming brief and it's really simple.

Arielle Jackson (00:20:07):
What are you naming? Are you naming a company? Are you naming the product? Are you naming both? Usually if you're early stage company, you're naming both and they're going to have one name because you don't want people to have to remember two things. What do you want the name to communicate? So in that example of Seesaw, we wanted it to communicate young childhood. In the example of Eero, we wanted it to communicate design, being designed forward. It can be whatever you want it to communicate. What do you want to avoid? We don't want it to sound like this competitor, or we hate this word or whatever you want to avoid. What are the names of competitive and related products? And then are there other considerations? I worked with another First Round company that was operating in China.

Arielle Jackson (00:20:53):
And one of the considerations was this has to be pronounceable for a native Chinese speaker. That's a very valid, additional consideration. And then there are seven criteria for names that always apply in my opinion. And you could add additional ones, like that Chinese speaking one would be an additional one. The seven are trademark, which is kind of obvious, can you use this? Are you violating someone else's trademark? And the second step with trademark is, do you need to proactively protect the name? Domain availability, so everyone gets hung up on getting a.com like maven.com got maven.com. It was an arduous process that Gogan wrote about on Twitter. But these days, you don't necessarily need the.com. Square operated on SquareUp for very, very long time. Lots of companies are operating on variants of a .com. So domain availability, distinctiveness. Is it memorable?

Arielle Jackson (00:21:51):
Is it sound like someone else's name? That's I think one of the most important ones, just is it different and distinctive? Is it timeless? So there's a lot of naming trends. If you tell me Optimizely I could tell you what year was the company formed when it ends in LY. If you tell me a word like Flicker, I can tell you what year it was, because that was the naming trend to remove vowels. So I generally stay away from naming trends, because I want your company named not to sound dated in 10 or 20 years. The last one is it's kind of related to that. What we talked about in the brief, what do you want the name to communicate? Which is the name reflective of your key messaging or does it somehow suggest an emotion or feeling that you're trying to convey, and then sound and ease of pronunciation.

Arielle Jackson (00:22:44):
Is it fun to say, is it easy to say, how is it to spell? We almost named a First Round company a while ago Lattice which is now a different company that's doing quite well, but we didn't name it that because this was a company that was B2B sales was going to be their main channel. So they're going to be people on the phone being like, hey, I'm calling from Lattice and we went through this exercise and we're like lettuce? It's not so easy to say and spell. So we actually didn't name the company that and went with something else. But there's a company now doing quite well.

Lenny (00:23:16):
You think that was the right move?

Arielle Jackson (00:23:18):
I don't know. I always say a good name is only going to help you, but a bad name won't hurt a good company. So I don't really feel-

Lenny (00:23:25):
Interesting. Good to know. Yeah. Keep going.

Arielle Jackson (00:23:27):
And then the last two are appearance. So there are some names that just lend themselves really nicely to visual design and they have to do with how tall the letters are and is their symmetry and if you give this to designer, making a logo just so awesome and cool and fun and then length. So a lot of people, they want to name like Square and Stripe and these one syllable names, but a two syllable or even a three syllable name can often be more memorable.

Lenny (00:23:57):
lennysnewsletter.com. Shoot.

Arielle Jackson (00:24:00):
Yeah. Well, so you got the Lenny part with the two syllables is generally a nice sweet spot.

Lenny (00:24:07):
Sweet. Have you put out a template or anything that folks can find to do this? Or should they kind of listen here and take notes?

Arielle Jackson (00:24:15):
Yeah, there's an article on the First Round review called Positioning Your Startup is Vital, Here's How to Nail It and all those criteria and how to do naming is actually in that article.

Lenny (00:24:27):
Awesome. We'll put that in our little show notes. And then as you go through this, is this a binary thing or you kind of rate each of these categories one to five?

Arielle Jackson (00:24:36):
Yeah. So the way I do it is I apply the criteria after we do the brainstorm. And then we do red, yellow, green on each of those criteria just to weed out ones that are not doing well on any of those. Got it. And then you add your own criteria. So the next steps the brainstorm. I'm going to go fast through this.

Lenny (00:24:55):
Yeah. I was going to ask you about the brainstorm. I'm excited to hear this.

Arielle Jackson (00:24:57):
Yeah. So the way that I run a naming process is I like to first do positioning and then I set up an hour with the founders and me and ideally a couple other people who are interested, but disinterested. So I'll bring a writer from the First Round team or the founder has a friend who's a linguist or the founder has a friend who speaks four languages. We like those kind of people to be in it if possible. And it's generally five to seven people in a brainstorm. And the idea is we spend one hour, I set it up beforehand and we try to come up with hundreds and hundreds of bad ideas and a couple decent ones that are worth exploring more. And the brainstorm is two parts. The first part is based on words in your positioning statement.

Arielle Jackson (00:25:40):
So we take all the meaningful words out of your positioning statement is the warmup and we run synonyms, antonyms, free associations, other languages, whatever we can do off of those words. And so if your words in your positioning statement are related to what that you do, which they very well should be, that's a great way to just come up with hundreds of words really quickly. And then the second step is a thematic brainstorm. So I pick between seven and 10 themes, you can think of them like Jeopardy themes. So it's like, I don't know, okay, so there was an-

Lenny (00:26:11):
Source.

Arielle Jackson (00:26:11):
... AI. Yeah. It was like an AI tool for strawberry picking and the themes would be the history of strawberry farming or botany 101, things that are related. You could do like last names of famous farmers, think about how did Tesla get their name? They probably did last names of people related to electricity, and that's such a great name, so thematic brainstorm. And then that's usually a little more fruitful. And we do the same thing, free association, all that.

Arielle Jackson (00:26:40):
I spend some time afterwards on Wikipedia and the internet and actually finding words words. Also love the library, check out books sometimes and just read books on the topic and just write down the interesting words that come up. And anyway, so then I give them back a short list. The short list is around 10 to 25 concepts that are ideas that are worth looking at further. And from there narrow it down based on the criteria and the red, yellow, green, we come up with three to five, don't come up with one because you might not get it for trademark, and it's really sad when you get really attached to one and then you can't use it. So yeah, three to five top contenders. And then you go through trademark process domain and kind of go from there.

Lenny (00:27:23):
That was amazing. If you're doing a startup name versus a product, is the process any different or is it basically the same?

Arielle Jackson (00:27:29):
No, same. The only difference is if you have a lot of equity in your company name... Square is a good example. Square had a lot of equity. Google is a perfect example. A lot of equity in the company name, you often don't want to name your products something really creative and different because you actually want the equity in the master brand to come through. So if you think about Square's names, they have other ones, when they diverge from the Square brand like cash or when they want something new or Google, when they came out with Android and they wanted to diverge from the master brand. But think about all the products. Square Register, Square Stand, Square App, Google Maps, they're really boring and it's because the equity is in the company name and the product name can actually be boring and descriptive.

Lenny (00:28:20):
That makes sense. I want to come back to a point you made that a great name will help a startup and a bad name is not going to hurt you or I forget the word to use. I'd love to hear that because that's that's really interesting.

Arielle Jackson (00:28:33):
Yeah. So if your company has a great name and the name is remarkable, people will be like, oh, that's a great name, or it just makes sense. In the case of Seesaw like, that's a good name for that company. That good name is just going to help people talk about it. It's going to spread word of mouth. People are going to like to talk about the company. If you think about there's a lot of companies with bad names that we use all the time or even quite boring names that we now love. So if you think about Disney, Walt Disney's last name, it didn't mean anything, but over time that's such a good company and it got imbued with all this meaning and now it stands for magic and stands for so much, but it was just the dude's last name. So over time a word can come to mean something that is beyond what that actual word means.

Arielle Jackson (00:29:21):
Disney means magic today. Volvo means safety. Those names are not good. If I just put it in a spreadsheet or one of those lists, no one would pick it. So that's kind of what I mean that the name is just part of the overall marketing or the overall brand and a bad name with a really great company with great company strategy, great marketing is going to be great over time. And a good name is just going to help you, but I don't think a bad name is going to kill a good company.

Lenny (00:29:51):
So interesting. So basically your goal is to help find a name that will help. Worst case, you're going to be okay if your product is awesome.

Arielle Jackson (00:29:59):
I think so. Yeah. I mean it also takes a little of the pressure off to be honest. Everyone wants to find that perfect name. If you actually think about it, this happens a lot. You give someone a list of 10 names or 15 names and they're just cells in the spreadsheet these days, we're doing most of this virtually. You give people a name like that and it's like, you have to imagine what it could be. You think about Apple or Disney or Nike or Volvo, Lego, any of these brands, in a cell spreadsheet in plain Arial in 10 point, they're just okay, you have to grow them over time. You just hear about I think Phil Nate with Nike, when he was given that name as an option, he was like, that's okay. Yeah. I'll sleep on it. Such a great name.

Lenny (00:30:50):
This makes me think about my startup back in the day, it was called Local Mind, and we went through an exercise similar to this. Not nearly as in depth and well run, but I remember our designer was the person that helped us nail the name. He's just like, oh, I could do so much with this name. Let's just see where this one can go. Is that something you find?

Arielle Jackson (00:31:10):
Yeah. There's definitely been bad names. I helped a company rebrand recently that they had a bad name. It just looked dated. It didn't fit any of those. It wasn't distinctive. It wasn't timeless. It had one of those like naming trends. Those are not good. You want to avoid those, but if you come up with something that is pretty good and you can make up something beautiful out of it and it fits your company, it does some of the marketing work for you and people like to say it and ideally it's memorable and it has some emotion to it, go, go for it.

Lenny (00:31:39):
Awesome. One last question about naming. What's a common mistake that people make going through this process coming up with a name?

Arielle Jackson (00:31:47):
Yeah, a really funny one is if you have a code name for your product or at First Round, a lot of the companies we invest in, they raise their seed round with one name. They may or may not be attached to it, but then they work with me and I'm like, yeah, your name's not that good, and here's why, we should probably change it or they say, we can't use this name. We found out we have a trademark conflict. I really believe in using a code name that's so ridiculous that you won't ever launch a product like that if you're just trying to incorporate and go really quick.

Arielle Jackson (00:32:18):
So for example, a lot of people, they need their name for their corporation. And so they are filing all the steps to creating a business and they just like pick something, but then they end up getting attached to it and then they want to actually launch under that name. And it's like, well, that's not so great and here's why I think you should change it. If you pick something so ridiculous that you would never launch, it's actually helpful because then you can go through a process and find a name that will do more of your work for you and you won't be attached to something crappy.

Lenny (00:32:50):
Such a good point an idea. And by the way, so if you're a First Round company, you get this naming service for free and all these other things we're going to talk about just to be clear.

Arielle Jackson (00:32:59):
Yes, that's right.

Lenny (00:33:00):
Oh my God. I could do a whole episode about how much I love First Round, but I will say I'm a huge fan. I think I've participated in every program that First Round offers. The First Round review is actually one of the first pieces of writing that kind of helped spur my now career. And so I'm really-

Arielle Jackson (00:33:15):
I remember that article, was awesome.

Lenny (00:33:17):
Yeah. And I did two more after that. So much work, but yeah, that was a big deal. So I'm really appreciative to First Round. And we could talk about First Round a bit at the end, too.

Arielle Jackson (00:33:26):
Sure. Yeah. Everything we're talking about that you've asked me so far, I think that you're going to ask me about positioning and [inaudible 00:33:33] your marketing person, and all of that is stuff we offer to First Round company, we offer my services as part of the investment. There are times when we might get stuck and we have to bring in an outside person to help us with something, but for the most part, it's all included and you'd pay a lot of money... The naming firm I like the best when I get stuck, it's called A Hundred Monkeys. They're awesome. A long time ago, I used to be like, oh yeah, it's about $25,000. And I recently couldn't take on an outsider First Round project and referred it to them. It's $47,000 for a name.

Lenny (00:34:04):
Wow.

Arielle Jackson (00:34:05):
So yeah, it's gotten expensive, but if you have the means, it's nice to get some outside help.

Lenny (00:34:12):
#valueadd. Okay. I want to transition to your brand development framework, which I read a bunch about. And I know you teach a course about this, which we could also chat a bit about, but first I'm curious, just practically, why is a brand useful? Why is it even something people should spend time investing in? Why does it matter?

Arielle Jackson (00:34:33):
Okay. So a lot of founders may think that when we say your brand, we mean your logo and your font and your colors, and that is a visual expression of your brand, but it's not actually your brand, your brand is who people think you are. And so why is it important for people to think what you want them to think? That really comes down to people's understanding and particularly your target audience's understanding of what your company and your product is. And I don't really think there's anything else more important than that if I was building a company.

Arielle Jackson (00:35:08):
So your brand is who people think you are and developing a brand strategy is what do you want to be? What do you want people to think you are? And what are you going to do to help shape that perception? So when I work on a company, there's a lot of steps to this, but I kind of have this nice little process that's right sized for early stage startups. And I like to start with, why do you do what you do? Just having a really clear understanding of that. That's your purpose. The second part is your product positioning. So meaning how do you want people to understand your product and what role it plays in their lives? And then the last part is your personality, which is how do you show up in the world? What do you like? If your brand was a person, would I want to hang out with them? Would someone else want to hang out with them?

Lenny (00:36:02):
We're going to get into each of these three pieces, but before we get in there, as a founder, how do you know when you're done with your brand development? I know it's a never ending ongoing process, but at the end of a process, you figure out your purpose, positioning, and personality, and then there's logo and colors, when you think about just here's the brand package, what are all the little pieces of it? And then we'll dive into these three elements.

Arielle Jackson (00:36:30):
I think what you said is right. You get those three components, your purpose, your positioning, your personality, you use that as an informant to your visual design and also to your tone of voice. So the way your copy sounds, the way you show up in written copy. A lot of companies have what they call like a style guide or a brand style guide and it really only covers logo, fonts, colors, like don't put our logo and blue, don't tilt it on an angle, here's what it looks like in white, here's what it looks like in black, here's the favicon, but they don't have that for here's who we are, here's 10 lines that could be ad copy for us, here is why we do what we do.

Arielle Jackson (00:37:14):
This is the personality of our brand. Here are five attributes. We are playful, but not silly. We can talk about that a little bit more. But I think all of that belongs in the style guide, not just logo, font colors, which is really just a visual articulation that feeds into your brand. I'm a big Volvo fan. I'm on my fourth Volvo right now. So I'm super brand loyal. And I always use them as an example, because if you can picture the Volvo logo in your head right now, it kind of looks like the male symbol, it's like a circle with an arrow coming off the side.

Arielle Jackson (00:37:48):
There's nothing about that logo that means all the things I like about Volvo, all the things that the Volvo brand has come to mean to me and they're colors, they're like black and white and a little blue. There's nothing more boring than their color palette. And so it's not the logo and the font and the colors of Volvo that has made them mean... They literally own the word safety in cars right now. It's other stuff. And if you looked at their style guide actually, looked at their style guide recently and it's just like, here's our black and our white and our blue and here's our tertiary colors and here's our logo. It would not help you understand Volvo as a brand.

Lenny (00:38:29):
I'm guessing some of that happened because they've evolved over the years and it's probably a very different initial brand. So it kind of tells me that it's more important to have a logo and a brand that can kind of represent many things that isn't so stuck in a certain positioning, maybe. Does that resonate at all?

Arielle Jackson (00:38:44):
Yeah. Their logo has to do with a very early history. I researched this because I was a nerd out on this stuff. They had some early history as a ball bearings company. And so I guess that logo had some meaning then, but it wasn't so descriptive to being a ball bearing company that they were able to keep it as they evolved into a car company.

Arielle Jackson (00:39:05):
But if you look at their early writing, it's so cool. It's so cool. Long, long time ago they would talk about cars are driven by humans. And our job as a car manufacturer is to protect the humans who drive the cars. That was fundamental formation of the company. So they really knew why they existed. And then they did stuff in I think it was the 1950s when everyone just wore lap bands in the car and they came out with the three point safety harness and instead of patenting it and licensing it, they gave that away for free for everyone because that would make all the world's cars safer and those kinds of company decisions. That's what made Volvo stand for safety. It's not the logo.

Lenny (00:39:48):
Very interesting.

Lenny (00:39:50):
This episode is brought to you by Athletic Greens. I've been hearing about AG1 on basically every podcast that I listened to, like Tim Ferris, and Lex Fridman, and so I finally gave it a shot earlier this year and it has quickly become a core part of my morning routine, especially on days that I need to go deep on writing or record a podcast like this. Here's three things that I love about AG1. One with a small scoop that dissolves in water. You are absorbing 75 vitamins, minerals, probiotics and adaptogens. I kind of like to think of it as a safety net for my nutrition in case I've missed something in my diet. Two, they treat AG1 like a software product. Apparently they're on their 52nd iteration and they're constantly evolving it based on latest science research studies and internal testing that they do.

Lenny (00:40:39):
And three, it's just one easy thing that I can do every single day to take care of myself. Right now, it's time to reclaim your health and arm your immune system with convenient daily nutrition. It's just one scoop and a cup of water every day. And that's it. There's no need for a million different pills and supplements to look out for your health. Make it easy. Athletic Greens is going to give you a free one year supply of immune supporting vitamin D and five free travel packs with your first purchase. All you have to do is visit athleticgreens.com/lenny.

Lenny (00:41:10):
Again, that's athletic greens.com/lenny to take ownership over your health and pick up the ultimate daily nutritional insurance.

Lenny (00:41:18):
One question on my mind before we get into these three elements, last question kind of setting context is if I'm a non founder or a PM, I'm just like, oh my God, a branding exercise is going to take months going to suck up all these resources. I don't know what it's going to do for us. What kind of timeframe do you recommend for early stage companies to go through kind of a branding exercise and go through something like this and maybe even later stage, what's reasonable?

Arielle Jackson (00:41:45):
Yeah. It depends on the stage of your company and how much you have already that you have to kind of... It's hard for people to scrap up what they already have. There's a lot of sunk cost fallacy type stuff going on. If you're starting from nothing, I think you can do this in three weeks. The naming process itself because of trademark and domains can take a little longer. When I name companies, it usually takes about a month just for naming, but the whole brand strategy process you could do, if you're a really early stage company in a matter of weeks.

Arielle Jackson (00:42:15):
And I think whatever time it takes you actually is going to save you so much time down the road. It's going to help you save time on company decision making. It's going to help you save time, writing your website. Literally your web copy almost writes itself, if you get this all done right. So it's a small investment of time up front that actually saves you a lot of time down the road is how I would sell it to a skeptical PM.

Lenny (00:42:40):
You've sold it. That sounds very high ROI. Let's get into it.

Arielle Jackson (00:42:43):
High ROI.

Lenny (00:42:43):
So purpose is the first piece. What is that? And then what are some examples of really good executions of purpose that you've seen?

Arielle Jackson (00:42:50):
Sure. So your purpose is why you do what you do. It makes people want to root for you. And it has a big role in aligning people to come want to work for you and to have employees all feel like they're part of something. I like to think of it as we exist to blank. And whatever that blank is your purpose. Do you want to hear about examples or do you want to hear about what makes a good purpose?

Lenny (00:43:14):
Both would be most excellent.

Arielle Jackson (00:43:16):
So a good purpose, it explains the change you want to see in the world irrespective of financial gain. So people often get hung up on mission and vision and values and all this stuff. And values are fine. They're internal. I'm not going to talk about those today, but I don't care about mission and vision. I just want one thing because people can only remember one thing and it's your purpose and it's why you do what you do. And when you articulate this really well, it helps you make company decisions, it exists on a 10 year frame. So everything we talk about with product positioning, it's pretty malleable. It exists on an 18 month frame if you're a early stage company, so it can evolve, whereas your purpose is pretty much going to stay the same for 10 years. It's that north star.

Arielle Jackson (00:44:03):
And it helps align people in the company and it helps the public want you to win. I worked at Google right out of grad school and Google's purpose was to organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and useful. And I thought every company had a purpose that everyone at the company knew. I just thought that was my first real job. It turns out that's not true. And Google's actually been amazing at this. I had a person in my last cohort who had recently left Google when they were like, I don't know, 80 or a hundred thousand people. He said everyone still can say that. That's amazing. But I joined, it was like 1400 people. And by the time of your first day, you already knew that. It was part of your hiring process.

Arielle Jackson (00:44:51):
It was part of your onboarding. It was in your offer letter. It was everywhere. And I just thought that was really cool and a good purpose. One that is kind of related to financial gain, but I still think is cool is Stripe's, which is to increase the GDP of the internet. I think that's really well said and cool and just gets you thinking about the internet as a country. I don't know. If you're an internet person, it makes you want to root for them.

Arielle Jackson (00:45:21):
Nike's is awesome. I wrote Nike's down because I don't remember it, to bring inspiration and innovation to every athlete in the world. And if you have a body, you are an athlete. It's not just about LeBron it's about me and how was my Peloton ride this morning too? So those are some famous companies. I could tell you a little bit about some that I've worked on that I think are pretty cool that are companies you may not have heard of yet, just because sometimes we get hung up in like thinking Stripe and Nike and Google are awesome names because of all the meaning we have behind them. And I want to talk about some companies you may not have heard of because you can have a good purpose and not be Stripe and Nike and Google.

Lenny (00:46:07):
Yeah. That'd be awesome. And by the way, the purpose, should it be a sentence? Is that the general-

Arielle Jackson (00:46:08):
Yes.

Lenny (00:46:08):
... guideline. Great.

Arielle Jackson (00:46:09):
So you can introduce yourself at a conference. You're the keynote speaker at a conference and I want you to introduce yourself and I want you to go, hi, I'm Lenny, I'm the founder of the company X, and we exist to blah and say it and have that feel natural.

Lenny (00:46:21):
Awesome.

Arielle Jackson (00:46:22):
And it should make people want to hear what else you have to say. And the other thing it should be able to do is be the header for your about page. So meaning we exist to blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. But you would just take out the we exist and say the verb and start there. That could be the header for your about page. So one company I worked on, First Round company, they're called LogicLoop and it's an operations automation company.

Arielle Jackson (00:46:48):
You can think of it almost stuff like a no code, low code platform to automate a lot of the operations data based work that people have to do. And we did this whole brainstorm and I really liked their purpose. You can look at their about page. It will be right there it's to make operations data work harder than operations people. And if you ever have worked in operations or have friends who have, they work really, really hard and it can be kind of thankless. So it gets anyone in that field to root for you. Your data should be working harder than your operations people.

Lenny (00:47:21):
Disclaimer, I'm an investor in LogicLoop, and I love that you worked with them.

Arielle Jackson (00:47:24):
Cool. Awesome. And then another one that I worked on of another First Round company, they're called Woolf. They're informed by the UC model where there's a bunch of individual schools that all exist by themselves, but they get something from being part of a larger organization. And what they do is they provide accreditation through being part of the larger Woolf University, but every individual college can still operate as their own independent college.

Arielle Jackson (00:47:52):
And so their purpose is to increase access to world class higher education and ensure that it is globally recognized and transferable. So this idea of you should be able to take a class from the best instructor online and then go travel to Australia and take a class there and then go to China and take a class there and get the best education that the world can offer.

Arielle Jackson (00:48:15):
Another one that I worked on a while ago is Alt. I think they've recently gone through a little bit of like a rebranding, but theirs was to increase the transparency and liquidity of alternative assets. And in their case, the product positioning was really about making sports cards as easy to invest in as stocks. So the idea of alternative assets in this case are not private equity and hedge funds in real estate, but alternatives to alternatives, like sports cards and Pokemon cards and art.

Lenny (00:48:45):
Awesome. Those are so many awesome examples. That's going to be useful for people to wrap their head around what a purpose might be. Execution wise, do you just kind of open up a Google doc and just start writing out ideas and brainstorm a little bit and just kind of keep refining with your team?

Arielle Jackson (00:48:58):
I actually stole this exercise or borrowed it from [inaudible 00:49:03] that I actually think adds some structure to that. If you do it that way and it works for you, that's awesome. But if you want to go in and go through a process to get there, what I like to do is list all of the cultural tensions that are happening in the world that are relevant to your business first. And so for Alt, that would be things like there's an increase in interest in alternatives. People who are now in their 30s are nostalgic for things that happened in the '90s There is at the time really low interest rates and people are not getting any sort of edge off of investing in the things that their parents used to invest in. So those would be examples of cultural tensions. Cultural tensions are zeitgeist, their things that your audience might be thinking of.

Arielle Jackson (00:49:51):
They're things that they may be even subconscious to them, their current events. So you make a long list of all of those. Then you make a long list of all the ways that you might describe your brand's best self. And this is related to your product positioning, but let's say you haven't done yet, so just think of it as your brand's best self. How would we want someone to describe us? When everything works perfectly, and our product really delivers, what does it deliver? And again, bullets, just ways that you would talk about that. And then you pick one from each side, that's really the best articulation of what's happening in the world, what your product delivers, and with that context, now you're primed.

Arielle Jackson (00:50:30):
With that context in mind, now you do the brainstorm of, we exist to let me finish this sentence, and even before you get there, sometimes it's helpful to do the world would be a better place if. So for my company, the world would be a better place if, and finish that sentence and then go into the we exist to.

Lenny (00:50:49):
Wow. I'm so happy I asked that question. By the way, is there also a place we can point people to that want to do this exercise? Is there another First Round interview post, or I know you have a course on this too.

Arielle Jackson (00:50:59):
Yeah. There's another First Round review article it's called Three Moves Every Startup Founder Should Make, something like that

Lenny (00:51:07):
Great. I will find it and I'll add it.

Arielle Jackson (00:51:09):
Yeah. Okay. Awesome.

Lenny (00:51:10):
Amazing. Okay. Let's move on to the next part, which is around positioning, which is a big deal. First, just what is positioning? And then I'd love to know just what tells you may have a positioning problem, that's something you should really focus on?

Arielle Jackson (00:51:23):
Okay. So positioning is the space that you occupy in your target customer's mind and everything you can do to influence how they describe your product. You have a positioning problem if I ask 10 of your customers or 10 of your employees what the company does or what the product does. And I get multiple answers. And unfortunately that's the case for most companies. It's okay if the answers are tiny slight variance on the same thing, but I have actually done this with some later stage companies [inaudible 00:52:01] my first step is often I go in and I interview 10 people, and the 10 people are everyone from execs to people who talk to customers to a few customers. And when you get 10 people saying 10 wildly different things, you have a positioning problem. Other ways you might know that if you have a positioning problem is if you can't explain what you do to me in a sentence that's, you have a positioning problem.

Lenny (00:52:25):
That's a high bar.

Arielle Jackson (00:52:26):
Yeah, it is. And when I first started consulting, I would spend the first meeting with a founder, just totally cold. Hey, tell me about your company. And they would take 30 minutes to tell me about their company. And at the end of 30 minutes, I would pretty much get it, but it always took the first 30 minutes. So now when I engage with a new company, I have them fill out this little worksheet beforehand. And one of the questions is what do you do? And they have to write in a box that's kind of paragraph length.

Lenny (00:52:55):
Clever.

Arielle Jackson (00:52:56):
And then I go in and I ask questions about that. And ultimately we get it to sentence length.

Lenny (00:53:00):
Amazing. Okay. How do you go about figuring out your positioning? Big question.

Arielle Jackson (00:53:05):
Yeah. So I start with your audience. Who's this for? And we really think about what's the broadest set of customers or users that you might have and narrow in from there to a target audience, which is who are you outwardly going to try to acquire for the next 18 months?

Arielle Jackson (00:53:25):
You can think of it like concentric circles. The biggest circle is your TAM. As you get smaller, there's five parts to it. So the biggest circle is circle one, circle two, circle three, circle four is your target audience. All of the circles have to be contained within the bigger circle. And then the dot in the middle is your model persona. So this is actually like a person with a name and an age and a location and a job and feelings and priorities and interests and all of that.

Arielle Jackson (00:53:54):
And so we talk about the model user and the target audience, the target audience again is who will you outwardly try to acquire for the next 18 months? If you're an early stage company, it's very possible that you're going to acquire people outside of that circle, in the next circle or even the bigger circle, but they're not who you're actively going out to try to acquire.

Lenny (00:54:15):
Can I ask you a couple questions on the person?

Arielle Jackson (00:54:17):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:54:18):
I'm doing some writing and research into this stuff. How specific do you suggest people get with this person right at the middle? I love that it's an actual person, I guess not a real person, but a very descriptive [crosstalk 00:54:29]

Arielle Jackson (00:54:29):
Can be a real person or an amalgamation of not real people. So with the target audience, I like to think of it as something you could name. So with Eero, it was tech savvy dads. It's a category of people. And then the model persona, or that individual user who represents a tech savvy dad for them was this guy who had teenage kids lived in suburban St. Louis, had a 2,800 Square foot house that was made of brick, worked at home on Fridays. His kids were into gaming. He was the VP of sales at a company that was tech adjacent, but not tech. He was more of like a tech enthusiast than an actual software engineer. We knew a lot about him. I could tell you a lot about him. It's kind of robust, but tech savvy dads was the way to represent him and other people like him, that would be their target audience.

Lenny (00:55:22):
A lot of founders have trouble recognizing that going very focused and niche is a good idea versus man, I'm just going to have these 10 people in the world that really want what I want. What have you found to be the reason it's very powerful and important to start really focused?

Arielle Jackson (00:55:37):
Yeah. So when you are an early stage company, the worst thing you can do is try to be everything to everyone because you don't have enough runway. You just don't have enough of anything to do that successfully. The best thing you can do is find an audience that is big enough, that if you got your significant market share among that audience, you'd be a giant business. And tech savvy dads is a pretty big audience. Also that's just who your outbound going to try to acquire for the next 18 months. I'm a tech savvy mom. I live with a tech savvy dad. I have an Eero system. It doesn't mean everyone you'll ever acquire must be in that audience, it means that is who we're focused on acquiring.

Lenny (00:56:24):
Awesome. I took us off course around the positioning process. I think we kind of went off course with concentric circles model. So I'll give it back to you to keep going.

Arielle Jackson (00:56:36):
Yeah. Okay. So the way that I like to run positioning exercise is to start with who is this for? And then what is the problem that they have? There's some problem usually that these people have, they may not even be aware it's a problem, or they may not be experiencing the problem as particularly troubling, but there's something going on for these people. And then how do they address that problem today? So they do something, they're buying something, they're have a workaround, they're doing something today. And that something might not be another startup or your direct competitor. It might be the old way of doing things, but they're doing something. So we go through who is it for? What's their problem? How do they address it? And then what do you make?

Arielle Jackson (00:57:20):
How does it work? And what would you want a user of your product or service to tell another? And that's kind of if you answer all of those questions, it ultimately leads into this classic four statement, which is not something I invented, it's something that's been around for 40 or 50 years. And I learned it when I was 22. And I think it's one of the most powerful tools in marketing. It can feel like mad libs if you just approach it cold. But if you've gone through that work of defining who is it and what's their problem, all it is a distillation of that. So that statement is for target audience who there's a statement of need or opportunity. And then you say our product name is a category that has a benefit, unlike the old thing they were doing, our product works this other way.

Lenny (00:58:10):
Awesome. And we'll link to the post that actually has that so people don't have to write this all down. That last piece you mentioned, I hadn't heard before, the idea of what will they tell other people or how will they describe it to other people? Is that right?

Arielle Jackson (00:58:22):
Yeah. So I believe that great benefits if you've defined your benefit really, really well will actually be the thing that will be the H1 on your homepage and will be the thing that you want someone to tell someone else. Think about Square Stand and turn your iPad into a point of sale. Turn your iPad into a point of sale. Yeah. If I went to a small business owner and they were having drinks with a friend, who's also a small business owner, what would I want them to say about the Square Stand? Oh yeah. I just got the Square Stand. It's this really cool new register that turns my iPad into a point of sale. That's pretty much exactly what I want them to say. And so if you can write that line, that is your ideal benefit, what you want people to say, and it's something that your target audience would actually say, that's great.

Lenny (00:59:12):
Interesting. I love that. That makes a lot of sense. For people trying to go through this exercise, you always have such a good answers to how actually the process of coming up with say you're positioning this case, is it again, you pull up a doc and start writing things or is there something even more structured?

Arielle Jackson (00:59:28):
Yeah. There's something more structured. I have kind of a worksheet that goes through all those things we just talked about. So it's like, who is it for? What are they doing today? All those questions we just talked about, it's more like a structured brainstorm. There's an exercise I really love that I've called the bar test that is helping you get everything you've written into human language because one of the really big pitfalls I see, especially for B2B companies, but really for everyone is they write in a way that people don't talk. So the document, when I get the first draft back from founders often has things like leverages and empowers and nobody talks like that. And so getting this into turns your iPad into a point of sale blankets your home in fast, reliable wifi, records your screen and cam at the same time, really basic stuff that it describes your product in a way that someone would actually say that's the type of language that I think people want to use.

Arielle Jackson (01:00:28):
First of all, you defined your target. Now you pretend to be someone in your target, having drinks with someone else in your target at a bar and you have to be able to say, hey, I just started using product name. It's this really great category, that benefit. And the other person goes, hm, tell me more or that's cool, what do you mean? Or some other similar prompts. And then you have to say your differentiator. You actually have to say it out loud. And if you run through that test and it's actually stuff people would say out loud, then you've done a pretty good job and you can start using that copy publicly.

Lenny (01:01:07):
That is very cool. I have not heard this bar test before and I like that it might happen at an actual bar. Is that also something people can find online or is that they write it down right now?

Arielle Jackson (01:01:18):
Ooh, I don't know if that's online.

Lenny (01:01:20):
Okay, cool. This is it. Exclusive.

Arielle Jackson (01:01:22):
Yeah, that's in my course, and we talk a lot about that and we go through the exercise like a real role play in the course, but yeah, take some notes.

Lenny (01:01:31):
I like that a lot.

Arielle Jackson (01:01:33):
Thanks.

Lenny (01:01:33):
Your point reminded me of an email I just pulled up that I got from ADP, your point about just you want to make sure you're branding is something that feels like something you would say to a person. So it's like ADP, which is a security service for fire, like alarms. I got this email, summer's on with fun or our free secure app and more. And then it's like make summer safer and more fun at home or away. ADP, you're not going to make it more fun. What are you talking about?

Arielle Jackson (01:02:01):
See, that's an example of trying too hard. They tried too hard to make it sound colloquial and fun. They're a security system, it should be more like secure your home while you're away. Feel safe when you're on your summer trip. Stuff like that.

Lenny (01:02:16):
They even included a gif of this TikTok'er being like ADP is my MVP.

Arielle Jackson (01:02:21):
Yeah. This kind of relates to brand personality where the brand personality for ADP, I don't know, it's pretty not fun. And so for them, when they put on fun hat, it seems awkward and forced.

Lenny (01:02:36):
That's exactly the feeling I got. And so, yeah, personality, that's our next topic. It's not something I you think about when you think about brand and marketing and plans and so I'm really curious to hear why I think that's important then how to figure out your own personality for your brand.

Arielle Jackson (01:02:51):
So I think personality is one of those inputs that will help define your visual design and it will definitely help define your written copy. And it really comes from this idea of brands are like people. And if you start thinking of your brand more like a person, it's quite obvious that it needs a personality, because all people have personalities. And these days, especially when brands show up in places where people show up, like TikTok and Instagram, your brand certainly needs a personality or else you end up like ADP trying to be fun for the summer, which just feels really off and weird. So personality is one of those things that it's actually the easiest part. I think it's the fastest part. It often ends up an hour and you can get it done. But I have some frameworks I like to use that really just get at are you Mountain Dew or are you Rolex or are you somewhere in between?

Arielle Jackson (01:03:46):
And when you think about brands that have a lot of equity, they really do have a personality. I often talk about Mountain Dew marketing as that marketing that's like trying really hard to be cool and rugged and edgy and fast and kind of teen and Rolex, it's very like Gray Poupon, oh, roll down your window and do you have any Gray Poupon, it's fancy and sophisticated and a little bit aspirational and maybe even a little British. And those two things are really, really, really different. And there's a lot in the middle and not everyone's going to be a Mountain Dew or Rolex, but where are you? And so you can just write it down. I think a lot of these answers come back to like, if you are good with just opening a blank Google doc and like writing down who you are by all means, go for it.

Arielle Jackson (01:04:35):
And if that feels daunting and hard for you, use a framework. And the framework that I like to use has two parts. The first part is based on some academic research by Jennifer Aker and it basically analyzed the top brands in the world and figured out that all brands can be segmented into five dimensions of brand personality. And that really strong brand spike in two of the five. So the five dimensions that she found were sincerity, so this is like, is it down to earth and honest, excitement, it's spirited, this is a Mountain Dew thing, competence, reliable and intelligent, sophisticated, sophistication, which is a charming and upper class and rugged outdoorsy and tough. So sincerity, excitement, competence, sophistication, and ruggedness. And going back to those two brands we just discussed Mountain Dew is rugged and exciting, Rolex is sophisticated and competent and you can do this with any brand who admire or just think about brands you like and kind of deduce them to their two of those five.

Arielle Jackson (01:05:39):
So that's the first step. Which two of those five are you going to spike in? And it turns out a lot of tech companies end up spiking in sincerity and competence just usually does happen that way. Amazon is sincere and competent. Google is sincere and competent. Apple is not, Apple has a little more of that sophistication to it. But in any case, if you just did that, we would end in a world where everyone's sincere and competent or maybe sophisticated and competent. It's like a really boring world. So the next step after you do that is to define five attributes, five brand personalities, thinking about those two dimensions. I like to think about this as a star, five point star and brands need tension to be interesting. So if you tell me we're helpful, we're nice, we're approachable, we're competent, and we're reliable.

Arielle Jackson (01:06:37):
You basically haven't told me anything because you just use three words to say one thing and two words to say another thing. Whereas if you tell me, oh, well we're really savvy, but we're also really approachable. That's kind of cool. Because people who are expert are always approachable. They have to have a little tension and then you want to write them as statements that say we are X, but not Y, where Y is taking X too far. So in the example Google is playful but not silly, so they would say we are playful, but not silly, or maybe Mountain Dew would say we are daring, but not stupid. So taking that attribute a little too far. And so yeah, then you end up with these five statements that are we are X, but not Y. And those are really useful in informing how you write and maybe even what your visual design would look like, and certainly what your illustration style photography style ad copy will be like.

Lenny (01:07:39):
Once you've gone through that exercise and in maybe the other two pieces, where do you put this? Is this just like in a doc that's like here's our brand overview, here's our personality, here's our positioning, here's our purpose. And then you refer back to that whenever you're designing and putting together strategies? Is that how it works?

Arielle Jackson (01:08:00):
Yeah, you could do it that way. That's definitely one way of doing it. That's a good start. I think that one other place where it shows up, like we talked about that visual style guide that everyone has, that they give to an agency or copywriter who's writing on their behalf. I think these should all be inputs into that doc that you end up sharing. I think it should go into any onboarding you do for new employees so that they understand who the company is. Any partners that you're marketing with, co-branding, all of that, it should really be think of it as your little brand Bible about who you are. And also it should be revisited when you're doing, let's say a new product or to make sure does this need to be updated or does this new product need to fit into who we are?

Lenny (01:08:40):
What do you call this document/place?

Arielle Jackson (01:08:44):
When I take all those three components and then add a bunch of other stuff, I call it a creative brief, which is the thing you would hand to an agency or a writer who's writing on your behalf. It would include some other things too, that we didn't talk about, like creative inspiration direction. So picking visual clips and written clips and all these things that you like and that you don't like, so you can show both positive examples and counter examples to the thing you're looking for.

Lenny (01:09:09):
Awesome. Thank you for all of that. There's so much juice there. I think people are going to have to listen to this a couple times to get all the learnings. Before I let you go, there's two other areas I wanted to dive into. But I'll keep them brief because I know we're going long. One is about getting PR and just a question I wanted to ask you while I had you, founders and even bigger companies, they're always like, how do I get PR? How do I get press for my product, even though it's sometimes a waste of time. Do you have just any tactical advice for startups hoping to get some PR?

Arielle Jackson (01:09:43):
You mean initial coverage around a launch or ongoing?

Lenny (01:09:47):
I'd say early on, yeah, before the launch.

Arielle Jackson (01:09:49):
Sure. So the first one is to get your story straight. So, so many times I have founders come to me and they're like, hey, we need help with this announcement. I'm like, cool. What's the announcement? And back to the 30 minutes until I understand what the company is, so if you can't describe it to me in a sentence, your reporter is certainly not going to understand in a sentence and they won't be able to describe it to their audience in a sentence. And so really getting your story straight, all the stuff we talked about specifically around product positioning is so key. Almost always when someone comes to me and says, I'm ready to announce, we go back to positioning first. Also make sure that your website is ready for the traffic you're going to drive to it, that you're not driving traffic to a name that you're going to later scrap.

Arielle Jackson (01:10:32):
Are you really ready for this? So go back to all the other things we discussed first and then having realistic expectations about the outlets that will cover you and the time it will take to get them. So a lot of people will be like, I'm launching next week. And it's like, well, cool that you're doing that, but no reporters going to cover you next week. It just doesn't work like that anymore. Five years ago, eight years ago, founders could really dictate the date of a launch announcement, they could brief three to five outlets under embargo, which means like you all can't tell our secret news until we tell you at this time you can publish. And at that time, three of the five would all file a story and write, and it just doesn't work like that anymore. These days for early stage startups, we're almost always running the launch announcement as an exclusive, which means you give the news to a single outlet.

Arielle Jackson (01:11:19):
And they're the only ones who get to write about it. You can obviously still do all your owned and operated stuff, your blog, your social, your investors, your friends and family, but they're the only like news outlet who gets to write about it. So having an expectation that this is probably going to be an exclusive, it's harder than ever to secure funding for a seed stage company and funding in and of itself is not that interesting anymore. There's so many bad companies getting funding. There's so many good companies getting funding too just more than ever. And the number of reporters and the number of outlets that are covering it is just less than it used to be. So really just thinking about like, well, who writes about this space? Do they write about company's at my stage?

Arielle Jackson (01:12:08):
That's another really big one is, hey, we want the New York Times. It's like, cool, no one's at the New York Times has ever covered a seed stage startup unless it's crazy for the last five years. Who do you think is going to write about you? But there are still outlets that do. The other one is don't do a straight funding announcement. A lot of founders raise money and they're like, cool, let's announce. It's like, no, we'll use that funding announcement as a news hook to tell a larger story and a larger story might be your products available. You have reference customers, you have momentum, you have some great partnership that you're announcing. There's something else going on, not just your funding and using your funding as part of that initial launch is great, but what else are you announcing?

Arielle Jackson (01:12:55):
The last thing is really about making what you do interesting and relevant so that it's not just interesting and relevant to you and the three other people who worked there at the time, but interesting to all the readers of whatever outlet you're trying to target. And so an example of that is I worked on this company, Vitable Health and the founder, Joseph, he created a product for hourly workers that their employer would buy and it costs like $50 per person per month. And what it does is it provides urgent care and primary care. So these hourly workers who make too much to qualify for Medicaid and too little to pay their health insurance premiums, and so primary and urgent care for hourly workers. And we tied it into this idea of the great resignation and small businesses not being able to hire hourly workers, which was like a big trend end of 2021, and the company operates in Philadelphia and Delaware, and we were actually able to get him the Sunday after Christmas, Philadelphia Inquirer story.

Arielle Jackson (01:13:57):
But it was all about making this daycare and this restaurant in Philadelphia into heroes because they offered this cool benefit to their hourly workers. And so the headline was perfect for them, but it wasn't like here's Vitable and here's what they announced and here's, it was like, hey, look at this cool new thing that local businesses are doing to attract hourly workers. And so think about your company in a way to make it interesting and relevant and don't sleep on local preps.

Arielle Jackson (01:14:23):
If you have a local business or a local story or local customers, this was a huge thing at Square. We turned all of our customers into heroes and went after local press. Most PR firms that service the tech community aren't experts in local press, but if you have a way to make some connections with some local press, they are the ones hungry for these stories more than the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal.

Lenny (01:14:50):
What a good tip and most likely they're much more open to writing about you versus New York Times or Wall Street Journal. Cool. Okay. So I want to ask you one question about hiring marketing real quick and I'll keep it short just because I know we're going to run out of time. When should a startup hire a full-time marketing person in your experience?

Arielle Jackson (01:15:08):
When you have a lot of problems that you're trying to solve that would be better solved by someone who knew what they're doing, or when you have a bunch of freelancers and agencies that are becoming too hard to manage by yourself.

Lenny (01:15:21):
When do you find that usually ends up being... Is there kind of a heuristic-

Arielle Jackson (01:15:25):
Yeah. Ballpark, it kind of depends if you're a marketing driven business or a sales driven business. So if you're a sales driven business and you don't have a repeatable sales motion, it's not yet time to hire a marketer, get that repeatable sales motion, and marketing's job is to bring you more marketing qualified leads. So that's one, so that kind of depends. If you're a marketing driven business, it generally seems to me like it happens around 10 people, the founders doing most of this themselves, they're not doing the best job usually or they've hired agency here, a freelancer there to kind of cobble some stuff together. And they now realize like, okay, if I had a person who would be able to do all of this and manage these agencies and freelancers, this would be a lot better.

Arielle Jackson (01:16:13):
It also is do you have a one point in time project? Do you need to do positioning? Do you need a website? Do you need a name? Do you need to run a test of Google ads? Those things are all discreet when it becomes this is ongoing work that needs to happen over time. It's better to think about hiring a marketer and really what kind of marketer do you need? Do you need a product marketer, a performance marketer, a comms person, a creative person? Ideally everyone wants all of that. But I kind of like that idea of a T-shaped marketer who's really deep on one of those functions, but knows enough to be dangerous across all of them.

Lenny (01:16:48):
I think we're going to need another episode just about that one topic. I have so many questions I want to ask, but I need to let you go. That'll be V2. Before we do that, we've gotten to the very exciting lightning round where I'm just going to ask you quick questions and you just give me a quick answer and we will knock through them all. Does that sound good?

Arielle Jackson (01:17:06):
Sounds great.

Lenny (01:17:07):
What are two or three books that you recommend most to other people?

Arielle Jackson (01:17:09):
In marketing land, definitely the book called Positioning: The Battle for Your Mind. It's from 1980, it's still my favorite marketing book. Another recent marketing book is Alchemy by Rory Sutherland. It's like my favorite area of reading is behavioral science, psychology meets business. And that's in there. For fiction, I just read The Vanishing Half by Brit Bennett. It was awesome. I then read her other book called The Mothers, but I think The Vanishing Half's better.

Lenny (01:17:36):
Awesome. I will check that out. What's a favorite podcast or even newsletter on marketing?

Arielle Jackson (01:17:41):
I love Nick Sharma's weekly newsletter. He's a growth marketer. He started his career I think at [inaudible 01:17:48] water. So he does a lot of CPG type DTC. He has a great marketing newsletter that comes out every Sunday night. On podcasts, I love How I Built This. I know that's already really popular, but I love that one. It's not really marketing, but just general business. The First Round podcast in depth is pretty great. Lenny's podcast I've been listening to is awesome. And then my friend Jasmine from The Concept Bureau has a marketing podcast called Unseen, Unknown. And it's kind of about culture and branding and how these things and society and trends. It's not like straight marketing. It's kind of more of the culture and sociology that informs marketing.

Lenny (01:18:30):
Wow. That is a lot of good stuff. What's a recent movie or TV show that you've loved?

Arielle Jackson (01:18:35):
This is more embarrassing. How many movies have you seen in the last year? Just curious.

Lenny (01:18:41):
Me? A lot, on streaming services. Way too many also, if that's where you're going or have you seen none?

Arielle Jackson (01:18:48):
Well, I've seen maybe four and they're probably all on Disney+.

Lenny (01:18:53):
You're winning. That's excellent.

Arielle Jackson (01:18:56):
I would say I really like some of those Disney Pixar movies, Luca, Encanto. Those are all really great. I mostly only watch movies with my kids, but I'm pretty excited. I had a celebrity crush on Anthony Bourdain and I'm excited to watch his new documentary if I ever get around to it. And TV shows I'm equally bad.

Lenny (01:19:16):
Okay, great.

Arielle Jackson (01:19:16):
And there's this little Netflix show called Old Enough. It's a Japanese show with subtitles about sending toddlers on errands in Japan. They like go by themselves. It's 10 minutes. They're awesome. My whole family watched them together. It's really cute.

Lenny (01:19:29):
Old Enough. I'm going to check that out. Okay. Two more questions. Favorite interview question when hiring a marketing person?

Arielle Jackson (01:19:35):
It's probably tell me a project you're proud of. Tell me about a project you're proud of, is just really open-ended and get to hear a lot about a lot of things that way. And then maybe runner up is tell me about a campaign you recently come across that you were not involved with that you thought was cool.

Lenny (01:19:53):
Hmm. Love that. Okay. Final question. Who else in the industry do you most respect as a thought leader?

Arielle Jackson (01:20:01):
In the marketing industry?

Lenny (01:20:02):
In the marketing industry? Yeah, sure.

Arielle Jackson (01:20:04):
I guess old school thought leaders, David Ogilvy, Rory Sutherland, Seth Godin. New school thought leaders, we mentioned Nick Sharma. There's a woman named... I'm probably going to butcher her name, Anna Andjelic. She has a newsletter that I didn't mention before. It's called the Sociology of Business. That's really good. She's a CMO, chief brand officer type. She kind of turned around Banana Republic recently, which was cool. Emily Hayward from Red Antler. I also really like Ross. I don't know this guy, but Ross Simmons from Foundation, which is a content marketing agency. I'm not a content marketing expert, but he really is. And I think he puts out some good content.

Lenny (01:20:48):
Man, these show notes are going to be a long list of great stuff. Arielle, thank you so much for being here. There's just so much jampacked knowledge. I don't know if people were prepared when they started listening to this and so congrats on making it through and I hope you're probably going to go back and listen again and again. And so again, Arielle, thank you so much for doing this. Two last questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out or ask questions and how can listeners be useful to you?

Arielle Jackson (01:21:14):
Sure I'm on Twitter and LinkedIn. Twitter, I'm hiimarielle. And if you're interested in this stuff, but feeling overwhelmed, I will plug my Maven course. I teach a course on startup brand strategy that covers everything we talked about in this hour, or this is more than an hour now and kind of with a little more hand holding and feedback. So it's a crash course on all this stuff. The four founders that takes two weeks and you go through all of this and that next cohort of that, I think we're on cohort four will be this fall. So you can apply for that course at maven.com/arielle/startupbrandstrategy.

Lenny (01:21:57):
Amazing. And I guess that's how listeners can be useful to you.

Arielle Jackson (01:22:00):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:22:01):
Excellent.

Arielle Jackson (01:22:01):
Exactly.

Lenny (01:22:02):
All right. Well great. All right, well thank you again, thank you again and [inaudible 01:22:07].

Arielle Jackson (01:22:07):
Thanks so much, Lenny. It was fun.

Lenny (01:22:09):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Barbra Gago (00:00):
When you're building a category, you need to make sure that there is a category that's validated by analysts and directory sites and things like that. But also, you want to have a lot of traction in terms of thought leadership like why is this the category? What are the unique value propositions of this particular thing? What are the pain points it solves? And then of course, getting a lot of content around because when you're generating a new category, you're also needing to educate buyers that there is a category that they can now budget for and why they should allocate budget for that.

Lenny (00:40):
Welcome to Lenny's podcast. I'm Lenny, and my goal here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. I interview world class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard learned experiences, building and scaling today's most successful companies.

Lenny (00:54):
Today, my guest is Barbra Gago. Barbra was chief marketing officer and global head of Marketing at Miro where she helped build their global brand and create a whole new software category for the space. Before that, she was VP of marketing at Greenhouse where she brought the product to market and led their go-to market strategy. And she was also head of marketing at CultureAmp where she helped build their go-to market plan and close their first 50 customers.

Lenny (01:18):
In our conversation, we focus on three topics: creating your own category, when it makes sense to explore that, when to avoid it and how to go about it; building your brand and rebranding when it makes sense to, and building opinionated software. I've never seen a post or a podcast get as deep into category creation or rebranding, and I'm confident that you will learn something valuable from this podcast. With that, I bring you Barbra Gago.

Lenny (01:46):
This episode is brought to you by AssemblyAI. If you're looking to build powerful AI-powered features in your audio or video products, then you need to know about AssemblyAI. AssemblyAI is the API platform for state-of-the-art AI models that thousands of product-led growth companies like Spotify, Loom and CallRail are using to infuse AI into their products. With simple APIs, developers and PMs can get access to powerful AI models for transcription, summarization and dozens of other tasks that are fast, secure and production ready. All of their models are researched and trained in-house and continuously updated by their team of AI experts, which for a PM makes it easy to build and ship new AI-powered features.

Lenny (02:30):
Product teams of startups and enterprises are using AssemblyAI to automatically transcribe and summarize phone calls and virtual meetings, detect topics and podcasts, pinpoint when sensitive content is spoken, redact PII from audio videos and way more. Visit assemblyai.com to try AssemblyAI's API for free and start testing their models in their no code playground. That's assemblyai.com.

Lenny (02:57):
Do you want to reduce friction in your onboarding flow? Then let me tell you about Stych, and that's stitch with a Y. Stych is on a mission to eliminate friction from the internet. They're starting by making user authentication and onboarding more seamless and more secure. They offer super flexible out of the box authentication solutions for companies of all sizes, from email magic links to SMS pass codes, one tap social logins to even biometrics. Stych is your all in one platform for authentication.

Lenny (03:27):
Stitch customers have been able to increase conversion by over 60% after spending just one day integrating. And with their API and SDKs, you can improve user conversion and retention and security, all while saving valuable engineering time. Your engineers will come and thank you for using Stych because Stych keeps you from having to build authentication in-house and the integration process is super fast and super smooth. To get $1,000 in free credits, just go to stytch.com/lenny to sign up, and that's stitch with a Y.

Lenny (04:05):
Barbra, welcome to the podcast.

Barbra Gago (04:07):
Thanks, Lenny. Excited to be here.

Lenny (04:10):
Just to start off and set a little context for our listeners, can you give us a 55-second background on some of the wonderful things you've done in your career and what you're up to now?

Barbra Gago (04:21):
Definitely. So I've spent pretty much my entire career in B2B SaaS tech, building and scaling through hyper growth, oftentimes with disruptive technologies at the center of people, tech, future of work. I would say I helped bring products like CultureAmp and Greenhouse to market in the people space. Before that, I did some work in enterprise social networking in the Yammer days. And most recently, I was the CMO at Miro where I also led the rebrand and introduced that product to the world, which was very exciting.

Lenny (05:01):
And you've got a startup now, so maybe you just mention that briefly and then we'll talk about it at the end again. Yeah. What are you working on now?

Barbra Gago (05:08):
Yeah. And now, I'm building a product which we'll see about the category what it ends up being, but it's what we call an employee progression platform. So basically, from the work that I've done as a leader, building and scaling teams and also the exposure I've had in the people tech space, I just have found that there's been a lot of tools lacking for leaders to really coach and develop their team in the right way, creating enough structure and transparency into the process that creates accountability on both sides. So yeah, we're taking on the big goal of killing performance reviews.

Lenny (05:49):
Holy moly. Cool.

Barbra Gago (05:50):
Very exciting

Lenny (05:51):
Performance reviews. Very exciting. It's true. We'll talk about that a bit at the end more. And there's a bunch of stuff I want to dig into. You have such a cool background on so many interesting experiences. The first is something that you mentioned just now, which is category and category creation, which I know is near and dear to your heart. I was reading a bit about your background, and I learned that at Miro, you invented this category that's now called visual collaboration. And at CultureAmp, I think you helped lead the creation of this category, employee experience. I imagine at Greenhouse, you did something similar. And I know startups are often trying to decide, should I create my own category? Should I try to win in an existing category? And so I want to spend some time talking through your experience there.

Lenny (06:32):
And so the first question is just say at Miro or Greenhouse, can you just talk through your thought process of trying to decide, should we invent a whole new category that we're going to win or should we just try to win an existing category and how did that go?

Barbra Gago (06:45):
They're both great examples because in one, we did create a new category and in the other, we tried and abandoned ship. With Miro, I think when I joined the company, there was this concept of an online whiteboard, which also is a category, but it's a much smaller category and it wasn't something that a lot of people searched for. And I think the biggest motivating factor of thinking about category creation at Miro was how do we become something really big and needed by every company and not just this little thing that maybe product teams would use or maybe engineering teams or schools or something like that.

Barbra Gago (07:26):
When you're thinking about category creation, it's really, for us, it was really about the scope of what we're trying to do and not wanting to be in something too small. And I think with Miro, the platform that it is, there is so much possibility. I used to joke that it was, even as a company, we were the ever expanding universe. There's just so much to do there, but online whiteboard was really small.

Barbra Gago (07:52):
Greenhouse is in the ATS category, which is applicant tracking system. And at the time, applicant tracking systems had a really bad name. I don't know if folks that listen to this know of Jobvite or remember Jobvite, and there were a lot of systems before that. Jobvite had come in the mid-2000s as the new and improved ATS and it was all about social recruiting, but it was very transactional and it wasn't very strategic. And so we wanted to steer clear of the ATS space even though we were an ATS. We can talk more about what we tried and what we ended up doing, but I think the main factors when you're thinking about category creation is really what budget companies have, if they have a budget, if they don't have a budget. Companies did have a budget for ATS, for example. Until now, I don't think companies had a budget for visual collaboration. For example, what's the language and the words that people use to describe their pain points and their situation, the things that they need? And then is their competition?

Barbra Gago (08:59):
And sometimes, competition, you would think like, "Oh, we want to not have competition, so let's build a new category." But ultimately, you're not building a category until there is competition. It's not officially actually a category until there's more companies that do that. And that was a big learning for me in this whole process of category creation, is that it's actually okay when new companies come in that say they're that category because it's just validating the fact that there is a new category. So I think it's really ... If and when is really about what the overall objective is and also what the current situation is with competitors and the space. The ATS market is still the ATS market, for example, and Miro has created visual collaboration as a category but also ticks off boxes for other categories as well.

Lenny (09:53):
I have a thousand questions I want to ask to dig deeper. Before we get in there, can you just define, well, what is a category? Folks that are just like, what the hell have you been talking about? What is a product category? What's the high level way to think about this?

Barbra Gago (10:04):
When we talk about category, I think it's really what would be a good way to explore your space and your relevant categories would be to go to G2 Crowd or Software Advice or any of those type of review sites or directory sites and learn about how they've categorized products based on feature sets. And so within each industry, there's going to be a bunch of different types of categories. Those categories are typically products that solve, at least in B2B products, that solve a certain pain point or a set of pain points, and they can be very wide like all in one and big solutions or they can be narrow. There's this all in one versus best in class, for example. And I think that's where the granularity of category comes into play and then how big the market is. Obviously, maps to granularity versus more broad and when are you granular versus when do you go broad? But I think ultimately, it's just a set of features or products that are solving a specific pain point that customers most likely have a budget allocated for.

Lenny (11:17):
And then the category ends up, the way you use it is it's the way you pitch your product often. It's like the big part of the headline, part of the way you sell it. It's like you come back to this we're the leader in visual collaboration, for example, or that's how it practically ends up being used.

Barbra Gago (11:31):
Exactly. It's interesting because I would say that if you're building a category as well, you can sometimes be selling into a category while you're still building the appetite for a different category, which is a nuance, which is all about where's the budget and how do customers describe their pain points?

Lenny (11:53):
This reminds me, I was just trying to pitch my podcast in this little dock I'm writing. And initially, I was like, "Oh, it's like a top hundred business podcast." And I'm like, "No, it's the number one product and growth podcast in the world," which is true, but I created my own category. How about that?

Barbra Gago (12:09):
There you go.

Lenny (12:10):
Was that a good idea?

Barbra Gago (12:11):
I think so. The thing is it's like when you talk about ICP for how you're going to sell your product and really build a repeatable sales process to scale that piece of your business. And the more specific the thing is that you're selling initially, obviously you're going to have more relevant users. They're going to spread word of mouth, etc. You could always expand that scope later. The category can also evolve. You mentioned CultureAmp earlier. The category now is people experience. Actually, when I was there, it was more about people analytics platform or people intelligence platform because we were providing a deep set of data that companies didn't have before, but that category has since evolved as their go-to market has changed, as they've added new products to their platform and new features and things like that.

Lenny (13:06):
To make it even more concrete for people, what are other examples of categories that come to mind that are either invented recently or just generally?

Barbra Gago (13:14):
In the early days, I was working on market automation, for example, so Marketo, now HubSpot, fits into that, even though back then, they were more of this inbound marketing platform/category performance management, which is the area of Pando. We've talked a lot about people, products. I think Gainsight did a great job with the customer success platform, so this is a different problem that they were solving within the organization for a group. The customer success team, basically how are they going to make their customers successful?

Lenny (13:49):
Awesome.

Barbra Gago (13:50):
Okay.

Lenny (13:51):
Yeah, customer success. It's a well name.

Barbra Gago (13:53):
Yes.

Lenny (13:55):
Okay. There's many benefits to try to create your own category, right? We're number one. That's one main category. Two is you can lead the charge on understanding or just defining what's important. I imagine there's other benefits maybe you could share, but there's also probably a lot of downsides. You mentioned oftentimes, it doesn't work and it just ends up being a lot of wasted money. Maybe just talk about what are the reasons to pursue trying to create your own category and then some of the reasons you maybe shouldn't.

Barbra Gago (14:20):
Greenhouse is a great example to talk about a failed approach at creating a category. So I mentioned before the ATS or the applicant tracking system category at the time was just, it carried so much disdain. People had such bad experiences with that whole category of products. No matter what, they weren't strategic. They didn't help people be good at recruiting. It was just a pretty terrible, very transactional experience. And I came in and it was like, "Okay, let's reposition ourselves. We're going to create a new category." We tried several things.

Barbra Gago (14:57):
One of the main things that we zeroed in on was recruiting optimization platform, and it was really like we are doing that. We're helping companies really structure the process, identify where they have gaps, where people are falling through the cracks, where they're flying through the process and really tweak and iterate it and improve it. And we spent time getting content out there, talking to press about it, positioning it in this way. And ultimately, at the end of the day, the budget that customers had and the way that customers talked about what we did, no matter what we called it, was applicant tracking.

Barbra Gago (15:33):
So it didn't really make sense to continue to go against the grain of, no, we're going to be this new thing or we're going to call it this if everybody, even seeing the value and seeing the differentiation of our platform to others, still called it an ATS. We abandoned that process. But I think the main thing that we understood then was instead of spending the time and money to build a new category, we were going to spend the time and money to elevate the value of this category. So rather than changing the category to something else which we could value at whatever it was, we were just going to spend all of our resources to make this whole category much more valuable to the users, to companies. And that really was, along with what CultureAmp was doing at the time in the same space, what set off this whole trajectory of really good, strong people practices and people organizations that were really doing cool stuff on the recruiting side as well as employee engagement.

Lenny (16:35):
You mentioned a few components of when it makes sense to come up with a category. One is there's budget already against it. Two is people use the words associated with that category. I imagine with Miro and this idea of, what was it, visual collaboration, there wasn't budget for that yet. So how does that work?

Barbra Gago (16:53):
No. That is more of the vision piece, I would say. Sometimes you can have a vision that customers, they don't have it yet or they don't share it, but they can grow to share it and they did in that case. And I think that with Miro, we still worked to optimize where we could in terms of the categories that we did fit into or how people talked about us, but it was also such a new format and it was really a disruptive product that didn't exist before in the enterprise so that it was called a lot of different things. So it was much more fluid and people talked about it in different ways, and this was our way of hearing the feedback about how people talked about it as online whiteboard or lots of jobs to be done were framed, mind mapping platform or diagramming or whatever, all of these little things.

Barbra Gago (17:52):
And so visual collaboration was our way of putting a nice bow around this thing that could then be an enterprise product that solves a lot of different problems for a lot of different use cases and different types of users. We started out selling and having a lot of users that were in product and in engineering and teams that were used to using whiteboards anyway and then needed to do it in a distributed way, but very quickly packaged different types of jobs for HR teams or marketing teams or design teams and pretty much anybody in the organization. But it needed to all come together cohesively; otherwise, it was like everybody in the org just calls it a different thing because they use it in a different way.

Lenny (18:37):
Part of what I'm hearing is that you don't stop working on the other categories that it already sits within and just keep optimizing those but in parallel, start to try to pull together, hey, there's this bigger vision of where this could be. Does that sound right?

Barbra Gago (18:50):
I think so. And it's really where you get the inputs from your customers and your users. We heard all these things. Miro, we did a lot of content marketing. That's a big piece of doing category creation generally I would say. But there's a lot of different ways that people talked about it, and so that's an opportunity to actually come and say, okay, here's what it is because no one knows, and it's all of these things and all of these things together equals this now. And then that created momentum where other companies started thinking like that and then they started tagging themselves as that category as well, and then you had a category of multiple companies now that were doing similar stuff.

Lenny (19:35):
Yeah, absolutely. How do you know when it's probably a bad idea to try to create your own category?

Barbra Gago (19:41):
The sooner, the better if you're going to try and fail and iterate. I think if you already are well established, I don't think category creation is really a meaningful effort if you already have ... It's not going to be necessarily a way to just all of a sudden generate new business by creating Q&A new category once you've already gone far enough down the path. I think that if you're not getting ... With the Greenhouse situation, as much as we used this other language and it did get picked up a bit in terms of context that people would use to talk about Greenhouse, it really just wasn't sticking. And so I think it's good to try things and also abandon them and that's okay. You can always sit back into the category. If you really don't fit into any other category, then you probably do need to figure out what the category is and package that. And that's going to be done mostly by continuing to talk to customers and listening to how they talk about things. It all comes from what you hear from them ultimately and what will resonate.

Barbra Gago (20:49):
So I think, yeah, if you're already established, if you really aren't differentiated from other categories in your space, then you probably are in that category. And doing category creation is a lot of work that is not going to be fruitful if you're pretty squarely in something already. And then if you really aren't but you need to figure it out, you're just going to have to keep iterating until you figure out what makes sense to your customers.

Lenny (21:15):
For founders who are listening to this and they're just like, "Oh, this sounds interesting. I want to try to think about a new category maybe for my product." Can you just talk about the mechanics of going through this process of trying to decide what category it should be called, how to roll it out, anything you could share by just the tactics of creating a category?

Barbra Gago (21:36):
The main thing which we've talked a little bit about already is really understanding your customers and their pain points and how they talk about things. All of my best marketing and positioning literally comes from having a million conversations with customers and listening to how they solve problems and how our system helps them solve problems and what they're doing and how they talk about stuff. I think that's step one, is really understanding who those buyers are, how they talk about the product, what's the unique differentiator and selling points?

Barbra Gago (22:10):
One thing that's really important in category creation as well is actually PR. You need to get this category and positioning out there at a high level in order to test it out and see if it makes sense and if it's resonating. And then the other piece is really those directory sites, which the analysts like Gartner and Forrester and all these guys, at least in B2B and enterprise, they really shape for customers what the categories are. And you need to build relationships with them. You need to work with them to create your category as well. So with the visual collaboration, for example, we weren't ranking, we weren't categorized in visual collaboration on G2 Crowd, and we had to meet with them and explain what it was and talk to them about the differentiation of this category versus other categories in terms of features and all of that stuff so that they could understand how they would differentiate this category from another category.

Barbra Gago (23:15):
So I think those are really good channels to look at. And then tactically, it's a lot of content marketing and a lot of thought leadership. When you're building a category, you need to make sure that there is a category that's validated by analysts and directory sites and things like that. But also, you want to have a lot of traction in terms of thought leadership like why is this the category? What are the unique value propositions of this particular thing? What are the pain points it solves? And then of course, getting a lot of content around because when you're generating a new category, you're also needing to educate buyers that there is a category that they can now budget for and why they should allocate budget for that.

Lenny (24:02):
Sounds like a hell of a lot of work.

Barbra Gago (24:03):
It's a lot.

Lenny (24:05):
I'm curious. What percentage of say B2B companies do you think should pursue creating a category? Is it almost none or is it a meaningful percentage?

Barbra Gago (24:13):
It goes in waves with the tech innovations. So for example, when there was the whole first web wave and then there was this whole social enterprise and consumerization of IT was a big change in how technology occurred in the workplace and a lot of new categories came at that point. So I feel like it's less about the raw percentage and more about general inflection points that are happening that are causing the need for this.

Barbra Gago (24:44):
And I take COVID for example and this very quick shift to distributed work was one of those type of inflection points that has changed a lot. A new category that has grown extremely fast is, and I don't even know exactly what they call it, but it's these employment platforms like Deel and Oyster that have cropped up and grown significantly fast and also have created a new category where there was already the ability to hire people in all of these distributed places, but you had to find a company in that place that would then hire the people. And then of course, they created these platforms where, hey, here's a system, you can manage it all here, we'll go and build all those relationships on the ground. And Nayya is a new set of a new category with four or five companies just in the last three years that have cropped up. So I think it's more about what the market demands and what's happening in the market rather than whether or not one company it makes sense for, if that makes sense.

Lenny (25:48):
Yeah, makes sense. It depends on where the tide is pulling everyone. I think that makes a lot of sense.

Barbra Gago (25:52):
Exactly. Yeah.

Lenny (25:53):
Maybe one last question about category creation. So on the surface, there's this binary choice. Either try to become the best ATS platform or we're not ATS, we're employee recruiting automation. Is there a middle ground? Do you have to go one or the other or is there some in between route, maybe positioning a little bit differently or how do you think about that?

Barbra Gago (26:13):
There could be some middle ground. I would say for Pando, for example, performance management is a very established category that we technically fit into, and also there's a line item on the budget and people have money to pay for performance management. But we're introducing this concept of employee progression, which is more of a long tail strategy. So while we want to educate the market and build this new category of employee progression because it's related to the differences between what we're doing and traditional performance management, we're still going to rate ourselves in directory sites, for example, or categorize ourselves as performance management and talk about performance management and sell to companies that are looking for performance management. But ultimately, we want to shift everybody's mindset and change the category.

Barbra Gago (27:09):
So it's not necessarily one or the other, but I do think the investment is high if you want to build a new category, and we're committed to an investment of time and thought leadership and content and all of that stuff, but it's also not our strategy right now to go and create employee progression and own and dominate this. We're going to work our way up to that over time.

Lenny (27:34):
Got it. That connects to what you talked about with Miro. It wasn't like we're switching, we're now visual collaboration. It's like we're still whiteboards, we're the best white boarding tool, but let's also start building this brand of visual collaboration so that people start to learn.

Barbra Gago (27:48):
Exactly. And I think it's a bottoms up mentality much like our business model was there because with marketing automation, it wasn't a progressive buildup. It was marketing automation. That's what the category was. I was working for a company that was doing marketing automation. There was Eloqua and Marketo and several others and we all were just telling everybody, educating the market on what that was, and that was very top down.

Lenny (28:19):
Awesome. This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate growth. If your business stores any data in the cloud, then you've likely been asked or you're going to be asked about your SOC 2 compliance. SOC 2 is a way to prove your company is taking proper security measures to protect customer data and builds trust with customers and partners, especially those with serious security requirements. Also, if you want to sell to the enterprise, proving security is essential. SOC 2 can either open the door for bigger and better deals or it can put your business on hold. If you don't have a SOC 2, there's a good chance you won't even get a seat at the table.

Lenny (29:00):
Beginning a SOC 2 report can be a huge burden, especially for startups. It's time consuming, tedious and expensive. Enter Vanta. Over 3,000 fast growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2. Vanta can get you ready for security audits in weeks instead of months, less than a third of the time that it usually takes. For a limited time, Lenny's podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Just go to vanta.com/lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A dot-com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discount. Get started today.

Lenny (29:38):
I know another area that you spend a lot of time thinking about and you've done a lot of work around is branding, rebranding even and just go to market in general. I know at Miro, you led the charge on rebranding Miro. It used to be called I think RealtimeBoard, the little two capital letters and no space.

Barbra Gago (29:52):
Yeah.

Lenny (29:53):
And with Greenhouse, you basically led the go-to market plan. And so I want to spend a little time here I guess just around rebranding. At Miro, it's a rebrand. How do you know it's time to rebrand your product and it's worth investing there?

Barbra Gago (30:06):
RealtimeBoard was interesting. I almost didn't join because it was called RealtimeBoard. Honestly, I was like, "Oh my, god. This is so literal." While I was walking the dogs with my husband, I'm like, "Am I really going to join a company called RealtimeBoard" Can this be a big company with that name?" I was really concerned about it and ultimately, I spent more time with the leaders there and I was like, "Okay, I think they'll be open to changing the name." So I think there's a maturity piece. A lot of companies are started and you just come up with a name and you don't put a lot of thought into it and then you grow to a certain level. At that time, I think we were a million users, maybe a couple of million in revenue so it was very early days. You had a name, you came up with it, you got the website and then the business grew, and at some point, can it be as big as we want it to be, as we think it can be with that name? And I think that was my biggest thing.

Barbra Gago (31:08):
With RealtimeBoard specifically, it was so literal and matter of fact and the product itself had so much more potential than the name was doing justice for. So I think at some point, it's common for companies to do a rebrand once they go into scale mode before you have too many people and before you invest too much obviously in building that brand. So I think the sooner, the better like rebrand before I even joined. Will they let me change the name was my criteria for joining. And I would say in general, the sooner, the better, but obviously after you know that you have product market fit and you have something to scale, so you don't want to invest too much in a brand that isn't going to get you as far as you want to get if you're going to obviously scale.

Lenny (31:58):
I was going to ask you what it took to convince the founders to rebrand because that's often a big challenge, but it sounds like that's part of your employee agreement. I will join if you give me the right to explore this.

Barbra Gago (32:08):
They were pretty receptive to it. The company was not US-based. I had spent my whole career in Silicon Valley a lot of time with brand and inbound and community-focused brands. So they were pretty receptive. It was not that hard to convince them, which was great. I think the scary part for them and many people was just there was some equity. They did have advocates like how would this impact the people who really loved the product right now? And so one of the things that was really important as we transitioned was that we kept as much of the essence of the initial brand. Before, the logo was like a Post-it and then RealtimeBoard. And so that Post-it, for example, that yellow became the new M that we used, and we actually proposed a hot pink M initially and the yellow M was the, okay, we don't want to go too far from the RealtimeBoard with the yellow Post-it and this was a way to nob to the early base of customers and keep something that was pretty standard and pretty core to the initial brand and name.

Lenny (33:25):
Looking back, do you think that was worth the effort and time to worry about those folks?

Barbra Gago (33:29):
Oh yeah.

Lenny (33:30):
Yeah. Okay.

Barbra Gago (33:31):
Oh, the early folk, we definitely got feedback from along the way. We did case studies throughout the process. We got feedback on logos. We got feedback on brand and designs, and there were plenty of people who were like, "Oh, I like RealtimeBoard. It's straightforward." They loved their product, but ultimately, we kept many of them informed and we really involved them in the process to the degree of not slowing us down but still getting feedback, because we did all of this in a very short period of time on top of it. And I think it was worth it because they felt really good about the outcome as well.

Barbra Gago (34:09):
And a big part of rebranding also means that you have to bring the whole company along too and make sure they feel really good about the outcome. And that was probably one of my big takeaways, is just at that time, we were already about a hundred people, so it wasn't a super small company, and everybody had thoughts and feelings and the company had been around for quite a long time before that. So it was a big change for many people.

Lenny (34:38):
Any other learnings from that experience about just going through a branding or rebranding? Maybe just focusing on rebranding. Any other learnings for future rebranding efforts?

Barbra Gago (34:46):
So rebranding is just the visual aesthetic, and I think that's important to make sure you can transition in a way that you're still nodding to the original things but you've reinvented it or transformed it in a way that makes more sense for where you're at and where you're going. If you're changing the name, it's way more complicated because everybody has to be involved, legal, all the contracts, the website, the product, all the links. We changed our URL. Everything changed. And so I think it's really important that you have to mobilize and align and have a very clear vision about the process and the steps and be very transparent about it. I think a lot of times, marketing teams just go and do their thing and come back and it's like, "Here we go."

Barbra Gago (35:34):
With the rebrand at Miro, it was very much rebrand as a product approach. It was very much a product development process with sprint teams and agile, coming back, and you had owners for different parts of things and all reporting back and it really required everybody in some way to be involved. As I mentioned, we did it in a very condensed period of time. I think we kicked off the naming process in end of October and we launched publicly at South by Southwest with a fully three dimensional booth in March. So it was very short to get a name, and then once we had the name, to do all the actual brand and then not only that but produce an entire booth and event collateral and all of that stuff. So I think mobilizing, having a really strong clear process and delegating and letting go in the marketing role, not trying to own everything. It has to be owned by everybody else because you need sales decks and it's just everything.

Barbra Gago (36:39):
I think there's also luck involved with any success and also in rebrands because a million things could go wrong. We got our domain name changed to miro.com, I think it was 48 hours before the event.

Lenny (36:54):
Oh damn.

Barbra Gago (36:54):
All the material had been printed with the new URL. We had to just make a leap of faith, super stressful, but thankfully, we had luck on our side. But ultimately, team process, clear structure, transparent for everybody, getting feedback from customers and making sure stakeholders feel like they're involved. I think ultimately, it's a really powerful way to create defensibility for a product and a brand in the market, but it's also a lot of work related to category creation.

Lenny (37:29):
I was just going to say that. It sounds like everything you do is just a hell of a lot of work. The rest [inaudible 00:37:34].

Barbra Gago (37:35):
It's fun. I love work.

Lenny (37:36):
Me too. I always joke that I work for a workaholic, which is myself.

Barbra Gago (37:40):
Yeah, I do. I know. I just love it. So I get into this stuff and I think rebranding and category creation and brand in general, I think what our goal with Miro was to create ... There's this concept of a love mark rather than a straight mark. It's like how do you build a brand? I think Airbnb has done a great job with that as well, but how do you build a brand that people really love and so committed to and invested in? And that you have to put a lot of thought into it, and it needs to be authentic for it to really work, but if it does, it's super, super powerful.

Lenny (38:22):
Yeah. I was there during the Airbnb rebrand. It took I think a year and a half for them from start to finish to get to something they were really excited about ready to launch. And there's also actually a similar story to the domain story shared with the font. I don't know how much I could share, but they didn't have the right to use the font until the last day or something. It was a close call.

Barbra Gago (38:43):
Yeah, but you have to just like, "It's going to happen." There's some blind faith.

Lenny (38:47):
Right. It helps close it. We're launching. I wanted to talk about just branding in general. You've worked on such great, big, successful brands and you've helped craft these brands, and I'm just curious what advice you have around just building a brand, a lasting brand, a global brand. What's important when you think about creating a brand for your startup?

Barbra Gago (39:06):
I think it's something that companies should think about as early as possible and have it not be an afterthought. The product and the brand are the main things that will get customers and keep them and also keep them loyal and engaged. So I think you have to have both. You can't have one or the other. You could have a great brand and if the product sucks, there's only so far a brand can go. And you also can have a great product and maybe not that thoughtful of a brand, but what I've found is that the more the brand is interchangeable with the people at the company and the company itself, the stronger it is, the more authentic it is. When you talk about Google, you also talk about its people. They're one and the same Googlers. And a lot of companies have that same approach.

Barbra Gago (39:55):
And I think with Miro, we definitely incorporate our values into the brand. Our whole mission was to help companies build the next big thing. This is what we want to do. We want to be the platform that helps companies build the next big thing. We also had to be a big thing. We need to show what big things are. And so your company values, for example, can shape how big and how deep you go with your brand, how authentic it is to the experiences that people have because ultimately, values play a big part because values are foundational to how people behave at the organization, how they work together, how they work with one another, how they work with customers, how they talk to customers.

Barbra Gago (40:40):
The best way to incorporate your brand and how people are interacting with people that you are selling to, customers or whoever, partners, is to have those values incorporated because then it's every touchpoint isn't something that you have to train people, okay, these are all the touch points and this is how the brand needs to manifest. It already will because it's part of the DNA of the company. So I think really integrating the values can help with that and also, of course, make the brand itself human and authentic and something that people really feel emotional connection to.

Lenny (41:18):
What's an example of value informing the brand or change or helping you make a different decision maybe at Miro or CultureAmp or Greenhouse to make that a little more concrete?

Barbra Gago (41:27):
Authenticity as a value. Candor as a value. Thoughtfulness as a value. If you have a value around a bias for action or something like that, these things can translate to how the brand manifests in terms of the language that's used, the colors, the objects. With Miro, for example, we had each character of the word Miro in a different shape, and each shape had different characteristics and those were tied back to different values so they each represented something different.

Lenny (42:02):
What's an example of that? What were Miro's values while we're diving into there?

Barbra Gago (42:06):
One of them was around agility. And so, one, I don't remember which letter it was. Maybe the I. It was shaped wiggly, and then we also had a visual manifestation of it so they all behaved differently. They all had their own behavior. And one of the things that was really important to us is that we were creating a visual system or a visual language so that people that were from different parts of the world, working together could understand each other without necessarily speaking the same language. And so this was a way to invoke this connection of different perspectives and different languages in a way that got all pulled together.

Lenny (42:47):
Got it. Cool. There's a lot there. The way you all visualized the values were using the name Miro. I imagine there's four values then.

Barbra Gago (42:53):
Yeah.

Lenny (42:54):
And then Agility as a value informed the product. It needs to be agile and make sure people can be flexible in how they use it.

Barbra Gago (43:01):
Definitely. How we build the product, how people around the product act, and then that shape itself was agile and moved and agiley.

Lenny (43:10):
That's awesome. I love that. Were you there for coming up with the values? People are always wondering, just how do we come up with our company values? Do you have any insights into just developing company values?

Barbra Gago (43:20):
We did iterations of it while I was there. They already had a stake in the ground. What I have done in the past with values is we just did an exercise with my leadership team, for example, where we did a workshop format. We actually used Miro where everybody just brain dumped their ideas around values, and then it was, okay, from there, let's group them into themes. And then from there, let's vote on the most important things. And then from there, how do we start to articulate and define these things? Ultimately, coming up with the definitions is not really something you can do as a group because it's just not very productive. It's better if somebody who knows how to write well can come up with the first stab of the sentences, if it's operating principles, if it's values, and then get feedback on it. But you can get everybody's input and make the process pretty structured by doing something like that where it's like brain dump, group, vote, and then you have your short list of things that you can then work to define.

Lenny (44:23):
Awesome. Maybe one last question around brand. People that aren't in, say, marketing hear brand and it's, okay, it's this fuzzy thing that I feel about our company. When you think about creating a brand, what are the bullet point things that you come up with? There's a logo. There's color palette. Can you just talk through, what is a brand when you're creating a brand and building a brand, what are the elements of it?

Barbra Gago (44:47):
So all of those things that you mentioned. I would say the logo, the colors, the fonts, all the general aesthetic. Do you have photography? Do you use illustrations? Is it all illustrations, all graphics, whatever? You decide those things. You need to understand what the voice is of the brand, how the brand sounds when you write things, when you market it, how people talk. All of that stuff is part of the brand. If you want to build a brand that's really scalable, you think about it more as a system like a brand system. So this is creating things that ... With Miro, for example, we had the letters and we had the colors and we had these concepts of agility. I don't remember all of them off the top of my head, but all of these different concepts that then were represented by different shapes or different colors that could be used in various forms. So it's really like how does it become an extension of all of the different things that you're going to be doing visually or when you talk to customers or how you present the product, etc.?

Lenny (45:50):
And all of that combines to this feeling you get eventually from the brand. All these things create that fuzzy feeling.

Barbra Gago (45:56):
Yes.

Lenny (45:57):
Yeah. It's interesting you don't remember all the values at Miro. With Airbnb, I'm just like, I will never forget the Airbnb values. They've been so drilled into our heads.

Barbra Gago (46:05):
Yeah, it's because they were too long. It was something that we were constantly working on because they were too long and there were too many things in them to remember. That was the problem.

Lenny (46:17):
That's a great learning there. Make them simple, but also don't make them generic.

Barbra Gago (46:21):
Yeah, it can't be generic, but it also can't be too much that nobody knows what they are. They need to be simple and straightforward and easy to remember.

Lenny (46:32):
And potentially, illustrated with your company name. That's a really cool idea.

Barbra Gago (46:36):
Exactly. Yeah.

Lenny (46:37):
Last topic I want to spend a little time on is something that I know you're really passionate about, which is this idea of creating opinionated software that has clear opinions about how you should be using it and how you should be doing your work. And so maybe as a first question, just what is opinionated software? What's important about it?

Barbra Gago (46:54):
Opinionated software is basically software platforms that essentially have either best practices or maybe some rules integrated into the system. You have systems that you can customize any which way and however you want and then you have other systems that enforce a certain way of behaving or doing work, as you said. And so I think probably a pretty well known example for your audience especially is Atlassian really building tools for agile workflows and agile teams.

Barbra Gago (47:27):
And Greenhouse is another example from a recruiting perspective in terms of what we called structured recruiting. There was a very specific way to create a pipeline, build an interview kit, and all of that was important because it made recruiting better and more transparent and obviously less bias and all of those things. So it's principled, I would say. It's anchored in some values. And because of those values, there will be certain rules that are built in that you can't really work around.

Lenny (47:58):
Do you have any advice for when it makes sense to be very opinionated about how you make people use your product and do the thing they're trying to do versus just optimize for flexibility?

Barbra Gago (48:11):
I think Atlassian built around a process that was already happening and growing momentum and it was like, okay, let's build a solution to enable companies to do this with technology. So there was already a process that didn't have a technology integrated, and then with Greenhouse it was like, there's a better way to do it and this is how it should be done. So I think there's two different approaches. Either find a process that just doesn't have technology that is a best practice or growing best practice. I think the same thing happened in DevOps with many different tools. And then Greenhouse, which is more like, what are companies missing? How can they do it better? How can we train them and teach them a better way? And then by the way, our software helps you do that.

Lenny (48:56):
With the product and company you're building now, are you looking to make it very opinionated and here's how you should be doing performance reviews or how are you thinking about it?

Barbra Gago (49:03):
Yes, we are. It is opinionated, and it's opinionated because the current way that performance reviews happen are full of bias and there's a lot of problems with it. It's like the best thing that companies can do and therefore, they continue to do it, but that just perpetuates a lot of issues. The reason that companies have to go and look at compensation data and fix pay gaps is because they have systemic problems with how people are promoted and progressed in the organization. So if they're recruited in a certain way, they may or may not be developed and then they're evaluated on their performance, which ultimately results in compensation and what people are paid, and that as we know, there's plenty of problems.

Barbra Gago (49:47):
So companies are fixing this compensation issue by updating the comp every year, but that doesn't fix the systemic problem. And so yes, we have opinions about how to fix the problem and therefore, our building a system that when it comes to performance evaluation, employee progression, we require companies to be more transparent about the levels at the company, the expectations for different levels and competencies, and we create accountability both on the employee and the manager side, but it's also the right thing to do. Employees should feel that they're evaluated fairly, and without a system enforcing some of these things, there's too much subjectivity in the process to make it good, unless you really do a lot of work, which most companies don't do to create the right system. You don't have to use a platform to do it, but if you don't do the work anyway, you won't have the outcome that you want, which is people feeling good about their career and paid fairly.

Lenny (50:59):
Yeah. I found performance reviews to be one of maybe the most powerful tool as a manager to change the way people operate, help them improve, make them fulfilled and happy with where things are going. It feels like that's the core of management, is the performance review cycle and giving people feedback on how they're doing it and then continuing to come back to here's where you're underperforming, here's what it'll take to get to the next level. So I'm excited about what you're working on.

Barbra Gago (51:22):
Thank you.

Lenny (51:23):
We've reached our very exciting lightning round where I'm going to ask you five rapid fire questions and you just tell me what comes to mind. We'll go through it pretty fast. Does that sound good?

Barbra Gago (51:34):
Yes.

Lenny (51:34):
Okay. Awesome. First question, what are two or three books that you recommend most to other people?

Barbra Gago (51:41):
Definitely Radical Candor. We give this out to customers. It's really good for management and best practices around giving feedback. I love the Art of War just as strategic thinking. And then not work related, a book called Kafka on the Shore. It's one of my favorite Murakami books that I highly recommend.

Lenny (52:00):
What is that one again?

Barbra Gago (52:01):
Kafka on the Shore.

Lenny (52:03):
Kafka on the Shore. Wow, cool. I haven't heard of that.

Barbra Gago (52:05):
Yeah.

Lenny (52:06):
Awesome. Going to use these in the show notes. What's a favorite other podcast than the one you're currently on?

Barbra Gago (52:13):
I love Cautionary Tales. I don't know if you know this one, but it's a great podcast that basically identifies and tells stories about the mental mindsets that we're in and the biases that we have and then historic events that have happened and just crazy things that have resulted from things that we do as humans because we're biased.

Lenny (52:36):
Irrational humans.

Barbra Gago (52:37):
It's really good. Yeah.

Lenny (52:38):
What's a favorite recent movie or a TV show that you watched?

Barbra Gago (52:42):
I watched Sandman. I don't know if you've heard of this.

Lenny (52:46):
I've heard of it. I haven't seen it.

Barbra Gago (52:49):
It's based off of an eight-part graphic novel series by Neil Gaiman. It's really good. The TV version of it isn't exactly about the books, but it's about the characters, and I feel like the way that they portrayed the characters was really interesting and super diverse. It's a great show.

Lenny (53:09):
Awesome. That's more plus one for that show. What's a favorite interview question that you like to ask when you're interviewing people?

Barbra Gago (53:17):
Everybody hates it, but I like asking what someone's top 10 accomplishments are. They hate it because it's like, "Oh, God. Ugh." But it's really interesting to understand the level of quantitative versus qualitative in their accomplishments, what they value. And also if it's a, "Oh, I ran a hundred miles or I have a great family," whatever it is, it's really interesting to get to know somebody and also what they value.

Lenny (53:46):
Who else in the industry do you respect most as a thought leader or just influence on your career life?

Barbra Gago (53:52):
Early days, I really appreciated Nancy Duarte. She is based in the Bay Area. She has an agency called Duarte Agency. She does a lot around storytelling and visual communication. She's been really great for me just in my career as a mentor. I've worked with her a couple of times, but also just following all the work that she does. She's amazing.

Lenny (54:13):
Awesome. I remember learning about her when Al Gore gave his TED Talk and her whole agency was a-

Barbra Gago (54:17):
Yes. She's done an incredible thing with her agency because they started as making presentations more visually appealing, and then it migrated to storytelling, and then it's evolved to change management and how to use story for driving change. And she's also evolved the agency so much over the years as well. She's done a lot of impressive work.

Lenny (54:42):
Barbra, thank you so much for being here. This was amazing. Two last questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and learn more, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Barbra Gago (54:52):
LinkedIn is probably the easiest place to find me /BarbraGago. And for me, we're building a product in employee progression, so anybody who wants to share their stories or feedback, our insights around their experiences there or if they're interested in getting product feedback, we're really interested in actual user feedback, even though we're selling to HR teams.

Lenny (55:16):
And what's the URL?

Barbra Gago (55:18):
Pando.com.

Lenny (55:19):
Awesome. Barbra, thank you for being here.

Barbra Gago (55:20):
Thank you so much, Lenny.

Lenny (55:24):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Camille Ricketts (00:00:00):
The way that you think about product market fit, you have to think about content market fit. So even though content feels like it's running adjacent to the actual product that you're putting out there, you still have to think about who is my audience? Who is the audience that I really want to have? Who is the audience that is going to be drawn to this most? Who are they? What is it that they really need in their lives? Even abstracting content from it at all. What is it that they need to get promoted? What is it that they need to avoid failure? What is it that causes them a great deal of anxiety in the day-to-day of their lives or their work? And can you create some type of content product that is going to address this for them?

Lenny (00:00:38):
Welcome to Lenny's podcast. I'm Lenny and my goal here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. I interview world class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard won experiences building and growing today's most successful companies. Today my guest is Camille Ricketts. Camille was the first marketing hire at Notion and longtime head of marketing at Notion. Prior to that, she was head of content and marketing at First Round Capital, where amongst many other things, she launched the First Round Review, which holds a very special place in my heart because a guest post in the First Round Review essentially helped me launch my now career of newsletter and now podcast. Camille also did content marketing at Kiva and also comms and PR at early Tesla where she sat right next to Elon Musk for about a year and she shares some really fun stories about that.

(00:01:26):
In this episode, we focus on two areas that Camille was very early in and has tremendous insights around. One, community led growth. What it actually is, when it's something you should invest in, how to do it well. All based on her experience building Notion's early community, which was a huge part of Notion's early success. We also talk about content marketing. When it's worth investing in, how to do it well, and all kinds of tips for building a content marketing machine. It was a total blast chatting with Camille and I am really excited for you to learn from her. With that, I bring you Camille Rickets right after we hear a word from our wonderful sponsors.

(00:02:02):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation AB testing platform built by ar Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like Netlify, Contentful, and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern grow team stack. This leads to wasted time building internal tools or trying to run your experiments through a clunky marketing tool. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved about our experimentation platform was being able to easily slice results by device, by country, and by user stage. EPO does all that and more. Delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytics cycles, and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic clickthrough metrics, and instead you to North Star metrics like activation, retention, subscriptions and payments. And EPO supports tests on the front end, the back end, email marketing, and even machine learning clients. Check out Eppo, geteppo.com, get E-P-P-O.com and 10X your experiment velocity. Hey, Ashley, head of marketing at Flatfile. How many B2B SaaS companies would you estimate need to import CSV files from their customers?

Ashley (00:03:21):
At least 40%.

Lenny (00:03:23):
And how many of them screw that up and what happens when they do?

Ashley (00:03:26):
Well, based on our data, about a third of people will consider switching to another company after just one bad experience during onboarding. So if your CSV importer doesn't work right, which is super common considering customer files are chock full of unexpected data and formatting, they'll leave.

Lenny (00:03:45):
I am 0% surprised to hear that. I've consistently seen that improving onboarding is one of the highest leverage opportunities for both signup conversion and increasing long-term retention. Getting people to your aha moment more quickly and reliably is so incredibly important.

Ashley (00:04:00):
Totally. It's incredible to see how our customers like Square, Spotify and Zuora are able to grow their businesses on top of Flatfile. It's because flawless data onboarding acts like a catalyst to get them and their customers where they need to go faster.

Lenny (00:04:17):
If you'd like to learn more or get started, check out Flatfile and flatfile.com/lenny.

(00:04:27):
Camille, welcome to the podcast.

Camille Ricketts (00:04:29):
Hello there. Thank you so much for having me.

Lenny (00:04:32):
Absolutely, my pleasure. You have such a fascinating background working at so many world-class companies with so many fascinating people. Could you just take a minute to talk about some of the wonderful things you've done in your career just to set a little context for folks?

Camille Ricketts (00:04:47):
Yeah. Well thank you for characterizing them as wonderful.

Lenny (00:04:50):
It's true.

Camille Ricketts (00:04:51):
I feel like it's been a quite circuitous path, but definitely has taken me to some interesting places. I started off as a journalist at the Wall Street Journal and then found my way into communications and marketing at Tesla Motors where part of my responsibility there was to sit to Elon's right and make sure he had all the data he needed at his fingertips when talking to the press, which was deep end of the pool on the PR learning. And then after that, found my way to First Round Capital where I was really fortunate to be at the ground floor of First Round Review, if anyone out there watching this is familiar with those pieces. Was there for about five years. Loved that team. Really incredible folks. And then they had invested in Notion really early on, and so I was able to meet Ivan Zhao as a result of that and him and Simon, and they gave me the opportunity to join as the first marketing hire at Notion. And that's what I was doing up until recently.

Lenny (00:05:44):
I love that Elon tidbit. I like that it was on his right. His right hand person. What was that like? And is there something that you learned working alongside Elon, sitting next to Elon, about operating, working that maybe you've taken to other places you worked at?

Camille Ricketts (00:05:59):
I mean, it was a long time ago, so I'll caveat that. This was before Model S came out even. So a lot of my work was, and this was a great opportunity, but driving around in the Roadster and talking to journalists and letting reporters ride in the car, which was very seductive and I think maybe just a little unfair from a PR standpoint. But in terms of what I learned, that was really the first job that I had that was necessitating just being incredibly on point with all the information. So making sure that I knew everything that could possibly come up in a conversation, being incredibly well-versed in just the topics at hand, I think that served me really well. I just have to be really, really, really quick and on it. And then the other thing that Elon I think is very talented at or definitely at the time really made an impression on me was painting an emotional picture of the vision that he was really going after and being able to convey the emotional quality of the mission to the people he talked to. So definitely at the time about the electric vehicle revolution and then space travel, I think he just knew how to make people feel about it that really enlisted a lot of hearts and minds and that is something that I've taken with me for sure.

Lenny (00:07:09):
Would you say that was the most stressful place you've worked or have you found more stress post Elon?

Camille Ricketts (00:07:15):
I think that that was the place where you just needed to be so on your game. Game face every single day. Which is a wonderful skill to learn. And then I think there were other moments in my career where just the stakes might have been a little bit higher. Certainly at Notion every day felt like we're building this thing together and we're in this very special moment. So yeah, I think there was a mix there.

Lenny (00:07:39):
Speaking of Notion, I think you mentioned this and if not, you were the first marketing hire at Notion. Is that right?

Camille Ricketts (00:07:44):
Yes.

Lenny (00:07:45):
What employee number was that?

Camille Ricketts (00:07:47):
I was number 11.

Lenny (00:07:48):
Wow.

Camille Ricketts (00:07:49):
Yeah. So it was really a small squad of folks at the time.

Lenny (00:07:53):
And how big are they now, roughly would you say?

Camille Ricketts (00:07:55):
The last I heard, I think that they were around 400. Maybe a little over 400.

Lenny (00:07:59):
Amazing. And I think they're worth ... I don't know. Last valuation was like $10 billion. So there's been quite the journey. Must have been quite the adventure being at Notion during this time. What's maybe the most tangible memory of working at Notion in the early days? What was it like early day Notion?

Camille Ricketts (00:08:15):
I think a lot about just what the environment felt like. This was the first very small startup that I had worked for. When I left First Round, I really wanted that experience. And the first office that I worked in was really just like a home. It literally had an apartment on top of this loft space and it just felt like we were a group of people who lived there together during the day, but it had that kind of home spun really warm quality. So we all took our shoes off. There was beautiful furnishings and rugs and we would all just sit around and drink tea and work together on these couches. So it really had that feeling to it. And then there were little quirks. I like to reminisce with my colleagues who were there at the time that we didn't have a great HVAC system.

(00:08:58):
So during the summer it was really hot and then in the winter it was really cold and we would have these big industrial fans and at the time we were like, "Oh, this is really bizarre." But now it's one of our favorite memories to talk about. Or for a while we didn't have overhead lighting, so me and my colleagues who were there working really late at night, it would just get darker and darker and darker. And one of my favorite folks there actually had a headlamp that she would switch on at a certain point in the evening. So that's the stuff that really comes up for me. We were all working really hard and in this thing together, but it's that team familial quality that stands out to me.

Lenny (00:09:35):
I love how some of these early moments where it feels like, what the hell are we doing? We have to wear headlamps? It's super hot. When you're in it, you're like, this isn't maybe how our startup should be going. And it feels really painful and hard. But looking back, it's always the best memories, those hardships.

Camille Ricketts (00:09:52):
It truly is. And the moments that we were there late at night really trying to get something done before a big launch the next day, that's where our hearts lie, I think, to a large extent. That crew that was there.

Lenny (00:10:04):
On that note, and when you're talking about stress working with Elon, you talked about Notion had a different kind of stress. What's maybe the most stressful memory you have of working at Notion? Whatever you can share.

Camille Ricketts (00:10:14):
This is something that has long since been rectified, but the first day that we came back from break in 2021 ... We had all been sort of away for the holidays. We reassemble. I think it's January 3rd, 2021 perhaps. Had a massive outage that day that took down, not just us but also a lot of our peer companies. And so it was literally all hands on deck. We're suddenly seeing all of these people on Twitter pop up, on the Reddit pop up being like, "Oh my gosh. What am I going to do?" And it really reinforced for us how central Notion had become to so many people. So on one hand it was kind of this amazing moment of realization of how vital this thing we were building was all the time, which adds to the stress in the moment, but also your motivation overall.

(00:11:01):
And then we also saw on Twitter, and this is part of why community is such a core focus of mine, but people being like, "They're trying really hard to get it back up. Give them a break." Or like, "Sending hugs to the Notion team. We know you've got this." And we really appreciated that and that was just a very heartwarming aspect of it. But that day was definitely a scramble and we wanted to be as communicative as possible. So my team was really central to making sure that everybody knew what was going on, what the efforts were being made to fix it, time horizon, all of that. So they've long since hired the best infrastructure people I think in the industry and refactored the database and everything. So it's not an issue anymore, but certainly that was a moment of stress at the time.

Lenny (00:11:50):
It's interesting looking at those times. When you're in it, you're like, "We are going to die. We're down. People will stop using Notion. We're in big trouble." When really people always come back if it's an awesome product. I think of last things down for a week, JIRA or Confluent, and people come back if it's an awesome product.

Camille Ricketts (00:12:07):
I think that's a good tactical learning and hopefully a takeaway for folks who maybe will experience that moment is that truly there's more resilience built into the system than you might think.

Lenny (00:12:16):
So speaking of community, you talked about just how important that was during this time and then just in general. I was doing research on you and things that you've done over your career to prep for this podcast and I found there's two areas that you've led the charge on and we're ahead of the curve on and in part help innovate. One is community led growth and two is content marketing in a big way. And so I wanted to focus a lot of our chat on these two areas. Community led growth, it feels like a very buzzy topic on Twitter. Everyone's always talking about how the future of growth is community. You've got to build a community. You got to be community led and all these things. And so I want to try to make this concept concrete and help people understand should they invest in community. How can community help you? When does it make sense to you? When does it not make sense to invest? And so maybe just as a first question, just what is community led growth? What does that actually mean as a concept?

Camille Ricketts (00:13:09):
Yeah. I think it has become quite buzzy and it's certainly aspirational for a lot of product led growth companies and even those that are maybe a little bit outside of the product led growth orbit. And we're seeing all of these startups I think also come out that are about community and how to enhance the effects. In terms of how I think about what it actually is, it's when your community helps you achieve such ubiquity and such name recognition that it actually allows you to start moving upmarket into the enterprise. And I know that might be very specific to enterprise oriented companies, but that's how we defined it at Notion was the fact that so many people were talking about this, sharing what they had built about it, honestly starting businesses of their own around it to formalize the relationship with teams that I think it de-risked Notion as a choice for a lot of companies just because they had heard about it through so many channels. They had seen it on social media, they've heard about it on a podcast, their friend told them about it, they saw a billboard. All of that lended itself to larger and larger companies and teams buying more and more seats. So I think that's the power that the community had for us. And I see that also being analogous to what companies like Figma have been able to achieve.

Lenny (00:14:21):
It sounds like a lot of the way you're describing it is basically awareness. Brand awareness is what you found to be maybe the most useful element of this community that you built around Notion.

Camille Ricketts (00:14:31):
I love using the word discovery because I think that that is even a little bit like a step further than awareness where true discovery is when you have intent to find out more. You've heard about it so many times or you've been intrigued by something that someone has told you to the extent that you're actually going to take the step of now learning about it. And that's where we really wanted to play and to emphasize our work.

Lenny (00:14:59):
Got it. So it sounded like the KPI/OKR of your team was get more people aware and excited to explore Notion.

Camille Ricketts (00:15:08):
Yeah. And maybe this is a helpful tactical point. I think when people think about acquisition or discovery or brand awareness or brand in general, they're like what collection of metrics are actually going to give us insight into this? And the one that I found to be the most instructive was net new visitors to the Notion website. So month over month, how many new people who had never been there before were motivated enough to come and actually learn about the product. And that was really the responsibility of the brand team and the folks that worked with me on community and content and all of the awareness campaigns that we were putting out into the field was about getting more new people interested.

Lenny (00:15:49):
So that begs to the question, did you have any clever ways of attributing that new traffic to stuff your team did versus the SEO team or other teams?

Camille Ricketts (00:15:58):
In particular I'll call out the influencer marketing efforts that were really being run by this incredible woman, Lexi Barnhorn, where they were incredibly measurable. Where we were like, okay, well we're sponsoring people for this amount, these creators across these platforms and we know that people came from that content directly to the Notion website. So we were able to draw really tight connections. So I think that some types of content lend themselves to that. And then also with community, there's certain things you can do around helping your community members report on how many people are attending, et cetera, to give you that sense.

Lenny (00:16:36):
So you may be already answering this question, but I'm curious what efforts had the most impact to achieve these goals that you had of creating more awareness and discovery motivation and things like that. What actually worked?

Camille Ricketts (00:16:48):
So I'd say that the community efforts that were very big for us we're the ambassadors. Also making sure that people were hosting in-person events. This really took off in 2019. Obviously we paused for 2020, 2021, but now I just spent time with Notion's head of community, Ben Lang, who truly is the mastermind and genius behind so much of this and he says that they're back up to 30 in-person events a month around the world. So that really helped on the international scale of spreading ubiquity and ended up lending itself to relationships with Station F in France, which is the biggest startup campus in Paris. So really helping us work our way into those types of networks and then supporting those people to also start their own businesses and derive whatever reward they were looking for themselves. So we really wanted to align our goals with theirs.

(00:17:38):
A lot of those folks actually started revenue generating businesses as consultants or course makers or influencers. Some of them just wanted to build their own platforms online. So all of our efforts there are around building guides or counseling people one-on-one or making it easier for them to actually achieve those goals for themselves was also a big part of this growth. And then like I said, influencers. This was something that Ben started exploring in 2019 and we were so pleasantly overwhelmed with the amount of traction and traffic that was driven by working with some of these influencers. And now that program has exploded into a multi-channel effort that's huge for Notion.

Lenny (00:18:24):
Awesome. The influencers makes a lot of sense. I want to learn more about this ambassador program and what that was about with events and maybe just broadly, I imagine a lot of founders might be listening and they're like, "Yeah, this all sounds awesome, but how do you know if it's doing anything?" Events. That would be great, but how much is it worth investing? How much time and attention does it take? How do we know if this is actually ROI positive? Is there anything you learn there about just ... Is it a founder must believe in this as a thing that is probably going to work sort of thing? Or is there something you found to convince people like, yes, this is how you can know it's working?

Camille Ricketts (00:18:58):
That's a great question. I think that we were really fortunate that Ivan saw the inherent value in community from the very beginning and was deeply supportive. And actually one of my number one recommendations for anybody who suspects the community could be a big growth driver is to not make metrics the be all end all at the very beginning. So we didn't necessarily start measuring things very concretely until last year with community. Mostly because we had already seen so much organic scale that we saw being tied to our community efforts in some way in terms of where we were geographically expanding, how people were reporting that they had discovered us whenever we surveyed them. So that type of motion. And I think for any company that is seeing this type of just organic fervor, one of the worst things you can do is say, let's cut this off at the knees if it's not generating ROI.

Lenny (00:19:52):
I imagine internally there's just like obviously this is good. We may not be able to measure it, but it feels like this is very good for Notion. It feels like especially for a prosumer product like Notion, it makes a lot of sense because it's driven by people using it and then they bring it into the company, like you said. Maybe it's less ROI positive or just one enterprise product. Do you have any thoughts there? Is this a great strategy for prosumer enterprise products more so than more enterprise-y?

Camille Ricketts (00:20:19):
Definitely I think if you have a long sales cycle or a high price point where there has to be many, many, many touchpoints in order to get somebody to decide to buy, I'm not sure that community should be the number one thing that you invest in. Certainly for freemium products, I think for a lot of them, especially if they have what I'm going to call the atomic unit of sharing, which I will define out, it becomes a no-brainer. I think that community lends itself particularly well if you have something that your product creates that people want to share because it exhibits something about themselves. So at Notion it was templates or even people just creating their own workspaces and being really excited to show them off. So Notion really benefited from being a creative product, but the same is true of Figma or Canva or any of these where showing people what it is that you've created is an aspirational thing to do. Because you are showing that you are really well versed in how to use the products, extremely organized. You're self expressing in some way. So if your product does have that element to it, I think that community is a great investment.

Lenny (00:21:34):
You touched on this point, and I don't think people realize this, but you can make a lot of money creating templates on Notion, right? That's a whole ecosystem. Can you talk about that? Because I don't think a lot of people know this.

Camille Ricketts (00:21:45):
Yeah. This is one of the reasons that I would advise any of the companies that feel like they fall into this category start early. Because you need to nurture all of these different routes that people in your community can take. Certainly early on I think that the people that we initially recruited in the ambassadors didn't see themselves doing maybe even close to a million dollars in business around helping other teams succeed with the product or selling templates. I remember really early on, probably mid 2021 we heard of one creator who had made $35,000 in four months selling one template and that was a very common story then from that point forward. And helping them do that, actually creating the guide material and the networks and also the connections between the people who are running similar businesses who could help each other, that all became really fundamental. But to your point about, oh is this actually related to the enterprise motion for Notion? So many companies now of many sizes are relying on the consultants that first came up through our community and some of those consultants are now employing dozens of other people.

Lenny (00:22:53):
That's incredible. There's no better way to motivate someone to evangelize Notion than have their income rely on Notion.

Camille Ricketts (00:23:00):
And it's also just inspiring for us, honestly. There's so many people who started off with not very many followers and now they are celebrities within this ecosystem.

Lenny (00:23:12):
So maybe coming back to the ambassador program, that's separate from this selling Notion templates ecosystem. What is the ambassador program?

Camille Ricketts (00:23:19):
They're actually quite blended because the folks who are excited about Notion, it takes a lot of forms. Sometimes they want to host events, sometimes they want to build templates. So we would actually have channels inside of our Slack instance for the ambassadors that had these areas of focus based on what people really were passionate about or wanted to do and they were like a force multiplying flywheel for each other. Because a lot of folks would enter the ambassadors program and then I'm happy to talk about champions as well, which is a little bit different, and then discover what it would mean for them to build templates and it became motivating for that reason. So on the champions side of things, and this is maybe speaking a little bit more to the enterprise as well, we wondered if the same DNA that existed among consumers for the most part in the ambassadors could work for folks who were inside of our customer companies. And so we launched another community, another Slack instance for folks who were the most passionate or the most avid users of Notion inside of our customer companies, which has become just a wonderful channel for customer success to be more communicative with those companies, make sure that things are sticking or obstacles are being overcome. And that's been designed very specifically that way and it has been really, really valuable over time.

Lenny (00:24:35):
Okay. So let me try to understand this. Champions are basically the most active users of Notion. You put them in a Slack and help them become even more excited and make sure they're happy. Ambassador. I still don't totally understand what is an ambassador? Is that someone you're paying to help promote Notion? What does that actually mean when you're an ambassador?

Camille Ricketts (00:24:52):
They're people who are really just passionate about the product. So it's not transactional. They're people who love building with Notion. They love sharing what they've built in order to help others. And they really just want it to be a bigger part of their lives. And I think that one of the points about community is that it's not just a one-to-one conversation with us. The big draw over time, maybe people joined because they would get early access to features. We would get their feedback. That became really important for our product team or because we would offer AMAs with some of our folks internally. But over time it was really because they were forming these bonds with each other and learning so much from each other that most of the time someone would come in and say, I'm struggling with this or I don't quite know how to use this and it would be another member of the community that would help them more immediately. So it really allowed them to form these dense networks of friendships that I think became just a positive part of people's lives.

Lenny (00:25:51):
What I'm taking away from this partly is you identify a group of people that are interested in Notion, excited about Notion and then just lean in to support them. There's people that are buying Notion and that are power users, help them be better power users. Influencers that are kind of excited about Notion, pay them to promote Notion. Then the ambassadors that are people just passionate about Notion, help them be more passionate. And then the people making templates, help them be successful. Is that roughly how you think about it? Just identify something that's working and make it more effective?

Camille Ricketts (00:26:21):
I think if it doesn't sound too reductive, yes. I would also say that one of the things that I think Ben was best at is not putting a one size fits all experience on any of this. I think that some communities get built where people are like, okay, well we have this community and it's going to be this and this and this, or these are the types of programs we're going to offer or these are the types of interactions we're going to have. As opposed to I think a lot of listening of the people who are actually participating. Really early on one of the things that Ben did that I thought was really amazing was he'd spend a ton of time just on Zoom having conversations, one-on-one conversations, semi small group conversations just saying, "Why are you here? Why do you like participating in this? What is it that would make it better?" And really helping our entire team follow their lead. I would recommend highly not necessarily coming in with preconceived notions about what a community needs to look like.

Lenny (00:27:21):
You touched on this, that if the founder believes in the power of community, this becomes so much easier. A lot of founders are like, "Nah. That's a waste of time." Do you think founders are convincible that building community and investing in community is worth it? Have you seen that effective where a founder just comes into it being like, "Nah, I don't think this is worth our time," and then they get convinced later? Or is it just like, "Nah, forget it. Don't even try."?

Camille Ricketts (00:27:45):
I mean I've talked to a lot of different people who come at this with different impressions and everybody knows more about their company than I do, but I do think that if ubiquity or just the sheer word of mouth engine is something that is going to be valuable for your company over time, I would really urge people to sit down and really think carefully what is going to be more conducive to our long-term success? Is it going to be that ubiquity or is it going to be revenue now? And I think if we look at a lot of the companies that have been just wildly successful from the start, they're people who have pushed off maybe monetizing every little thing if it's going to really put a damper on that type of enthusiasm and momentum that people have to share it at what it is they're doing. Because there's always opportunity I think later once you have that big tide of people who are not just excited but also legitimizing what it is that you do every single day, that gets mobilized in a lot of different directions and you have a lot more options then.

Lenny (00:28:47):
What's interesting about Notion is you have high LTVs when you sell to larger companies, but the initial users are often just regular folks. And so I think it's a unique place where you have cash to spend on making it ubiquitous and getting the word out through all these community efforts because it'll pay off. And a lot of companies probably don't have that advantage. So would it feel right to say that this is really effective for product led, growthy, freemium products most? Is that a good way to think about it?

Camille Ricketts (00:29:20):
Yeah. Or I think if organic growth is something that you see being really beneficial or if organic growth happens to be something you really have to crack because you don't always have everything you need for paid growth from either a resourcing standpoint, team standpoint, really figuring out how to get that organic flywheel going can serve you well. It becomes this buttress for any paid growth you explore in the future.

Lenny (00:29:47):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta. Helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate growth. If your business stores any data in the cloud, then you've likely been asked or you're going to be asked about your SOC 2 compliance. SOC 2 is a way to prove your company's taking proper security measures to protect customer data and builds trust with customers and partners, especially those with serious security requirements. Also, if you want to sell to the enterprise, proving security is essential, SOC 2 can either open the door for bigger and better deals or it can put your business on hold. If you don't have a SOC 2, there's a good chance you won't even get a seat at the table. Beginning a SOC 2 report can be a huge burden, especially for startups. It's time consuming, tedious and expensive. Enter Vanta. Over 3000 fast growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2. Vanta can get you ready for security audits in weeks instead of months. Less than a third of the time that it usually takes. For a limited time Lenny's podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Just go to vanta.com/lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discount. Get started today.

(00:31:04):
What other companies come to mind when you think about companies that effectively did community led growth, did community well and grew in large part because of community?

Camille Ricketts (00:31:14):
I've mentioned Figma a couple times here so I don't want to beleaguer the point, but they're certainly a team that I've looked up to through my entire experience at Notion. We were kind of sibling companies in a way. Huge kudos to Claire Butler over there who I knew led all of those efforts and we would trade a lot of knowledge back and forth, which was so lovely to have that relationship. But they did an amazing job I think in a similar vein to Notion of saying, okay, people are really excited to create these things and then put them out there on the internet. So how can we just fuel that particular motion out there? The other example I'll give, which is a little bit of a different tack is Stripe. And when Stripe launched Stripe Atlas, not necessarily core to the initial product line that Stripe was known for and what had been foundational for them, but allowed them to build this community among probably their core demographic at the time, which was founders and startups that were growing through the stages to mid-market, they were able to cultivate this huge audience of founders around giving advice and providing them with resources to actually get started and do that zero to one journey.

(00:32:22):
So while it was adjacent to maybe what the company's core mission was, it allowed them to actually create community among their customer base because they were like, "We're knowledgeable. We can share these things with you that we know are core to your journey." So I would encourage anyone who's thinking about community that way to be like, "Oh, maybe it doesn't have to be around our product. So specifically. What other knowledge or resourcing can we offer to the people who we do want using our product that's going to be really instrumental for them and can we convene them around that idea?"

Lenny (00:32:54):
I'm noticing a strong correlation between legendary generational companies, Figma, Stripe, Notion and community efforts and building community. That's interesting.

Camille Ricketts (00:33:05):
Yes. I'm a big proponent. At the same time I don't think that community is right for every company. I think that there is definitely an analysis to run on that. But hopefully this is helpful for those who can identify that those are attributes they have.

Lenny (00:33:19):
To pull on a thread there, what are maybe thoughts for when it probably doesn't make sense to invest a lot of efforts into building a community around your product? We talked a little bit about high-end enterprise products. Is there anything else that just like, man, it's probably not worth your time?

Camille Ricketts (00:33:34):
Like I said, if it's more of a sales led culture that you have, which is definitely true of products that are a little bit pricier or that require longer contracts, so understanding that. But I do think the community takes on different forms and I think when you hear the word community, you think of a big forum of some type, whether it's a Slack instance or something else where people are chatting away all day long. And I don't think it has to be that. That's not the only representation of it. So if you think about what is going to be right for you at any given time, I actually created this two by two matrix, which maybe I'll share with you after this. And on the axis you have, whether you have hit product market fit or if you're still exploring product market set and then whether you're strongly enterprise or strongly consumer. And based on where you land in that two by two matrix, there's a form of community or a community related initiative that could be right for you.

(00:34:31):
So just to give you an example of maybe an extremely different form factor from Notion, let's say that you're still on your way to product market fit and you're a strongly enterprise oriented product. I think that you have the opportunity to do customer advisory boards, which is really convening even smaller circles of ideal fit users and making sure that they are connected to each other as well as you, and then incentivize to provide you with feedback. Understanding that they're really on the ground floor of this journey with you and that they're going to be able to have influence over whatever you do in the future. Those folks can end up growing into your biggest evangelists and I've seen that happen a number of times and I would still consider that community even though maybe that is not what comes to mind for folks.

Lenny (00:35:20):
Well I imagine that becomes the seed of a community that you eventually build. Let's definitely link to this in the show notes. Can you give maybe a couple more examples of this grid? So that was pre-product market fit and then what was the other?

Camille Ricketts (00:35:32):
Strongly enterprise.

Lenny (00:35:33):
Enterprise. Okay, cool. Yeah, what are a couple other of the elements of this grid?

Camille Ricketts (00:35:37):
So if you're strongly enterprise and you have product market fit, let's say, this is something that Notion has really benefited from, but really emphasizing the champions in the consultants communities. So the folks who, like I said, may be inside of your customers who really get it, really get your value, really are excited to help you land and expand perhaps inside of their companies, making sure that they have a place to gather and a place to feel like they are more connected with your team than the average person gets to be. That they are special and that they have access. And then on the consultant side, like I said, just making it really easy, removing friction, helping promote the folks who want to be out there, helping you succeed with more customers. Like Salesforce. I know that this is a golden oldie of an example, but if you talk to anybody who was really early at Salesforce, they really went into this where they saw people emerging who wanted to help other companies. This layer of people who didn't work at Salesforce but saw the opportunity to help other companies actually succeed with it, implement it, grow with it, and that's become a massive part of Salesforce's model. And so if you're in that quadrant, figuring out how to start moving people in your customer base into those categories.

Lenny (00:37:00):
This is awesome. Maybe let's do one more of this grid and then we'll leave one for people to click into and check it out.

Camille Ricketts (00:37:04):
I'll talk about Notion's quadrant, which is the one that I would put up and to the right, which is you have product market fit and you're maybe a little bit closer to the consumer side of the spectrum. Obviously Notion runs the full gamut, but I would say especially early on I think that that's where we saw things take root and that's where I think ambassadors and influencers really take off. Individuals who are going to be extremely vocal, extremely excited, and where you're going to see more of this wildfire spread, at least trying the product, using the product, understanding what the product is. So if you can try to fuel that type of motion if you're in that quadrant, that's helpful.

Lenny (00:37:43):
I want to come back to this ambassador program real quick because it feels like something that a lot of people talk about and can do and especially in this quadrant of product market fit and consumer. How does this work? Is it you select, here's 100 ambassadors we're going to pick because we think they're awesome and they're great examples of people using, say, Notion and then we're just going to provide them with all the help they need to be successful with Notion. How do you think about creating an ambassador program?

Camille Ricketts (00:38:10):
I actually think it's pretty analogous to when you're thinking about positioning your company because I think the best first step for any positioning exercise is to think who are our best fit customers? And it's not necessarily who we wish they would be, but it's actually the hard cold reality of who they actually are. Where it's like these are the people that seem to be really getting it. They're paying us more, they're talking about it just organically. So really figuring out everything about who they are and making sure that those are the people that you're actually inviting in early. So the initial base of the ambassadors program which started back in 2019 was just 20 people and they were the 20 people who we happened to see be the most vocal already across Twitter and a couple of other social media platforms because they had that shared quality of wanting to be really vocal and expressive about their experience with the product. So that would be my advice for how to get one of these rolling.

Lenny (00:39:13):
And then what do you do for them?

Camille Ricketts (00:39:13):
Definitely making sure that there's enough incentive built in, right? Because like we said, it's not meant to be a transactional relationship, but we want them to feel like they are having a special experience, that they are connected with the company in a unique way. And it was so interesting to us how giving them the preview of features was so motivating to them and being able to use them and then give us feedback and feel really heard by the product team. So that was a big area of focus and I know that that still is and it's become even more of a robust conversation between the community and the team at Notion itself.

(00:39:52):
And then also we would do these very special experiences where Ivan or Akshay or Simon or MLM who's the head of engineering there would be available for these conversations where they would answer questions and it would feel like a very proprietary space. I think that that was really interesting to people. And then of course the things that you would suspect around subsidizing events. Making sure that people felt that they were actually supported by us to throw these events. And then also promoting their work. So if you look back at the social media channels, so much of the focus is on putting the creations of the people we were working with front and center as opposed to talking about just what the company was up to.

Lenny (00:40:36):
Have you ever written about just how to design an ambassador program or has anyone written about how Notion did this? Because this is really interesting.

Camille Ricketts (00:40:42):
I don't know if anything has been written or went into all of this detail, but it was truly one of the more magical and I think still is one of the more magical parts of this entire endeavor. And now that team is three people. So Ben who's still there doing amazing things, Francisco who joined us in 2021. Or sorry at the end of 2020. And then Emma. And they are just all day every day talking to people around the whole world. The international component of this is also just completely wild to see.

Lenny (00:41:18):
This could be a future First Round Review post, which we'll talk a bit about.

Camille Ricketts (00:41:21):
Yes. Perhaps.

Lenny (00:41:24):
Last question about this segment. Say someone is convinced they want to start investing in community and we talked about this two by two, but maybe just broadly if you had to boil it down to two or three pieces of advice for founders, for teams thinking about investing in community led growth and community in general, what would be some of those pieces of advice?

Camille Ricketts (00:41:44):
I don't know if you want to link to this in the show notes as well, but I actually put together some commandments for community builders.

Lenny (00:41:50):
Ooh. Absolutely.

Camille Ricketts (00:41:51):
Some alliteration. So the thing that I think were very defining for us early on, I already mentioned something about this, but not trying to hit a number early on. So don't dilute the impact of what it is that you're trying to do in order to show growth. I think that that's very important to protect yourself early on. So making sure that you are learning what individuals really want out of this and making them feel like they're very seen and very heard. That was a big area of focus and I think it's what kept people really engaged and coming back and feeling like this was a secondary family for them. And then one of the things that was most interesting to us that once we started sharing what was going on in the community with folks at Notion. So we would do this during all Hands meetings or on Slack, Ben would post these really incredible updates of just all of the activities of people in the community and what they were up to every month.

(00:42:46):
And it was just so inspiring for everybody inside the company that I think it all rallied us to do even more, I guess, day to day and really understand who it was we were building for.

Lenny (00:43:00):
Is there any other commandments you would add for if you already have a community going? If you have something bubbling for things you should do to keep it healthy and consistently good and growing?

Camille Ricketts (00:43:12):
Yeah. I mean this is going to be a little contrarian perhaps, and I mean this is just one data point for me, but not growing it so big so fast. One thing that we actually thought about pretty carefully was what a rate of healthy growth would be. So there actually is an application process for joining the ambassadors. It's a very light application process and it really is just so that we know how many people are interested in this. And then they're inducted around ... I think at the time it was 20 people at a time every month. So that it wouldn't feel like all of a sudden this had changed in terms of how the interactions were feeling, but rather gave everybody time to welcome the new people in and get to know them. And one of Ben and I's favorite things ever about working at Notion I think was when we would induct new people into the ambassadors and they would introduce themselves and say, "Hey, I am from Venezuela and here's the ways in which notion has changed my life."

Lenny (00:43:12):
That's awesome.

Camille Ricketts (00:44:11):
"I'm from Hong Kong and here's how it's changed my life." And all of that was just so fulfilling. That would be the number one thing I would say is give your community time to actually grow in what feels like an organic fashion as well. Because I think ironically, and then I'll stop rambling about this, but if you grow to something like, oh we have 5,000 ambassadors, which feels really good to say on a website, the conversation is actually very muted. I think because people feel like they're speaking to an auditorium whenever they say anything. I think it's because you don't really have a sense of who else is there with you. So helping to defray those concerns I think is a good course of action.

Lenny (00:44:57):
I've seen the same thing with the growth rate being really important with my newsletter Slack community. I think most listeners probably know this, but if you're a paid newsletter subscriber, you get access to the Slack community. There's about 10,000 people in there. And I find the filter of people that are willing to pay for content like a newsletter is a really good filter for awesome people. And so it ends up slowing growth in a really healthy way and then just creating this filter of the people that really want to self-improve and value the sort of thing join, and it becomes a really amazing group of people.

Camille Ricketts (00:45:31):
Yeah. It feels like such a ... I don't know. There's an emotional quality to it I think when that's the case. And all of those people end up being so incredibly impactful. The last point I'll make about community at Notion is that a lot of those people, and we actually ended up launching I think a channel for folks who wanted to do this in particular, but run communities external to Notion's actual owned communities. So you end up with Facebook groups that have ... I think Notion in Vietnam has like 250,000 members. Or the subreddit, which I now know has 210,000 people in the Notion subreddit. And those are all run and moderated by community members who just love running their own communities.

Lenny (00:46:14):
I feel like you've achieved your OKRs of ubiquity of Notion.

Camille Ricketts (00:46:19):
Yes. It was always a value at Notion to make sure that we were reaching as many people as possible.

Lenny (00:46:26):
It's working. One tactical question. Where does the own community of Notion live? Is it a Slack? Is it an online thing you've built yourself?

Camille Ricketts (00:46:34):
It is in Slack. And the thinking there, and it still is, was that we really just wanted to be in the course of people's everyday lives. We didn't want to be this other destination that you would have to make a point to going to every day.

Lenny (00:46:45):
That's exactly how I thought about it with my newsletter Slack community. PMs and founders, they're already in Slack all day. And just that badge, being on the app telling them there's something to check is such a powerful feature versus download a whole new app or go to a whole new website, you're never going to go there. It has to be 10 times better to pull you to a whole new site and change your habits.

Camille Ricketts (00:47:05):
I absolutely agree.

Lenny (00:47:07):
I'm glad we're all on Slack. Slack's so underrated. I feel like people hate on Slack all the time, but it's such a good product.

Camille Ricketts (00:47:14):
We all love it. It's just becomes something we take for granted in the background there.

Lenny (00:47:17):
Yeah, exactly. Okay. This is a good time to shift to our second topic, which is around content and content marketing. So you started the First Round Review at First Round?

Camille Ricketts (00:47:26):
Yes.

Lenny (00:47:27):
I don't know if you know this, but First Round Review was a big part of my early trajectory with this newsletter life. I did a guest post in the First Round Review and that was-

Camille Ricketts (00:47:37):
I remember this.

Lenny (00:47:38):
That was a huge deal for me. That was my first 500 subscribers to my newsletter.

Camille Ricketts (00:47:42):
Wow.

Lenny (00:47:44):
Then I did another guest post down the road, but that was not as important. It was a big part of my early path down this life. And so thank you for creating that platform. I was very honored to be involved.

Camille Ricketts (00:47:57):
That's fantastic to hear and exactly what we wanted to have happen. Just extraordinary operators being given a platform and then using it to do whatever it is that they wanted to do. That was part of the dream always.

Lenny (00:48:10):
It's working.

Camille Ricketts (00:48:11):
Yeah. I'm thrilled because now people are learning so much from you.

Lenny (00:48:14):
Yeah. It's an inspiration for where when I started too, just I wish I could be as good as the First Round Review and the stuff just keeps coming and coming. It's amazing. And I know other folks run it now. I don't know if they want to be named. They like to be behind the scenes.

Camille Ricketts (00:48:27):
They do, but I'm going to shout them out anyway because they do such an extraordinary job. I mean, Jessi Craige Shikman over there has been doing this now for longer than I did and she is absolutely incredible and her team is extraordinary and I don't miss it every single time it comes out.

Lenny (00:48:44):
Yeah. I tried to thank her my post. She's like, "Don't mention that. I'm behind the scenes."

Camille Ricketts (00:48:44):
Maybe I'll ask her.

Lenny (00:48:53):
We have to give her some cred somehow.

Camille Ricketts (00:48:56):
Yeah, absolutely. She deserves it.

Lenny (00:48:58):
So kind of zooming out, content marketing, maybe just to give some examples of just what are some of the most impactful things you've been a part of that come from creating content? Whether it's Notion, First Round, anywhere else, what are some examples?

Camille Ricketts (00:49:11):
Yeah, I'll give a few examples. Obviously First Round is a huge example and so I'd be remiss in not going into some detail there. And truly that was a team effort from the very beginning. I joined in 2013 and again, I was just so fortunate to work with a leader who believed in it from the very beginning. Josh Kopelman, who's the partner there who was just a massive supporter of mine. Phin Barnes on the partnership team. But then particularly Brett Burson who was running the platform team, which is where all of these value added services lived.

(00:49:40):
So it was me and an events person and the talent person and Brett just gave us all of the runway and all of the belief and support that we needed. And he was really bullish on content and really helped from the beginning, connecting me with incredible interview subjects. Because this whole thing, the only reason I think it survived and did as well as it did is that we were able to land a few really big names at the very beginning. And then of course that helps you down the road whenever you're trying to convince anyone else to do it because you say so and so and so and so have already been featured. So that was I think just a big point of confidence and also tactically, for anyone out there thinking about it, if they can leverage whatever connections they have in that vein.

Lenny (00:50:27):
I was at dinner with Brett yesterday.

Camille Ricketts (00:50:29):
Oh my god. What a guy, right?

Lenny (00:50:31):
First Round event. What a guy. That guy's amazing. I'm a huge fan. He's built an incredible platform and program at First Round.

Camille Ricketts (00:50:39):
And he's one of the people that I've learned the most from, certainly. But more specific to your question around what the content program was able to do there, certainly discovery of First Round. I think prior to that it was a very successful VC fund, but I think we got in front of all kinds of people, particularly in non-traditional geographies or non-traditional founder types or all of that. People who are inside large companies like Google, Apple, Amazon, whenever we would look at our list of subscribers, we had an disproportionate number of email addresses within those companies that were clearly curious about the startup experience. And I think First Round Review was helpful in moving them more toward that mindset and then them obviously understanding that First Round would be a great first stop for them.

Lenny (00:51:23):
What would you say is key to content being valuable? So you're talking about the First Round Review became really effective for people learning about First Round, working with First Round, discovery of First Round, but it's not just with content you just write some stuff and it works. It doesn't work that way. What have you learned about just what do you have to get right? You mentioned have names people recognize. Is there anything else you've learned over the years of just like, here's what we need to get right if you're trying to use content as a way to create discovery and awareness of your stuff?

Camille Ricketts (00:51:54):
This is something that I think we chatted about briefly, but the way that you think about product market fit, you have to think about content market fit. So even though content feels like it's running adjacent to the actual product that you're putting out there, you still have to think about who is my audience? Who is the audience that I really want to have? Who is the audience that is going to be drawn to this most? Who are they? What is it that they really need in their lives? Even abstracting content from it at all. What is it that they need to get promoted? What is it that they need to avoid failure? What is it that causes them a great deal of anxiety in the day-to-day of their lives or their work? And can you create some type of content product that is going to address this for them and is actually going to have that value?

(00:52:36):
So I think approaching content the way that you would a product in a lot of ways is very instructive way to sort of start hashing out your strategy. Starting with your audience, understanding their big needs. You've heard this, I'm sure, and most of your audience has, but there's the vitamin versus painkiller dichotomy. And painkillers always win. So can your content be a painkiller? Can it help people out of situations that are causing them a lot of pain? Can it help people stop being so confused or can it make them even feel less alone in their experience? That was a big one for First Round Review is helping operators share failures or suboptimal situations in the spirit of helping many other people feel like that was normalized and that the experiences they were having weren't as dire as maybe they had thought.

Lenny (00:53:27):
I love that. It connects so much with the way I think about writing. I use the jobs to be done framework a little bit here where I'm just like, what job am I doing when I'm writing a post? And you tell me if this makes sense to you, but I feel like there's four jobs to be done of a newsletter. Either how people make money. There's newsletters, here's how to invest, here's how to buy Bitcoin and win. How people make money. Entertain people. There's a lot of funny things, memes and cartoons and things like that. How people get better at their work or life, which is the category we're in. And then inform people. Like news.

Camille Ricketts (00:54:02):
Yes. What they didn't know before. Yeah.

Lenny (00:54:05):
And it feels like you got to do really well. You got to pick which bucket you're in. And let me know if you can think of any others because these are the four that I always come back to. And then pick your bucket and then it's be the best at that thing in your category. The way I think about it.

Camille Ricketts (00:54:18):
I love that listing out of those and also the acknowledgement that there are emotional jobs to be done. That there are not just utilitarian jobs to be done. It's not just, you didn't know this before and now you do, but it's like you felt this way before and now you don't or you do. And I think that that's underestimated. So I love that you called out entertaining people because we're all working in an industry where it's wonderful to interact with some of that sparkle and levity. So I love that approach.

Lenny (00:54:45):
And something else that goes unsaid I think in the way you talked about this is just putting in the time to make it really high quality. If you look at a First Round post, how much time would you say goes into in the typical First Round Review post?

Camille Ricketts (00:54:58):
Oh gosh. Here's where I'm going to shout out my writing partner at First Round, Sean Young, who was there with me for most of my time there and he and I would always, always talk about this. But it would take eight hours to just write the thing. And that's after you had done all of the prep work of making sure that your interviewee was feeling really anchored and understanding a topic that you were both really excited about and making sure you were mining all of the tactical gems from that conversation. And then you would start writing and that would be another eight hours. I don't know if that's your experience, but certainly was ours.

Lenny (00:55:31):
Yeah, very similar. I don't tie myself, but I feel like the median time to write a post for me is about 10 hours.

Camille Ricketts (00:55:37):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:55:37):
And that's I think the key that a lot of people don't think about. One is they don't have the time, and two, they don't realize they should spend this much time because the bar's so high for content on the internet as we all know. There's so much stuff out there. And so to get above that noise you have to really make it really good and that just takes time. And I find this really strong correlation between the time it takes me to write a post and how well it does. It's very highly correlated. And the advantage folks like say the First Round Review have and I have is I do this and there's a team doing this. And so people that are doing this on the side, it's much harder because they don't have that time.

Camille Ricketts (00:56:14):
It is. I end up admiring those people a lot where I'm like, how are you doing this?

Lenny (00:56:18):
Yeah. They're sacrificing something.

Camille Ricketts (00:56:19):
Yeah. But truly, it's a very shared experience with you. And I think that a lot of that was making connections between the information that you had available from these interviews. So not just straight here's what this person said, but how can you draw connections between those things, connect the dots, pull out bigger themes. All of that is really where I think a lot of the time went.

Lenny (00:56:43):
So you said you had this content market fit questionnaire that you talked through. You're going to send me a link that we can point people to check it out, right?

Camille Ricketts (00:56:51):
Yes.

Lenny (00:56:51):
Okay, awesome.

Camille Ricketts (00:56:52):
Absolutely. A lot of it is about getting to know your audience to an almost beleaguered degree.

Lenny (00:56:57):
Which is basically what job will you do for them, like you said. And so that makes sense. Maybe a couple more questions. Something that I've noticed a lot, and this is related to content and just PR and stuff like that. I've noticed a lot of people on Twitter and founders are trying to pitch this idea that you don't need to think about comms and press and PR as much because now you can go direct. You can have a newsletter, you can write, you can tweet, you can LinkedIn. Do you feel like that is where the future is going for founder press and comms and things like that or do you think you still need to have a really strong comms, press, PR org within your company?

Camille Ricketts (00:57:36):
That's a great question because I think that there's been just a lot of change in this space over the last five years and certainly very strong opinions from all over the ecosystem. I'm a big believer in comms. And I don't just say that because I used to be a journalist or I used to work in comms. But I think that there are very few and far between incredible megaphones for what it is that you or your company is doing where you get to reach such a breadth of people with that stamp of credibility and notice. How do you get somebody to say, "Hey, this is really something you should pay attention to."? Obviously I support all of the owned media efforts that are really working and bubbling up. And like I said, influencer I think is going to be a massive shift in how we discover things, but maintaining a wonderful relationship with the press, being straightforward, being that brand that is going to be accessible, I really think that that pays off.

(00:58:37):
And just to give you one example, David Pierce, who I think is one of the best working journalists in tech today, he's at The Verge now. He was covering personal tech for the Wall Street Journal early on at Notion and published a story that said this is the one work-life productivity app that you'll ever need. And that was Notion's big break. Truly, if you look back at the graphs, that made a demonstrable difference. And I've seen that happen time and time again. And one of my other efforts at First Round was helping companies in the portfolio figure out how to DIY comm strategies. And I saw this again and again that the companies that did get stories that really told their mission, it made a big difference for just discovery awareness. The number of people who wanted to be involved with them as candidates, as investors, as customers.

Lenny (00:59:29):
This gives me a new post idea of just what are the big breaks of companies? What was the moment where they started taking off? Note to self?

Camille Ricketts (00:59:36):
Yes. The other big thing for the Notion was product hunts. I want to give them-

Lenny (00:59:40):
Oh, okay. So posting on Product Hunt, that was a big deal for Notion.

Camille Ricketts (00:59:44):
It was. And it remains a big deal. If you go on Product Hunt and you type in Notion, you'll see just how many templates have been able to get noted because of Product Hunt.

Lenny (00:59:54):
So it's the templates being posted, but then also the launch of Notion on Product Hunt?

Camille Ricketts (00:59:58):
Yes. And Notion 2.0. And then whenever we would have a major productized launch.

Lenny (01:00:05):
Wow, that's awesome. Man, Product Hunt just keeps kicking.

Camille Ricketts (01:00:07):
Notion AI very recently for them, which couldn't be more exciting.

Lenny (01:00:11):
I have access to that. I've been playing around. It's awesome. Maybe a last question along these lines is thinking about the founders that you've worked with. So on the one hand you have Elon who is very direct on Twitter to his audience, and then Ivan feels much less so and more under the radar and doesn't love tweeting a lot. And then First Round Review somewhere in the middle. Do you have any thoughts on how much a founder should invest in, say, tweeting and going and communicating direct to folk? Or is it more just whatever the founder is, their personality, just go with that?

Camille Ricketts (01:00:41):
I really do think it's about personality and what feels authentic. I think that so much of a founder's strength comes from leaning into where they know that they love to work, what they know about themselves. And I think that one of the biggest mistakes you can make on social media is giving yourself a quota that you have to hit and say, I have to say X number of scintillating things every week on these platforms. We've just seen so much more traction, even from the main Notion accounts when we're a little bit more reserved and we wait until we have something to say that has value.

Lenny (01:01:12):
Awesome. Any last closing thoughts before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Camille Ricketts (01:01:19):
Closing thoughts. No, this was a wonderful conversation. Thank you so much for letting me share. Truly, I also want to make sure I'm giving a lot of credit away from all the people that I mentioned throughout. It was all just a major team effort and I've gotten very, very lucky to work with the best people.

Lenny (01:01:32):
Awesome. We'll try to link to all of the people you mentioned in our show notes. We try to do that every time. So it'll be a long show notes. And we're not done yet. We've reached our very exciting lightning round. I am going to ask you six questions real quick. Whatever comes to mind, we'll go through it pretty fast. That sound good?

Camille Ricketts (01:01:48):
Yeah. We'll see how it goes.

Lenny (01:01:50):
Let's go. No pressure. What are two to three books that you recommend most, that you've recommended most to other people?

Camille Ricketts (01:01:57):
Obviously Awesome by April Dunford. If you're looking to position your company, I don't know if you've read it, but it is a step-by-step guide. It's like 100 pages long.

Lenny (01:02:05):
I've read it. She's done a guest post on my newsletter. She's been on the podcast. So all over it.

Camille Ricketts (01:02:11):
Oh, fantastic. She's incredible. Yes. Oh gosh. I'm going to have a hard time coming up with two other books that have had that sizable of an impact.

Lenny (01:02:19):
We can keep it to one too. It's all good.

Camille Ricketts (01:02:21):
Can we keep it to one?

Lenny (01:02:22):
Yes. Just the one. All you need. What's a favorite other podcast that you listen to other than the one you're on currently?

Camille Ricketts (01:02:30):
I mean, I love your podcast.

Lenny (01:02:31):
Thank you.

Camille Ricketts (01:02:32):
Harry Stubbings never ceases to amaze me. We've gone on at Notion a couple times and I just really appreciate his approach to mining a lot of incredible information and unexpected stuff.

Lenny (01:02:46):
Harry Stubbings is the godfather of this podcast because I did his podcast and at the end of it privately he's like, "Lenny, you need to do a podcast, you idiot. Why are you not doing a podcast?" And that got me over the hump and look at us now. So yeah, huge shout out to Harry.

Camille Ricketts (01:03:00):
I love all of these connections that exists. That's wonderful.

Lenny (01:03:02):
Yeah. Next question. Favorite recent movie or TV show that you've loved?

Camille Ricketts (01:03:08):
Oh gosh. Recent. I went to go see Tar, which I know is going to be not everybody's cup of tea, but it was just incredible to watch this performance from Kate Blanchett. She learned German. She learned how to be a credible conductor of a major symphony orchestra. If you want to see a bravura performance, that's the one to see. And then recent television show I'm watching Fleischman is in Trouble. I love the book and I just think that the detail and texture of that show is super well done.

Lenny (01:03:37):
Awesome. My wife and I have been watching that and it's awesome. Last episode was less exciting, so I'm curious where it all goes, but I'm watching.

Camille Ricketts (01:03:44):
Agreeing. But every time Claire Danes is on screen, I'm riveted. Yeah.

Lenny (01:03:50):
Favorite interview question that you like to ask folks, either when you're interviewing at a place, hiring, anything that comes to mind.

Camille Ricketts (01:03:56):
Yeah. The one thing that was really helpful, because we used to do this thing at First Round Review where we would explore topics and be like, how do we get to a topics that's going to be unique or new knowledge or whatever it was. And it was, what is one thing that you think that led to your success that nobody else in your peer set has done? What was something that you did on a lark or that you were like, this is a big bet, or this isn't probably going to work, or it's a mistake that it even turned out this way, but it ended up being great. What is that one thing that was unusually conceived that you want to share with people?

Lenny (01:04:24):
I love that question. I almost want to answer it, but let's move on. What are five SaaS products that you use or have used other than notion that you found to be really good other than maybe Slack, which everyone always mentions.

Camille Ricketts (01:04:39):
I mean, I'm in love with Notion. The other thing, the other great love of my life right now is Arc, The Browser Company.

Lenny (01:04:44):
Oh my God, I love Arc. I just switched to it. I love it.

Camille Ricketts (01:04:47):
Yeah. It was something that I tried and within an hour I've made it my default browser and I just think it's beautiful and delightful in one of those intangible ways that a lot of these products are

Lenny (01:04:58):
Same. Yes. Cool. Oh, there's more. Yeah.

Camille Ricketts (01:05:00):
I already talked about Figma. I love Figma. I actually use it in my day to day life, which is one of the best parts of it is that folks who are not necessarily designers or highly technical can also get a lot out of it. Superhuman. Couldn't live my life without Superhuman. Whenever I have to go back into Gmail to set an autoresponder or whatever, I'm like, ugh, my eyes. So couldn't live without that. Gosh, I'm on sabbatical, so I don't know how many other SaaS products I'm actually using day to day so I'm going to keep it at three.

Lenny (01:05:29):
All right. Yeah. Use less SaaS products during your sabbatical. It's a good philosophy.

Camille Ricketts (01:05:33):
Yeah. I don't know if that was your experience, but just is. Oh, the other one I'll shout out, even though this is like a sneaky Notion plug is Kron. So if anybody isn't using the Kron calendar, which is now part of Notion as some folks might know, it is in fact the best calendar product on the market.

Lenny (01:05:47):
Sneaky, sneaky. Last question. What's a favorite read or course or just anything you'd recommend for people to level up their community building skills to build a community, run a community? What would you point people to?

Camille Ricketts (01:06:01):
I'm not aware of any courses that are necessarily offered. Ben Lang has done a number of AMAs or interviews, so if you want to just Google Ben Lang and the word community or Notion, you're going to find just a lot of incredible insight. And his experience has been, I think ... In terms of community people operating in tech, Ben is top level, so find whatever he's said.

Lenny (01:06:27):
Awesome. We will find it. We will link to it. Camille, I just met you an hour ago, but I feel like I've known you forever. This was amazing.

Camille Ricketts (01:06:34):
Likewise. Thank you.

Lenny (01:06:35):
Thank you so much for making time for this. Two last questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, learn more? You're on sabbatical now, and so maybe share what you're thinking about next and what you could be ... I don't know. And I guess this is the second question. How can listeners be useful to you?

Camille Ricketts (01:06:49):
Thank you for that. You can find me on Twitter. I'm just @CamilleRicketts. Super straightforward. Still sticking with it. And in terms of where I'm at in my life, I'm just interested in meeting as many fascinating new people and learning about things as possible. I've started going to these Founders You Should Know events for anybody who's interested about FYSK, and just meeting as many cool people who are building just incredible concepts. It's inspiring every time, and I just want my whole life to look like that. So get in touch if you're building something and think I could be helpful.

Lenny (01:07:21):
Amazing. Camille, thank you so much for being here.

Camille Ricketts (01:07:24):
Thank you so much. This was wonderful.

Lenny (01:07:27):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Carilu Dietrich (00:00:00):
In order to get hypergrowth, you have to have organic, inbound, and viral word of mouth. You can't pay enough to grow at those rates and have a viable company. The biggest thing is an amazing product that people love to use, right? I mean ChatGPT is the most hypergrowth product that we've seen in history potentially, because people are so excited to use it and it's working in interesting ways. 

(00:00:22):
And then I think the third thing is really riding the lightning, I would call it. Hypergrowth companies go through the stages of growth that would take other companies five years or 10 years, right? They're going from 10 to 50, they're going from 50 to 100, they're going from 100 to 200. They're jumping. And so they really need to keep hiring 2X and 3X leaders who have seen the next stage of growth, because it's going to be here before you know it.

Lenny (00:00:55):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast, where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard work, experiences building and growing today's most successful products. 

(00:01:04):
Today my guest is Carilu Dietrich. Carilu is a former CMO and has advised the CEOs and CMOs of hypergrowth B2B companies like Segment, Miro, 1Password, Bill.com, Productboard, Sprout Social, Weights & Biases, and most notably was head of marketing at Atlassian through their IPO. 

(00:01:22):
In today's episode, we cover what hypergrowth companies have in common, how to make big changes to your growth strategy to unlock new channels of growth, why COs don't trust CMOs, and why most CMOs get fired. Also, why most CPOs get fired. Plus, the benefits of waiting a long time to hire your first salesperson, bundling strategy, and a ton of incredibly insightful career advice. A huge thank you to Elena Verna for suggesting Carilu for the podcast. And with that, I bring you Carilu Dietrich after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:01:56):
This episode is brought to you by Rows.com. The world runs on spreadsheets. You probably have a tab open with a spreadsheet right now, but the spreadsheet product you're using today was designed decades ago, and it shows. They live in silos away from your business data. They weren't made to be used on a phone. And if you want to do even the simplest automation, you have to figure out complex scripts that are nightmare to maintain.

(00:02:18):
Rows is different. It combines a modern spreadsheet editor, data integrations with APIs and your business tools, and a slick sharing experience that turns any spreadsheet into a beautiful interactive website that you'll be proud to share. If you're writing a report on a growth experiment, you can use Rows to your analysis on data straight from BigQuery or Snowflake. If you're deep diving on marketing, you can import reports straight from Google Analytics, Facebook Ads, or Twitter. Or if you're working with sales, you can natively plug Stripe, Salesforce, or HubSpot directly into rows. And when you're done, you can share your work as a beautiful spreadsheet that's easy to read, and embed charts, tables, and calculators into Notion, Confluence, or anywhere on the web. I've already moved some of my favorite spreadsheet templates to Rows. Go to rows.com/lenny to check them out. That's rows.com/lenny.

(00:03:08):
This episode is brought to you by Braintrust, where the world's most innovative companies go to find talent fast so that they can innovate faster. Let's be honest, it's a lot of work to build a company. And if you want to stay ahead of the game, you need to be able to hire the right talent quickly and confidently. Braintrust is the first decentralized talent network where you can find, hire, and manage high quality contractors in engineering, design, and product, for a fraction of the cost of agencies.

(00:03:36):
Brain Trust charges a flat rate of only 10%, unlike agency fees of up to 70%. So you can make your budget go four times further. Plus, they're the only network that takes 0% of what the talent makes, so they're able to attract and retain the world's best tech talent. Take it from DoorDash, Airbnb, Plaid, and hundreds of other high growth startups that have shaved their hiring process for months to weeks at less than a quarter of the cost by hiring through Braintrust's network of 20,000 high quality vetted candidates ready to work. Whether you're looking to fill in gaps, upskill your staff, or build a team for that dream project that finally got funded, contact Braintrust and you'll get matched with three candidates in just 48 hours. Visit usebraintrust.com/lenny or find them in my show notes for today's episode. That's used usebraintrust.com/lenny, for when you need talent yesterday. 

(00:04:31):
Carilu, welcome to the podcast. 

Carilu Dietrich (00:04:33):
Thanks, Lenny. Happy to be here.

Lenny (00:04:35):
You've had this incredible career. You worked at all these incredible companies. I'd love to just dissect what you have found to be most important and effective in building a career long term, just broadly. And then specifically if you're trying to get to an executive role someday, what have you found to be some more important habits, behaviors, tactics, lessons?

Carilu Dietrich (00:04:55):
I'll start by saying that everyone has their own calculus about the trade-offs they want to make on pursuing their career and the sacrifices they might need to make versus the other things in their life, their family, their hobbies, their passions. And so I think the executive track isn't for everyone because there are a lot of trade-offs.

(00:05:14):
Because I think that some of the most important aspects of getting to the executive suite are working harder, learning more, pushing yourself, taking on more responsibilities and opportunities, maybe even in the white space, that aren't your job or aren't in your regular time. 

(00:05:34):
When I was young in my career, I decided I wanted to be a CMO. And at the job where I had decided I wanted to be the CMO, I worked two hours later than everyone else on the team. And I had this thought in my brain that two hours every day for five years would get me how many more years of experience than someone else? And I could do that when I was young, and I didn't have kids, and I was willing to make those sacrifices. 

(00:05:59):
But you look at a lot of the top CMOs and they have sacrificed a lot of things to read all of the books. And again, if I go back to that first job, I was a PR manager, and we went through a tough phase and we lost a ahead of product right before the major launch of a major product. So I volunteered to moonlight in the product department and run the beta, and do release engineering. And taking on other responsibilities gave me insights into other departments that made me more successful, early in my career and later on.

(00:06:33):
And the same thing happens as you're growing, right? If a department head leaves and you can spend extra time doing your own job and being the interim for this other function, you can really show the top executives that you have the appetite and the skill to take on more responsibility.

(00:06:50):
So I think learning as much as you can about your expertise, working really hard, and taking on more responsibilities, and having a great attitude and a strategic mind are probably what I think helps people get to the C-suite on the personal level. And then I have another set of five things that are what specific ways do you need to train your mind?

Lenny (00:07:15):
I know there's this backlash against working really hard that happened for a while, but I'm on the same boat as you have of success will come from working really hard. And sometimes that sucks, but that's usually how it goes.

Carilu Dietrich (00:07:27):
I think there's ebbs and flows in your life. You're going to have a baby here soon, congratulations. Thank you. And so maybe you take your foot off the gas for a little bit. But really, there's no shortcuts. There's no shortcuts to knowing a lot.

(00:07:43):
One of the people I admire most is Tomasz Tunguz, who was with Redpoint and now started his own VC firm. And I was talking to him about his blog and he was like, "I'd just wake up 5:00 or 6:00 AM every morning and write three to four blogs a week for 10 years." Damn. That is self-discipline and insight and drive. So yeah, no shortcuts. I think. You look at Denise Persson at Snowflake, and she's worked really hard to get there. 

(00:08:12):
So the five things I think you need to do to get to the C-suite that are not personal side are you need to think about how your responsibilities tie to revenue. You need to think and talk in the terms of the CEO and the board. And that can be tricky when you're junior because you don't have exposure to it. But getting a strong handle on finance, and how the finances of the business work, and how the revenue of the business works.

(00:08:38):
I went on a tour of the Tesla factory with my daughter's field trip a couple weeks ago. And the guy who was giving us the tour was like, "So I delivered and stocked all these different parts at the plant and then I would take a list. And after work every night, I'd go to each part of the plant and try to figure out what they were working on and what the challenges and opportunities were. And that's how I moved up."

(00:09:00):
So it's just understanding how the whole thing works together. Because if you want to be in the C-suite, it's a job about how the system works. So I really encourage tours of duty between different departments. I told you about my tour of duty and product. I thought CMOs had to do every function, so I took a tour of duty in every function in marketing, but really getting a sense for other departments.

(00:09:23):
The next thing is the relationships. So building really strong relationships with people by doing good work and helping them. And then the last thing I think is the quality of the companies you work for. So your career and your ability to transcend, which is really moving faster than other people to get bigger jobs, is fairly dependent on the momentum of your company. 

(00:09:49):
So I was a leader at Oracle for five years, and my team grew from five to seven over five years. And I was a leader at Atlassian for four years, and my team grew from 15 to 100. And so if you pick the right company with the right momentum, you have a better chance of getting higher level experiences and accelerated career growth.

(00:10:14):
And then I guess one little footnote. If you pick great companies, great people work for those companies, and go out and work at other companies and also give you opportunities. So I ended up at Atlassian kind of in a stroke of good luck because I had worked for Jay Simons, the president, at two companies before. So the quality of the first company, Plumtree, really helped propel my whole career.

Lenny (00:10:40):
There's so many things I want to double click on there. The last piece, it's the advice I always give people when they're early in their career is to go find a company that's going to do super well. That one experience is going to transform your entire career. Having the logo on your resume, the people you meet, the experience you get financially. But that begs the question, how do you find that? How do you pick a company? I think in your advising today, you join later where it's a little more obvious. "Okay, they're doing great." Do you have any advice or lessons about how to identify earlier where to go work and how to be lucky in that pick?

Carilu Dietrich (00:11:16):
Isn't that the billion-dollar question? So I worked for-

Lenny (00:11:20):
For investing too.

Carilu Dietrich (00:11:20):
Yeah. I worked at Atlassian, which was phenomenal. Then I worked for Classy, which was a company that helped nonprofits raise money. 

Lenny (00:11:29):
I've used that product.

Carilu Dietrich (00:11:31):
Thank you. And we were acquired by GoFundMe. And it was fine, but it was no Atlassian. And then I spent the next five years trying to figure out, how do you pick your next Atlassian? So my advice would be for people earlier in their careers, it's easy to pick the winners if you go work for a big company that's a winner. I would love to work for Tesla, or AWS. Or right this second, I would die kill for a job at OpenAI. You know some of the big companies that are successful... Salesforce has totally been a career maker to so many top executives.

(00:12:04):
So early in your career, working for big name high momentum companies. I think you can't wimp out. You've got to want it and go for it. And maybe you apply year after year, and you meet people, and you try for it early in your company.

(00:12:19):
Later in your career, I think what you just said, picking later stage versus earlier stage gives you a better view of their momentum. I actually have a Post-it note, got it here, about what I look for. 10 parts of what would evaluate to see-

Lenny (00:12:35):
You just have that Post-it note around?

Carilu Dietrich (00:12:37):
I do. It's one of five Post-it notes on my board.

Lenny (00:12:37):
I want to hear what the rest are too. But keep going.

Carilu Dietrich (00:12:44):
I have to look at it for advisory. I only take eight to 10 clients. I'm always full. And so it has to be a phenomenal company. So how do I know if it's a phenomenal company? Here's my list. Rule of 40, which is your profitability and your costs together. The quality of the investors. Are they really top tier investors? Are they mid tier or some you've never heard of? Investors do a lot of due diligence, but you also want to look at their most recent rounds, because they could have phenomenal early stage and have slowed down. I think the later the size, the more reliable, because they've just made it farther. 

(00:13:23):
Their Net Promoter Score or their customer satisfaction. Do people really rapidly love this product or is it like meh? Their net dollar retention, which is, how fast is their revenue growing? And I should have it on my Post-it note, but Snowflake was the benchmark. I think they were growing at 142%.

Lenny (00:13:44):
I think at one point it was 180, whatever.

Carilu Dietrich (00:13:46):
Yeah. That sounds right. 180, 165. Net dollar retention, if you have a customer and they just renew at the same dollar rate, it would be 100. So 180 is almost doubling just their customers. So they didn't even need new customers, almost doubled their business. A phenomenal net dollar retention means it's a really strong healthy business. 

(00:14:09):
I looked at their growth rate last year, their burn rate, are they going to run out of money? And then ideally, are they number one in their market? Do they have a Forrester or a Gartner Magic Quadrant? People tell you if they're number one. 

(00:14:22):
And then the last thing is I look at their Glassdoor. Is it just a bad place to work and where people unhappy? Because they don't actually survive as long as companies where people are happier.

Lenny (00:14:34):
I love this list. You should turn it into a blog post, and there's another idea for you. Can you share what the other Post-its are around you? Even broadly.

Carilu Dietrich (00:14:41):
I can. One says, "More Yoda, less Wonder Woman," which basically is ask better questions. The second one was-

Lenny (00:14:51):
Ask them backwards too.

Carilu Dietrich (00:14:52):
Yeah, right? Ask them backwards. Which is funny, because the other Yoda thing I have up Is... Here wait. "Do or do not. There is no try." Backwards. I have another one that says, "Hell yes or no." When opportunities come to you and you're like, "Should I do this or should I not do this?" You only have so much time in your life. And so if it's not something that really excites you and gives you energy, it's tough to be the best at it. And so hell yes or no.

(00:15:26):
And then the last one is, "Worrying is wasted energy," because I think we live in this economic pressure cooker, and there's a lot of fear and uncertainty. But we just need to take that fear and uncertainty and thank it for giving us urgency. And then make the list of what can we control now and what should we do next.

Lenny (00:15:50):
That's actually a perfect segue to my next question. And by the way, that was amazing. I'm glad that I asked about your Post-its. That's a whole life philosophy right there in Post-its.

Carilu Dietrich (00:15:59):
Yeah, I should do a BeReal. This is what is looks like at this side. These are all the Post-its.

Lenny (00:16:05):
Okay. So the question is around, I don't know if we're technically in a recession, but maybe we're on the verge of recession. The market's not great. And a lot of people are being laid off, or have been laid off, or are worried about being laid off, or just graduating college and looking for jobs. And I'm curious if you have advice for people trying to find a job in this market or just generally trying to accelerate their career. What is your advice for just how to deal with this environment while also trying to advance your career?

Carilu Dietrich (00:16:32):
I'd like to take in two parts. One is if you're unemployed and one is you're in a job. So if you're unemployed, it's tough. It's a tough time. There's a lot of supply. And so I think you just really need endurance and grit. And the sticker worrying is wasted energy, because you will get another job. It's just going to be a little bit more of a bumpy ride than some other years.

(00:16:55):
And the best executives I know have had down periods in their careers, where they were out of work for a while, where they were fired by a CEO, who this or that. And what they have in common is endurance. They're just back in the ring. So I think it's important to not lose endurance. 

(00:17:15):
It's also important not to settle on a crappy job or a crappy company. Each job you have prepares you for the next job, and each logo you have prepares you for the next job.

(00:17:27):
So I'd spent a lot of my career trying to also chase waves. My first job in college, I was in nonprofit, and then I wrote a book on the giving programs of the top 50 tech companies. And I realized that tech companies had a bunch of money in 1999, and were giving it away to charities. And I wanted to go into tech, because that's where the growth and money was. And I thought I could give it back to the world and good, but I could be inside the bubble. 

(00:17:55):
And then within tech, I moved my way to B2B. And within B2B, I moved my way to SaaS. And within SaaS, I've moved my way into dev tools, and collaboration, and now AI. 

(00:18:05):
There's this book called The Millionaire Next Door, which talks about how the very best antique store makes one or 2% profit. And the very worst oil and gas company makes 35% profit. And we know that some of the worst software companies make 65% profit. 

(00:18:25):
So picking your industry will propel your career, and picking the right company will propel your career, and then doing a good job will propel your career. So I think that there's no magic bullet to getting a job. But working your network, sticking with it, and continuing to grow your skills are the three most important things.

Lenny (00:18:43):
Big part of this conclusion is don't feel like your career needs to slow down in this period.

Carilu Dietrich (00:18:49):
And I think if you're in a job, some of my greatest career growth came in the economic downturns. In the 2000s, in the 2008. Because other people take their foot off the gas, and you can put your foot down. If you're willing to learn more, hit yourself into new roles or new responsibilities that no one's covering at your company. When they don't hire tons of people for everything, there's lots of open projects where you can raise your hand and grow. You just can't be as focused on title and salary right now. You're kind of building up value that you'll be able to monetize on the other end of this recession or downturn.

Lenny (00:19:26):
Let's segue to chatting about growth. And I thought it'd be fun to start with your story of running some very expensive ad campaigns. I know the founders are always kind of flirting with this idea of buying a bunch of billboards, running TV ads, maybe subway ads and bus ads. And you've done a lot of that and you've spent a lot of money doing that, and particularly non-digital advertising. And so I'm curious what you've learned from your experience and approach to this sort of marketing spend.

Carilu Dietrich (00:19:53):
Yes. I've spent hundreds of millions of dollars on it actually. I ran global awareness advertising for Oracle, and did all of the airports, and the front page of the Wall Street Journal, on the back page of The Economist, and take over in the middle of Salesforce in downtown San Francisco. And we did the Ironman movie sponsorships, and the sports teams and arena sponsorships.

Lenny (00:20:16):
That sounds very expensive.

Carilu Dietrich (00:20:17):
Super expensive. And then Atlassian to a lesser degree, we spent several million dollars on different awareness campaigns to get chat noticed, or to associate Jira with the Atlassian brand. Advertising is sexy and super expensive for the benefits. It's a multi-year benefit of awareness. People have to see things many times, and it has to really resonate with them. 

(00:20:45):
So my advice to founders is that the most important thing is the quality of your product. Oracle spent a ton of money, and people still didn't like us in a lot of ways because they had poor experiences with the salespeople, or they didn't like Larry, or the product had kind of languished since it had been acquired by the company. So your product has to really be fantastic. And then also to do good brand advertising, it has to be sustained over a long period of time.

(00:21:14):
So Oracle had the front page of the Wall Street Journal, back page of The Economist, this boring advertising template with the red bar, but it made it memorable. We would do market tests, and two or three or 10 times more people would recognize the Oracle brand without the logo, because of the consistency versus SAP or or IBM. 

(00:21:35):
So you really need to be thoughtful about spending consistently over a longer period of time, and a smaller amount on a fewer number of things can be really effective. So Snowflake, for instance, has always gotten credit for doing a billboard on 101, and people think they do lots of advertising. But for many years, it was only the billboard on 101. It was just sustained and strategic.

Lenny (00:21:59):
So I guess two things that I take away from that is one, you can spend a lot of money, and if your product's not actually incredible, it's not really going to do much. And correct me if I'm wrong. And then two is sometimes, just one very targeted spend is worth a lot more than just blanketing a bunch of ads.

Carilu Dietrich (00:22:16):
Absolutely. I was telling you a story that at Atlassian, we did a big advertising campaign on our HipChat product, which was head-to-head with Slack, and it was an Office Space spoof with Bill Lumbergh. But the product had some uptime issues, and some feature issues, and Slack pulled ahead, and the advertising wasn't what would've made it or broken the product. It's really the product experience, and the advertising just amplifies.

Lenny (00:22:42):
I think you also shared with me this HipChat ad, that's maybe my favorite billboard ever. And I don't even know why looking back, but it made me laugh so hard. Back in the day, it was this meme of some early meme stick figure guy saying, "Why you no use HipChat?" Looking back I'm like, "Okay. I don't know how funny." But I think in the moment that was a really popular meme, and it really stuck with me.

Carilu Dietrich (00:23:04):
Well if you think about the best advertising, it's something that has a little twist of humor, or personality, or truth that sticks in your brain. So yes, that was a successful advertising. And kudos to my team, because of course I don't write it myself as the head of marketing. But yeah.

(00:23:22):
And some of my other favorite ads are also others that highlight the customer. So New Relic did an advertising campaign around data nerds. When data nerds were not really popular, they were still nerds. And they had these tattoos that said nerd life, and they featured customers on billboards talking about cool data nerds. And some of those campaigns that really stand out have something that's funny, unexpected, and then true to the product.

Lenny (00:23:54):
I remember those, one of the ads featured, our CTO at Airbnb, Mike Curtis, and everyone was very excited to see his face on the Billboards.

Carilu Dietrich (00:24:02):
Yeah, Salesforce has done a great job with those over the years too, really highlighting the customers.

Lenny (00:24:06):
So zooming out a little bit, you specialize working with companies that are going through hypergrowth. And you've worked with companies like Miro, Segment, Bill.com, which I don't know if people know is just a massive, massive business. And also 1Password. 

(00:24:21):
And on the topic of 1Password, interestingly I didn't realize how big and how fast 1Password has been growing. And just last week I saw this report from Okta where they have all this interesting data about which products people are using, and they put out this report showing which products you're getting the most new customers. And then on a different axis, which companies are getting the most users per new customer. 

(00:24:46):
And there's this six companies in this quadrant. Figma, Miro, Snowflake, Sentry, HubSpot, and 1Password, which blew my mind. And interestingly, you work with two of them. And so all that to say, what have you noticed about what is most in common with companies that are going through hypergrowth? What is most in common in terms of what has contributed to them being that successful?

Carilu Dietrich (00:25:08):
The biggest thing is an amazing product that people love to use. I mean ChatGPT is the most hypergrowth product that we've seen in history potentially, because people are so excited to use it and it's working in interesting ways. So Miro, whiteboards were the number one most uploaded asset in Jira forever. Because people all get together and they write their ideas on a whiteboard, and then they need to remember it and iterate on it. And that bringing that concept to life just hit a cord that people wanted to use. And when one person uses it, another person uses it.

(00:25:42):
1Password similarly, I've been a 1Password user for more than 10 years. We used it at Atlassian, as a corporate. And then they have the family plan. So I used it at home and then my dad got elderly, so I had a family that I was the administrator for, and then I go into different companies and you bring it with you.

(00:26:02):
And one of the other companies I advise is Productboard. And I became an advisor of Productboard because 1Password's CPO had it in another company, brought it into 1Password, rolled it out company-wide to get alignment and visibility on the product roadmap. 

(00:26:18):
So in order to get hypergrowth, you have to have organic, inbound, and viral word of mouth. You can't pay enough to grow at those rates and have a viable company, especially in this economic efficiency market. So has to be an amazing product, has to have some viral activity. So we just talked about Miro or Atlassian. You could have an individual person use it and then they say, "Hey, I'm going to present at this meeting with Miro, come join me on my board. I've got these confluence pages we'd set up as a wiki about these engineering topics, and I want your team to collaborate on them." So those natural points where your users are selling to other people is way more efficient than having sales people that have to sell to other people. 

(00:27:12):
And then I think the third thing is really riding the lightning, I would call it. So hypergrowth companies go through the stages of growth that would take other companies five years or 10 years. They're going from 10 to 50, they're going from 50 to 100, they're going from 100 to 200, they're jumping. And so they really need to keep hiring 2X and 3X leaders who have seen the next stage of growth. And then the people inside can be homegrown talent, but it's tricky to keep up. 

(00:27:46):
So my whole business is based on people who are trying to be homegrown leaders, but don't know what the next stage of growth looked like. And so a lot of hypergrowth companies hire ahead, hire advisors. Leaders need to really think about mentors and friendships of people who know what great looks like at the next scale, because it's going to be here before you know it. And so I would say those things. Amazing product, viral movement, and company that can ride the lightning.

Lenny (00:28:15):
I imagine founders listening to this that don't have insane virality or huge word of mouth are like, "Is there no path to being a really successful company?" And then I think about companies that did succeed with other channels, like say paid or SEO. And so I guess the question for you is, do you need to grow in this environment, I guess, primarily through word of mouth, organic reality, growth engines? Or do you still see opportunity for companies to grow other ways, say paid, or SEO, or sales eventually?

Carilu Dietrich (00:28:51):
For sure. All of the things are important. I think what I wanted to say first as you were talking was that it's easy to look at a company after they've been viral and be like, "That's amazing." I would like to start a newsletter. I have. It's carilu.com. Lenny has a newsletter. How can I ever grow like Lenny's virality? But Lenny started with one blog, and then another, and the consistency.

(00:29:14):
And when I look back at Atlassian, people would be like, "It must have been so easy to go from 100 to 500 million." And it never felt easy. It was a slog to do exactly what you're talking about. New features, listen to customers, strong SEO. Actually SEO was the number one marketing motion that we used, and SEM. We spent probably between 15 and 25% of our leads from paid search marketing at the time. Now I have a ton of customers that are pretty deep into account-based marketing.

(00:29:49):
Getting to virality and getting the hypergrowth is not a magic bullet. It's consistency, customer obsession, incremental improvements across all parts of the business. So I think founders just need to double down on having a product that's differentiated and does something that their customers really love. And each incremental step is a step forward.

Lenny (00:30:16):
This episode is brought to you by Coda. You've heard me talk about how Coda is the doc that brings it all together and how can help your team run smoother and be more efficient. I know this firsthand because Coda does that for me. I use Coda every day to wrangle my newsletter content calendar, my interview notes for podcast, and to coordinate my sponsors. 

(00:30:35):
More recently, I actually wrote a whole post on how Coda's product team operates, and within that post they shared a dozen templates that they use internally to run their product team. Including managing the roadmap, their OKR process, getting internal feedback, and essentially their whole product development process is done within Coda.

(00:30:53):
If your team's work is spread out across different documents and spreadsheets and a stack of workflow tools, that's why you need Coda. Coda puts data in one centralized location regardless of format, eliminating roadblocks that can slow your team down. Coda allows your team to operate on the same information and collaborate in one place. Take advantage of the special limited time offer just for startups. Plan up today at Coda.io/lenny and get a $1,000 startup credit on your first statement. That's Coda.io/lenny to sign up and get a startup credit of $1,000. Coda.io/lenny.

(00:31:32):
Say that you as a company are seeing word of mouth in some virality, and you want to think about accelerating that, leaning into word of mouth. Obviously you want everyone to be talking about how awesome you are sharing with their friends. Is there anything that you've seen as a good way to lean into word of mouth and accelerate it?

Carilu Dietrich (00:31:49):
I think there's two or three things. One is really empowering the people in your company to be thought leaders. So early days, Atlassian's founders were on all the developer boards. And in fact, I remember, we were maybe 150 million or 200 million, and Scott Farquhar the CEO was still participating and going back and forth in different dev forums when I was like, "I don't know, should we elevate your status? Should we have evangelists and engineers that do this?"

(00:32:18):
And we did, right? And look, one of my clients now is Weights & Biases, the ML ops company helping lots of different AI companies with their ML models. And they have really thoughtful technical people who know more and write more on the blog and engage with their community. And that creates a word of mouth, because they're providing both a product and concepts and learning. That's one of the HubSpot secrets was all of their really thoughtful, helpful content, certifications for marketers.

(00:32:52):
So I think going back to summarize, word of mouth can be driven by thought leadership, which is hiring the right people to really be deeply engaged as super experts. Having a really strong content strategy that's either in communities that already exist, online communities, open source communities.

(00:33:13):
And then third I would say building your own community. So no one sells your product better than your own happy customers. And if I go way back to the very beginning of my career, I worked on a marketing team where I owned demand gen just for net new prospects, and a peer owned demand gen just for existing customer upsell. And we would have different field events.

(00:33:34):
And the existing customer ones were smaller than if we'd invited the prospects and had more buzz. And the prospect ones were very salesy. Whereas if we brought them together and you had customers talking to each other and prospects listening, everyone had a better time.

(00:33:48):
So Atlassian, one of our secrets was this amazing user group community where we just paid for beer and a pizza, and we'd facilitate local in-city leaders, and people would meet up and talk about our products, and talk about development generally, and grow their careers and grow their network. So I think those are the three. The right people, the right content, and the right communities.

Lenny (00:34:11):
As you were talking, I was reminded, I was just chatting with the founder of Gusto about their journey early on. And he said that for the first 200 customers, he sat there with them running payroll, watching how they react every step of the payroll process and how they feel at every moment. And that was a big part of what helped them build the product that people actually continue using, and love, and stick with. And if it wasn't in person, it was on a phone call. And it's like the epitome of doing things don't scale, just like for hundreds of new customers watching them use your product. Pretty wild.

Carilu Dietrich (00:34:44):
I mean that's the secret. That's the secret sauce. And I've heard some early stage startup advisors say that you should build processes that don't scale first. Because when you're in the super early stage seed A under 10 million, you've really got to go deep at that stage. 

(00:35:04):
And in fact, I see that that's one of the problems that companies experience as they get much bigger, when product managers can't meet with customers, or they get limited customers, or maybe they can only meet with a junior user, only the administrator, and not lots of the users. So that insight into the daily struggles and experience of your customers, it's harder to get as you get bigger I think.

Lenny (00:35:28):
I want to drill into Atlassian. You've brought them up a couple times. You were at Atlassian for a long time. You were there from early days of growth to IPO. And one of the most interesting elements of Atlassian and something that comes up a lot on this podcast is product led growth.

(00:35:44):
And Atlassian I think is one of the most classic examples of a product led growth company. And from what I understand, y'all waited a long time to hire your first salesperson. So my question is what did you learn from that experience about when is the right time to start leaning into sales and hiring sales, and what are the trade-offs of waiting longer or doing it earlier?

Carilu Dietrich (00:36:04):
Atlassian was a super unique company at a super unique point in time, because the founders never took outside money except for one late stage financing to buy out some early employees, to give some liquidity. So we never had VCs or private equity that had a voting share that was significant, that could overrule the founders.

(00:36:28):
So the founders were going through this experiment that turned out to be really successful, where they took all the money they would've spent on a sales org and plowed it into engineering and product. I'm going to pull up a slide here that tells the Atlassian story about the ratio of the sales and marketing to the product and engineering.

Lenny (00:36:46):
Amazing. And by the way, check this out on YouTube if you're listening to this and check out this slide.

Carilu Dietrich (00:36:53):
So this is a representative sample of what we did in Atlassian's history, and what ratios still exist today, even several years later. Where we spend way less on sales and marketing. Marketing spent less than other marketers. And also we had almost no sales org, or a sales org that was really focused on renewals, or now an assisting sales org that's focused more on enterprise. But relative to other companies, a much smaller, much more efficient sales org. And we took all that money and put it into product. So here we're spending two times, three times as many dollars in R&D as many other companies that we'd benchmark against to make a product that really sold itself.

Lenny (00:37:37):
It's interesting. So I'm looking at the slide. And again if you're listening, check this on YouTube because it's pretty crazy. This slide of bar chart of spend in sales and marketing and R&D, and Atlassian is the very lowest amount of spend in sales and marketing, and the highest spend in product. And it's interesting that it's from 2020, so it's not even in the early days. It's like still today basically.

Carilu Dietrich (00:37:59):
Right. I'm going to close this down and keep telling you a little bit more about it. There's some unique things that people can take now and incorporate. So the real strategy in sales, sales is the most expensive vehicle, right? Expensive people that spend a lot of time. So the Atlassian model was to sell only to people who were already customers really. If several people or a couple groups had purchased, we'd help them with their renewals. And now in the later incarnations of our sales orgs at Atlassian, it helps a lot more with larger enterprise companies who need enterprise deals, or does more cross-sell and upsell, but doesn't really do prospecting. Net new prospecting is a really expensive way to get new customers.

(00:38:51):
So we see different trends coming now with companies, because almost no one can do pure product led growth. Because your investors want to see accelerated growth, and most people believe that adding an SDR or adding an AE will add a predictable amount of revenue. And so it's difficult because product led growth and sales have to coexist.

(00:39:16):
But the whole transition in marketing that's happening to account-based marketing and intent-based signals is trying to do some of what we were doing at Atlassian, only to engage salespeople with customers that are actually likely to buy. And if you look at other hyper-growth companies, Airtable, Miro, both of those I know from the inside have had strategies where the salespeople really only engage after some threshold has been hit of number of users that have already been paying for the product on their credit card. But sometimes it's a high number of 20, 40 people at an account have to be engaged before a salesperson engages.

Lenny (00:39:54):
Based on that, what is it you recommend to founders these days that maybe are product led and just self-service [inaudible 00:40:00] oriented. Do you kind of take this experience and wait as long as you can to hire your first salesperson? I know it's very specific to the situation, but what kind of advice do you generally give?

Carilu Dietrich (00:40:12):
You and I are both like [inaudible 00:40:14] who was just on your podcast earlier this month. Product led growth depends so much on your product and your buying market. There's some buying markets that are less likely to use salespeople, and you need to go in from the beginning. HR might be one, right? Whereas a lot of the hyper-growth companies in the dev tool space can use product led growth because developers both hate failed people, and really love to research themselves. So you see [inaudible 00:40:47] taking off because people engage and kind of self sell.

(00:40:52):
So I would recommend, get closer to their customers and read the signals. If your product is good enough, the people can get time to value in a couple of days instead of weeks or months. You can have a product led growth motion. If your product needs to be put in context, and customized, and assisted, sales teams sometimes are expensive services arms to cover over product issues and help customers buy it until it's fixed. Or if you're in a market where your buyer just really doesn't buy online with research and a demo, then you need to have salespeople. But I would say try not to hire too fast and too far ahead in sales and inside sales, because it seems like it's going to add revenue, but it actually is a huge cost and a huge drain on the business if the product isn't getting that kind of resonance.

Lenny (00:41:47):
I just had a conversation with the founder of Retool for this series that I'm working on, and he basically found the same thing you found where they thought it could be a product led experience where you're building internal tools using their product, but it turned out nobody really understood how to do it themselves and it took a lot of handholding to make it work. So they became sales led from the beginning, even though it feels like a tool that has a lot of potential to be product led and self-service.

Carilu Dietrich (00:42:11):
I think the other hybrid I'm starting to see is people who turn their SDR, sales development reps, into sales engineers, researchers. So instead of having a salesperson who's like, "Would you like to have a meeting with another salesperson?" The first touch for customers that are maybe kicking the tires or trying a product led growth is a person who can help guide them on the path. And I like this hybrid nature because basically it extends product led growth, but helps people in this case where you're talking, where the product itself isn't so intuitive that you can get all the way to the buy itself.

Lenny (00:42:51):
It also sounds more fun to talk to a sales engineer than a salesperson.

Carilu Dietrich (00:42:56):
I know. I always wanted to be a sales engineer. I was a salesperson, and I crushed on the sales. Engineering team who knew everything and could draw all the architectures.

Lenny (00:43:03):
Oh wow, I didn't know that. A couple more questions around this stuff. So you've worked with a lot of different companies. And you kind of come in and help them figure out ways to grow faster, unlock growth opportunities. What do you find often gets most in the way of making big changes to the way they approach growth and approach different growth channels? And maybe on the flip side, what do you find is most essential to making big changes at a company around how they think about growth?

Carilu Dietrich (00:43:30):
The big growth levers are pretty consistent across companies. You start with one product, and you have a couple choices on how the go-to-market works. Product leg growth or sales assisted. You get a little bit bigger and you add an incremental product, or you start to add new segments. You're going to focus on a vertical like finance, or you're going to go global, or you're going to add new sales channels like a partner channel. 

(00:43:56):
And what I've seen with the big growth levers is that it can't ever be an individual department's goal without being a cross company strategy goal, if it's really going to make a difference. 

(00:44:07):
So you've talked about it in your newsletter and on your podcast, but growth isn't just like a person in the engineering team that hacks by themselves. It really has to be funded and thoughtfully constructed so that there's the right content and experience, and product features, and virality features a customer to continue to drive growth.

(00:44:29):
And similarly, lots of companies right now are trying to move upmarket because the economy has created so much pressure in S&B that they're going to try to move to enterprise, or they've trying not to sell as much just to tech companies because tech companies are under pressure and so they want to move to different parts.

(00:44:51):
Sometimes the marketers get blamed or sales gets blamed, we don't have enough leads. But really it's a company strategy problem where the company hasn't decided, "Hey, we're going to all move in this direction and if we're going to sell the enterprise, marketing's going to bring in leads, products going to have a roadmap, and some meaningful features to enterprise. The customer research is going to start thinking about them. We're going to hire some customer support people who know how enterprises work. We're going to hire some salespeople who sell differently to enterprises than S&B." The big growth levers are strategy problems, not individual departmental problems.

Lenny (00:45:26):
And what do you find needs to happen for that to change? Is that like CEO needs to be like, "Here's what we're doing, everyone get on board," or something else?

Carilu Dietrich (00:45:35):
I think it can come either way in the C-suite, right? So my job, I advise hypergrowth CEOs and CMOs of companies, 30 million to 500 million. Often if I'm advising a 30 to 100 million company, the more junior marketer with a CEO who's often a first time founder, who doesn't necessarily know if the marketer's good or not. Hasn't done run marketing before, doesn't know if they should trust what the marketers saying.

(00:46:04):
So often the marketer is saying," Hey, we're having problems because the company's not delivering on this promise you want us to sell." And sometimes the CEO doesn't know if they can trust it, a judgment. And so in that case, someone like me who's an advisor comes in and is like, "That's right, it's not a marketing problem, it's company strategy problem. Let's have an offsite and build some OKRs where we all go after enterprise and we win it together."

(00:46:30):
You'll see at bigger companies or when a new CMO comes in with more senior or seasoned, they'll have the social capital to push back into the executive suite. Or a new head of engineering who will say, "Look, I know you want to move ahead faster, but we actually have to catch up on this technical debt." And they'll push back and get that strategic space that they need. So it can either come from the CEO or it can come from the C-suite really coming together to solve those problems, instead of pushing them under the rug.

Lenny (00:47:01):
You touched on this nuance that a lot of times, there's not a lot of trust between the marketing head and the CEO. And I'm curious what you find helps build that trust.

Carilu Dietrich (00:47:13):
There's a couple things that are really critical for senior marketers, and I actually have a blog coming up based on a podcast I've recorded about why CMOs mostly get fired. And the issues are generally one, that the CMO isn't focused enough on the revenue. So some CMOs get focused more on the pipeline or the awareness, and the CEO doesn't feel like they really have a partner in driving the revenue. Or they don't feel like the CMO really has a handle on what will drive the revenue.

(00:47:46):
So marketing's tough because it's a big spend category, and lots of the spend doesn't convert in quarter. Some of it doesn't convert in year. Advertising campaigns, some take multiple quarters.

(00:47:57):
So it's really important for CMOs to have a handle on the metrics, a solid prediction of what growth levers they can use, and to be able to talk in the terms of the CEO and the board.

(00:48:11):
And I think that that's the biggest gap that I generally see. And then of course, there's a whole bunch of table stake stuff. They have to be running their business well. They have to be a good leader that people want to work for. They have to hire a great team that elevates them and the company, they have to be thoughtful and strategic about the market space that the company's in. They're not just working the levers in the factory. They're thinking, "What new markets should we enter? What new growth areas should we employ?" Like we just talked about. "What new companies should we acquire?" They also need to be thinking ahead. And I think being good on metrics, good on strategy, and good on market helps CMOs spar with CEOs in a way that builds trust.

Lenny (00:49:00):
It's interesting that you say, that blog post you titled Why Most CMOs Get Fired, and it connects with something. Casey Winters noted, that most CPOs also get fired chief product officers. I forget the quote, but it's something like, "The most you can help for is a couple swings at the bat before you get fired as a CPO." Why do you think this is so common for these chief C-suite roles to startups to not work out?

Carilu Dietrich (00:49:26):
They're incredibly hard jobs. The chief product officer and the chief marketing officer are both strategy jobs with difficult to measure results because some of them are direct and some of them are indirect. And I think both of them get swept up when a company's not performing well too. If company's not performing well, you can kind of swap out the head of product, and the next one will be more strategic and deliver faster.

(00:49:55):
And in fact, I've worked in one of the roles, the CFO was really after my chief product officer, and ultimately got him fired because he wanted to move everything offshore, and develop faster, and he didn't want to re-platform, and he didn't want to deal with the technical debt. And the CFO was sure that it was the CPO's fault, and then they got rid of the CPO, and the CFO tried his plan and it didn't work. And then you bring someone in who's like, "No, that guy had the right plane."

(00:50:21):
So both of them are tough jobs. And they require a high bar of excellence, a high connection of trust, and then I think just endurance to keep going and find the next role where you're really a fit and the company really has momentum.

Lenny (00:50:36):
It also reminds me, I was just talking to, I think it was Canva. Where their first engineering hire is now their CTO still, and their first marketing hire is their CMO still. So it does work out on occasion.

Carilu Dietrich (00:50:48):
It works out on occasion. And in fact, I've been playing around with a 10 part series about those CMOs in the CMO world, because there's about 10 to 15 CMOs who have started when it's really small and grown all the way. And they're the ones we really want to learn from. And I know a lot of them and really admire their work, and have learned so much.

Lenny (00:51:09):
You should absolutely do that. That sounds very cool. You talked about how you work with companies from 30 million to 500 million. What is it about that stage that's unique, and what happens after 500 million, and what's the difference before say 30 million? I know it's not an exact number, but how do you think about that range?

Carilu Dietrich (00:51:24):
No, it's not an exact number. My bottom number is because there's this early stage of product market fit where the founder and the company are trying to figure out who their real ideal customer profile is, and can they sell to them consistently?

(00:51:39):
So I've worked for some early stage startups where we've tried lots of different things, but they're not repeatable. You can't scale it. "This product works for this. This product works for this too and it works for this," but those are all kind of unique cases studies. And so my skill is in helping people scale. 

(00:52:00):
And so if they've already found product market fit and they've gotten some funding or they're bootstrapped, but have enough funding to really be trying to build out marketing in a marketing team, that's when I know what each stage looks like. So I know what $30 million great teams look like, and 50 million, and 100, and 150 million, 200 million. My ride at Atlassian was from about 100 to 500.

(00:52:26):
And then over 500, the act of going public, being an early stage public company, I know what that all looks like. And then beyond that, there's public company consultants I think more, that do more specific things. I more help the CMO and CEO structure for the next stage of growth, because they're going through it so fast, they haven't hired someone yet who's already seen.

Lenny (00:52:51):
Got it. One very nuanced question I want to ask you is about bundling. So there's HipChat and Slack kind of ate their lunch, not necessarily through bundling, but there's Slack. And then Slack, I don't know if it's true, but it feels like Microsoft Teams is eating their lunch with bundling. And I'm curious, what do you think of bundling as a strategy to win long-term? And also, how do you compete against say, a Microsoft that may one day bundle your product for free, and you might be in big trouble?

Carilu Dietrich (00:53:22):
I think it's two separate questions, so let me take them separately. The first is, what do I think about bundling? So small and medium-sized companies will go from being a single product company to a multi-product company in order to progress. Because you need a diversified financial model, because you need to be able to sell new products into your customer base who should already be friendly to you if they like your products. And because you need to really expand your total addressable market to get to be $1 billion or $2 billion company. But I believe in bundling is a growth strategy.

(00:53:57):
Specifically for product led growth companies, bundling is not a great land strategy. So at Atlassian, we had a number of products and experimented with different bundled lands. And it really slowed down the product led growth motion. So we ended up going back to land with a single product, high velocity, single person uses it quickly starts to get value, and then come in with other things.

(00:54:22):
So from that perspective, product led growth bundling is not very effective. Bundling for a sales led motion is pretty effective when you're at the right stage of growth. 

(00:54:33):
And then as far as the question of competing against Microsoft, there's these two parts of the philosophies. A best of breed and an all in one. An Oracle was an all in one, and Microsoft is an all in one. You can buy all the things and your CFO can get a discount by spending a whole bunch of money on a bunch of things. But in the all-in one, some of the pieces aren't as good as the best of breed.

(00:54:57):
And so Slack for a long time was the best of breed. People were willing to pay more because they thought it was markedly better than the other instant messaging options. 

(00:55:07):
But there's shifts between best of breed and all in one in economic wins. So right now, CFOs are putting the squeeze. Is Slack really that much better than Microsoft if the Microsoft one is free with all of our other purchases? It's tough. It's tough to go head-to-head with a powerful, big investing, all-in-one competitor. The only way to win is to be the best and have a product that's so much better, that it's worth the extra money.

Lenny (00:55:37):
Interesting. So essentially in a tough environment, bundling is most effective almost. And then this other interesting point about [inaudible 00:55:47], you want to stay focused on one specific pain point. What is it that Atlassian tried to do that they tried to pitch all your planning products in one suite? Is that kind of what we-

Carilu Dietrich (00:55:59):
Well, Jira was the issue tracking. And then we also had Confluence, which was the Wiki page. So let's say there was a business bundle that could have been HipChat, Confluence and Jira. Or there were developer combinations that could have been Jira, Bitbucket, and maybe Confluence too for an engineering team.

(00:56:19):
Basically, if you have to evaluate multiple products to purchase something, it's not a fast and easy online self-service buy. Because you're like, "Do I need all three products? Can I break them apart? Do they all work? Are each of them best of breed?" Whereas if you're like, "I need issue tracking, I'm going to buy Jira, this looks good. I've tried it out, I'm ready to go." That can happen in seven days. Whereas if you add in multiple products, it takes more days and just leads to fewer conversions.

Lenny (00:56:52):
That makes absolute sense. I can see someone thinking the complete opposite and then now realizing how we see. I see why this isn't working.

Carilu Dietrich (00:56:58):
You should always test it. Right? I mean, the secret to product led growth is can you test it? And so we tested everything. We tried bundles. We didn't try bundles. We tried different things in the bundles. We tried different days. Data led insights are better than anything any pundits would say on a podcast.

Lenny (00:57:17):
Amazing. Well with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready? 

Carilu Dietrich (00:57:22):
I'm ready.

Lenny (00:57:23):
Okay. What are two or three books that you recommended most to other people?

Carilu Dietrich (00:57:28):
The number one book is a life book called Tao Te Ching, the Stephen Mitchell translation. And the Tao Te Ching is a philosophy about the flow of life. And I love it. I've carried the Pocket Guide with me for 25 years. 

(00:57:40):
The second one is business focused. Never Split the Difference, which is a great book about negotiating written by a former CIA hostage negotiator, which also helps me with negotiations at work and with my children. So that's a great book.

Lenny (00:57:58):
Actually, I've been trying to read that book on audio. What's something you've taken away from me? Because the stories are so interesting and I'm always like, "What should I actually do in my day-to-day life?" What stuck with you?

Carilu Dietrich (00:58:08):
It's kind of the obvious thing that I wasn't good at. It's that you just really want to put yourself so deeply in the shoes of the other person, that you can figure out what make the win for both of you, right? Basically he says, "You can't win the negotiation by strong arming what you want. You really get to get to a win-win," which is probably every negotiation book ever. But he texturizes it so much. So I just felt like I was really able to... In my last office, we moved last year. I actually had the CliffNotes of his book printed out and posted on my wall because he had a series of questions to help you get deeper and deeper into the mindset behind people. 

(00:58:49):
And connected, but not connected the book How To Win Friends and Influence People, that's the 1932 bestseller, is basically that. People don't want to hear about you. They want you to be thinking about them. And then you can make friends with them, or you can negotiate with them, or you can get your hostage back.

Lenny (00:59:08):
I read How to Win Friends and Influence People when I was very young. And specifically, the chapters about there's no better sound in the world to someone than their name. Carilu.

Carilu Dietrich (00:59:19):
It's true. Thank you. You said it correctly.

Lenny (00:59:22):
Okay, moving on. Favorite recent movie or TV show?

Carilu Dietrich (00:59:26):
My favorite movie is Everything Everywhere All at Once. It's basically a sci-fi about all the different ways your life could turn out if you made different choices. And it was really a mind bender that made me think about all the different ways tiny decisions have changed my life, but then also an appreciation for the life that you have. At the end, it doesn't ruin the story, but she has this love of what she has, even though it's not as good or as different as some of the other options.

Lenny (00:59:26):
I love it.

Carilu Dietrich (00:59:58):
So I bought this poster. I don't think you can see it on the bath, but it says, "Gratitude turns what we have into enough."

Lenny (01:00:07):
Very Buddhist. 

Carilu Dietrich (01:00:08):
I like it. Read the Tao Te Ching.

Lenny (01:00:10):
Not a Post-it, but art. Another teaching from Carilu. I think this needs to be a second newsletter of yours. Life advice.

Carilu Dietrich (01:00:20):
Which is funny. I've been thinking about that one. It would be called The Tao of Hypergrowth.

Lenny (01:00:25):
Oh my God. I love that.

Carilu Dietrich (01:00:26):
And actually, I was thinking about doing it and taking actual clips from the Tao Te Ching, and doing textural analysis about how it applies to our. I've been thinking about this actual podcast for a while because I used to want to do the... I mean blog, the Tao of Parenthood. Because basically parenting, you try to control and fix all the things you didn't do right in your life. But actually, it's the act of providing freedom that lets them go out and explore and then come back to your way of being. So, I don't know. The Tao Te Ching, I love it.

Lenny (01:00:58):
I see so many opportunities. You got to stop what you're doing. Just write all these things.

Carilu Dietrich (01:01:02):
I know. But I love the hypergrowth customers, clients.

Lenny (01:01:06):
All right. Next question. What is a favorite interview question that you like to ask?

Carilu Dietrich (01:01:11):
So this is a little heavy, but it actually is my favorite. It's, "How many people have you fired? And tell me about each of the experiences." So the reason I ask this question is because generally, I'm managing teams of managers. And generally, I need people who have managed many people for a longer period of time. Or even if they're junior managers, how long and how many people they've managed is indicated by how many people they've fired. Because if you've never fired anyone, then you haven't managed very many people for very long, unfortunately.

(01:01:39):
And firing people is the hardest part of a leader's career. So how they talk about it, their compassion, and their need to drive the business, and the circumstances, "Was it layoffs? How did that work? Did you have to performance manage someone out? How did it work? Did you just have to restructure the team because of business goals? How did it work?" Gives you a lot of insight into their experience and their humanity in a way that they're not prepared for. So you really get the real story, and get a sense for what they would be like as a leader under a lot of pressure and difficult situations.

Lenny (01:02:17):
I've never heard that one before and I love it. Reminds me of a episode with Matt Mochary where we talk about how to lay people off really successfully and elegantly.

Carilu Dietrich (01:02:26):
It's a hard.

Lenny (01:02:27):
Yeah. Next question. What's a favorite product that you've recently discovered that you love?

Carilu Dietrich (01:02:34):
So I follow my favorite products to the companies that I advise. I love 1Password. I've got my 85-year-old grandfather and all of my family and friends set up on it. I love the cross-platform nature.

(01:02:45):
I love Miro and whiteboards. I joined Productboard because of this cross-company alignment and views into what's coming up on the roadmap, which is really the most important thing for the company. Momentum, as we talked about, having a great product and a great product strategy. 

(01:03:02):
And then I'm dabbling in all the AI things. I want to be excellent in AI visualization and art. I'm experimenting with Midjourney, but still kind of flailing. I've hired my 13-year old as my strategic advisor. And yeah, I'd love to work for OpenAI and ChatGPT. It's really interesting.

Lenny (01:03:23):
What's something relatively minor that you've changed in the way a product is built or just the company operates, that has led to tremendous impact on their ability to execute?

Carilu Dietrich (01:03:33):
On the product side, one of the concepts that I really like is the Amazon concept around writing the press release at the beginning of a product ideation. So one of the issues between marketing and product is the product will work so hard on something, and there'll be lots of different features, that it won't really be a theme that the marketing team can talk about. And then someone hands it to marketing and says, "Make this marketable." One of my mentors had this comment, "It's a bag of doorknobs." What do I do with this bag of doorknobs? Who wants to buy a bag of doorknobs? They want to buy the door and the concept.

(01:04:13):
So I like this idea of writing a press release. Start with the end in mind, and then negotiate. Is this good enough? Will this really resonate? Or is this really what we're trying to build? Or is this really the outcome we're trying to get with the product? So I've heard about Amazon do it. We experimented with it at Classy. I haven't done it at mass scale, but I love the concept.

Lenny (01:04:31):
Final question. I know you're a meditator. We've talked a little bit about your Buddhist nature. What's one tip for people that have been trying to meditate and just can't make it happen? What's your one tip for helping people meditate more often?

Carilu Dietrich (01:04:44):
So I'm a cheater because I was groomed to meditate. I don't remember how early, but I remember that the first meditations my mom had me listen to was a rainbow butterfly as I fell asleep when I was in kindergarten.

(01:04:55):
So I've been meditating my whole life, with mixed success. And the real secret is just that there's no right way, that there's no wrong way. That it's just making the time to be present, and breathe, and sense, and be here now. 

(01:05:13):
And so I use guided meditations mostly, because I'm not the best at quieting my own mind. I'm thrifty. So I use some free meditations. I use Tara Brach, who's a great meditator, who has short and long concept meditations. 

(01:05:30):
And I like this old one called Meditation Oasis, which actually isn't in publishing anymore, but it's still a podcast. And I re-listen to all theirs over and over. So stick with it is the secret to meditation, and any benefits you get from being present in meditation, hopefully carry over to be being present in life.

Lenny (01:05:51):
My whole body just relaxed as you were talking through all that. So you have a skill. Carilu, this was amazing. We learned how to grow products, how to live better lives, how to become more mindful. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to learn more, reach out? And/or how can listeners be useful to you?

Carilu Dietrich (01:06:09):
Follow me on LinkedIn, or I have a new blog carilu.com on Substack. Thanks to Lenny for the inspiration. And I still have one more advisory slot open, and I'd love to work with more AI companies. I just joined Weights & Biases in the ML op space. But if you know of other great scale up AI companies, I'd love to help junior marketing executives or first time founders see what the next stage of growth looks like and get there.

Lenny (01:06:39):
Amazing. And again, if they are interested in that, how do they reach out to you?

Carilu Dietrich (01:06:43):
On LinkedIn or through carilu.com.

Lenny (01:06:47):
Amazing. Carilu, thank you again so much for making time and for being here. 

Carilu Dietrich (01:06:50):
Thanks for having me, Lenny.

Lenny (01:06:51):
Bye everyone.

Carilu Dietrich (01:06:51):
Bye.

Lenny (01:06:55):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Christopher Lochhead (00:00:00):
The point being, now is the greatest time in history to be a creator, to be an entrepreneur, to be a marketer. I've been a marketer for my entire adult life. It's never been greater than it is right now. And so here's the big thing that I would share. If you are somebody for whom you want to make an exponential difference, you want to innovate, you want to create new value where there wasn't, you want to have a legendary career where you could look back on your career and go, you know what? I was part of this and that, and I was on this team, now's the greatest time in history. And what I would say to you is, the future needs you.

Lenny (00:00:35):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast, where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard-won experiences building and growing today's most successful products.

(00:00:43):
Today my guest is Christopher Lochhead. Christopher is a 13-time number one bestselling co-author, including books like Play Bigger and Niche Down. He's also a popular podcaster, co-creator of the excellent Substack Category Pirates, and is best known as the Godfather of Category Design. He's also an advisor to over 50 venture-backed startups, and a former three-time public company CMO.

(00:01:07):
In our conversation, we dig deep into all things category design, including what exactly is category design? Why, in order to build a legendary business, it's so essential to build your own category versus trying to become the best in an existing category. Also, how to actually go about creating your own category. A ton of examples of companies that did this well and didn't do this well, what we could learn from them. Plus a ton of practical frameworks, including something Chris calls The "Better" Trap. Also, why he thinks product market fit is a very dangerous idea. Chris is such a character and I had such a blast speaking with Chris. With that, I bring you Christopher Lochhead after a short word from our sponsors.

Advertisement (00:01:48):
This episode is brought to you by Mixpanel. Get deep insights into what your users are doing at every stage of the funnel, at a fair price that scales as you grow. Mixpanel gives you quick answers about your users from awareness, to acquisition, through retention. And by capturing website activity, ad data, and multi-touch attribution, right in Mixpanel, you can improve every aspect of the full user funnel. Powered by first-party behavioral data instead of third-party cookies, Mixpanel's built to be more powerful and easier to use than Google Analytics. Explore plans for teams of every size and see what Mixpanel can do for you at mixpanel.com/friends/lenny. And while you're at it, they're also hiring. So check it out at mixpanel.com/friends/lenny.

(00:02:36):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate your growth. Thousands of fast-growing companies like Gusto, [inaudible 00:02:45], Cora, and Modern Treasury, trust Vanta to help build, scale, manage, and demonstrate their security and compliance programs and get ready for audits in weeks, not months.

(00:02:55):
By offering the most in-demand security and privacy frameworks, such as SOC2, ISO 27001, GDPR, HIPAA, and many more. Vanta helps companies obtain the reports they need to accelerate growth, build efficient compliance processes, mitigate risks to their businesses, and build trust with external stakeholders.

(00:03:13):
Over 5,000 fast-growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC2 and these other frameworks. For a limited time, Lenny's Podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Go to vanta.com/lenny. That's vanta.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discounts. Get started today.

Lenny (00:03:37):
Christopher, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Christopher Lochhead (00:03:41):
Lenny, it is my absolute joy. And let me say in case my ADHD brain forgets, I love all things Lenny. You're doing a great job, buddy. I'm honored to be here. And there's so many people in the entrepreneur startup marketing world who are scam artists, shysters, pieces of shit, idiotic hustle porn stars yelling stupidities. There's a lot of idiocy in the world in which you travel and I travel, and you, sir, stand out. You are making a difference. The conversations you're driving, the content you're creating. You're fucking awesome, Lenny, and I'm really stoked to be here with you.

Lenny (00:04:27):
Damn, what an intro to my own podcast. I'm bad at accepting compliments. I'm just going to accept that and I appreciate that, man.

Christopher Lochhead (00:04:34):
No, you need to get it. You are a beacon in an ocean of crapola. You are incredible.

Lenny (00:04:42):
Well, enough about me. I really appreciate it. I was preparing for our conversation and usually what I try to do when I prepare for conversations is I read everything the person has written and it was very challenging with you. You have two podcasts, you have at least six books. There's probably more I missed. You have a newsletter, you tweet a lot. There's probably a lot of other stuff I didn't get to. And so you made my job very difficult preparing for this podcast, but also very worthwhile. So I'm excited to begin.

Christopher Lochhead (00:05:07):
I apologize for that.

Lenny (00:05:09):
The other thing I noticed as I was browsing your website, and it was hilarious because you have all these testimonials of your book and podcast and you have a lot of negative reviews, like "Off-putting, or, "Very disappointing," or, "Absolute crap." I'm curious why you chose to do that as your website testimonial wall.

Christopher Lochhead (00:05:29):
Well, and I believe, I'd have to check with Steve Osler, the founder and publisher of Podcast Magazine, but I believe I'm the only podcaster in history to run a full page ad in Podcast Magazine with just negative quotes in it.

(00:05:44):
So a couple reasons. Number one, can we all just have a sense of humor about this stuff? So it's my way, and the name of our team, yet we're sort of a company, but we're more of a band, is Category Pirates. I mean, clearly if you're called Category Pirates, you're probably trying to have a little bit of fun with this stuff. And so part of it is just trying to have a sense of humor with people.

(00:06:10):
The second piece of it is, for a lot of entrepreneurs, marketers, creators, innovators of any kind, we live in this fear that when we launch our thing, whatever our thing is, that we will be criticized by the world and that we will be made fun of. And if you've ever authored a book or done a podcast or done anything, built a product, a software product, built any kind of a product that you feel is part of you, and most innovators, creators, software developers, artists, of course entrepreneurs, feel that way because they put themselves into this stuff. And when somebody criticizes us, many of us are devastated. And I have been in the past too. I'm a person just like anybody else.

(00:06:55):
And what I realized is, fuck them. Anybody who's trying to do anything exponential, anybody who's trying to break and take new ground, anybody who's trying to radically innovate, anybody who's trying to design and dominate new categories of the way we live, work and play, gets criticized. Picasso was called stupid. The Beatles were called terrible. Elvis was called terrible. I just wrote recently a little bit about hip-hop. I was listening to Rick Rubin on Barry Weiss's podcast, excellent episode. Excellent. She does a great job with him. And he was talking about how ridiculed hip-hop was in the beginning and it got banned. And it's the number one category of music in America today.

(00:07:38):
Anyway, so that's also part of it, is to just sort of say, "Hey, look, this is some of the shit people have said about our work and my work, and I'm going to just put it on display, because this is going to happen to all of us."

(00:07:50):
And then I guess, Lenny, the third reason is in the creator world, broadly, there's a lot of people who are breaking their arms patting themselves on the back. And look, I understand why we have to tell people about why they should pay attention to us, and so we use our credentials or our awards or our downloads or our books, I understand that, and I do a little bit of that too. However, come on, let's just not take ourselves so seriously.

Lenny (00:08:17):
Amazing. I could definitely use more of that skill of not taking negative feedback as seriously. And I love the idea of just embracing it and showing people what people don't like.

Christopher Lochhead (00:08:27):
Why not? I mean, look, you're incredibly successful and if somebody says something negative about you, okay, great. Fuck them. They're not your people.

Lenny (00:08:39):
Fuck them. There we go.

Christopher Lochhead (00:08:40):
I didn't know who you were until Substack, and I saw your logo, the fiery logo, and there was something endearing about your logo. And the other thing that's great about you, from a radical differentiation marketing perspective is, you call yourself Lenny. And when I talk about you, I don't know your fucking last name. I mean, I sort of know it, but I don't really, you know what I mean?

Lenny (00:09:04):
Yeah. It's hard to pronounce.

Christopher Lochhead (00:09:04):
Actually, I was at the gym this morning and I was telling my buddy that we were doing this, and I said, "Oh, I'm going on Lenny's Podcast." He says, "Lenny who?" And I said, "It begins with an R. I don't know. Everybody just calls him Lenny." And so the fact that you are yourself, you don't play a character, you're not a douche, you're just a person trying to be successful in the world and help others, right?

(00:09:28):
That's a very powerful thing. And I think one of the things that is insidious about influencers, hustle porn stars, part of the business model is creating the perception of superiority, right? The reason Grant Cardone and Tai Lopez and all these douchebags pose in front of planes and all this garbage is they want you, the Kardashians are the queens of this, they want you to look at them and go, "Oh, wow, don't I wish that I was them."

(00:10:03):
And so these folks are in the create and monetize envy business, and you're the opposite of that. And I think the legendary educators in the native digital world are the opposite of that. Anybody who's creating separation, anybody who's putting themselves above, anybody for whom there must be, "I must be the leader, and you must be the follower," that's the business model of a massive amount of people in the native digital world, and we reject that. And I know you do.

Lenny (00:10:34):
Absolutely. We've already gotten way off track, but I love it. I'll just say one thing and then we'll get back on track. The reason I called my newsletter, Lenny's Newsletter is because that was the default recommendation Substack gave me when I signed up. They're just like, "Call it this." And I'm like, "Okay," because I don't know, I didn't have no plans to actually be doing this long term. And then it just stuck. And then I brainstormed for weeks. I'm like, "I need a real name on this thing." And I just couldn't think of anything that I liked. So I'm just like, "All right, I'll just roll with it." And then when the podcast launched, I tried so many ways to call it something else so that it would push the whole naming in a different direction, it wasn't about me, but I couldn't think of anything better. So I'm just rolling with it at this point.

Christopher Lochhead (00:11:12):
Well, and the interesting thing is, even though the branding of the shit has your name in, it's not about you. That's the irony, right? Meghan Markle gets canceled. Why? Because it's about her, and it turns out she's infinitely uninteresting. I've consumed enough of your content to know that the cool thing is, yeah, it's called Lenny, but it's actually, you are not trying to impress all of us with how awesome you are in front of a fucking plane or a bunch of scantily clad people, or I don't know what.

Lenny (00:11:54):
It's true. Well, I'm enjoying this podcast. You're very kind to me. Let's talk about the meat of what I want to chat about, which is your bread and butter category creation. It goes without saying you're a big fan of creating your own category versus what most people try to do, which is try to compete in an existing category. So just to kind of lay a little foundation, can you just explain what this actually means, this idea of category creation for people that have heard this idea in this term, but don't really know what it means.

Christopher Lochhead (00:12:23):
It turns out that in business, most people, and in life for that matter, make a unquestioned, unconsidered, undialogued, unthought of decision that they don't know they made. And the decision they make is, "What I'm going to do, is I am going to compete in a market with demand, with a better product/service/brand, maybe a better business model, maybe a better set of growth hacking ideas that I learned on the Lenny Podcast. And when the world gets my better, the world will beat a path to my door."

(00:13:16):
And if you go onto Amazon right now, Lenny, there's roughly a hundred thousand marketing books, and I think I'd have to double check, but I think there's about 60,000 or 80,000 business strategy books. And of course, me and my collaborators, we haven't read all of them, but like you and like many of us in business, we've read many of the tomes, the Bibles out there, and there's an interesting thing about virtually all of them. That's what they're about. It's about how to compete and win.

(00:13:53):
Well, here's the aha. Nobody legendary ever did that. Not a one. We all know who Bob Marley is. We don't know who the 17th greatest reggae musician or band in the world is. We all know who Pablo Picasso is. We don't know who the fifth greatest cubist artist is. And so wherever you look in life, whether it's in the business world, people who drive social change, artists, creators of any kind, the people that we tend to admire the most are the people who broke and took new ground. And the aha here is the category makes the product, the category makes the brand, the category makes the company.

(00:14:51):
So I'll give you the data and then I'll fully answer your question. So here's the data. We did an analysis for our first book where we studied every venture-backed tech company in the US from 2000 to 2015. And we asked a question that, to the best of our knowledge, had never been asked before. And we went to Stanford and we asked a bunch of professors this question, and they said, "We don't know this. You're going to have to do it yourselves." So we did, and incidentally had it peer reviewed and published in the HBR. And if you've ever gotten data published in the HBR, then you know what it's like to have a journalistic proctology exam.

(00:15:32):
Anyway, here's the net of it. In tech market categories, on average, one company earns two-thirds, 76% to be exact, of the total value created as measured by market cap and or valuation. So not market share, which is important, market cap as measured by the value of all the companies in the category. So you take a category, you add all the companys' value together, and you say, "What percent goes to the leader, the category, queen or king? And what percent goes to everybody else?" One company, two-thirds of the economics.

(00:16:12):
So the aha here, Lenny, is when we make the unquestioned, unconsidered, undialogued decision that we didn't know that we made, to compete, we have unwittingly said, "We're going to fight for the 24%." And it's the distinction or delta between create demand and capture demand. So we prefer the term category design, and I can explain why design instead of creation, we don't have anything against creation, but creation creates a confusion in people's mind. When people hear category creation, because most people in business, most people in tech, are strongly oriented to product, what they think you said is first to ship a product that has X features.

(00:17:08):
So when most people say category creation, that's what they think. They say, "They [inaudible 00:17:16] category, Myspace did." Or if you've been around for a little while longer, "GeoCities did." And so category creation, category design, does not equal first to ship a product with a set of features. So what does it equal? Here's the aha. Just like you can design a product, just like you can design a company culture or business model, you can actually design a market.

(00:17:46):
And in so doing, you create a new distinction in value for people that didn't exist before. I'll give you a simple example. If I could own any product in the world right now, I think I'd probably want to own Purell. And there's a great thing about the company that makes Purell. The company's been around for a very, very long time, and they're owned by the original family that created the company. Their original problem that they were solving is, it was a husband and wife team, and they were working in a factory. This was 80 plus years ago. The company, by the way, is called Gojo Industries. Gojo. And Gojo is a portmanteau, putting their two names together. I think it was, maybe it was Gloria and Joseph, or I'd have to double check the husband and wife names, you'll excuse me, but the company's called Gojo Industries, and I think the granddaughter runs it today, if I'm not mistaken.

(00:18:54):
Anyway, so the gal, the wife said, "This bar soap is disgusting. It's full of crapola, it's hairy, it's full of man nastiness." So the solution to washing your hands called a bar of soap was a disgusting, inappropriate solution for her. So she reimagined the problem, not as, "How do I wash my hands," but as, "How do I wash my hands without a disgusting bar soap?" And Gojo Industries created a whole new category called liquid soap. And in most restaurants, most corporate bathrooms, most airport bathrooms, if you start paying attention, you'll see the Gojo logo on the squeezy thing that you pull when you go to get the soap. So unlike most innovators and entrepreneurs, who get obsessed with the solution, and I understand why, we all love our shit, we all love our product. If you want to talk to me about our shit, I want to talk all about it.

(00:20:05):
We could do a 12-hour deep dive on all your content and how you built the newsletter, and you'd love it. It'd be great. We all do. If you're a creator of any kind, entrepreneur, innovator of any kind, you love the thing you're creating, of course. However, Gojo focused on the problem, not just the solution. So they stay obsessed with the problem, and then they ask a different question, which is, "How do I wash my hands in the absence of water?" And of course, the answer to that question is a new category, [inaudible 00:20:44] hand sanitizer. And the dominant brand, of course is Purell.

(00:20:49):
And so the aha here is the company that designs the space and gets it to tip at scale. And when I say designs the space, what I mean is specifically gets a meaningful percentage of the world to agree with their definition of a problem set, which then leads to their definition of a solution set. The company that does that at any kind of scale, wins. And so the number one question for any entrepreneur or any creator at all is, "Do I want to compete for 24% of an existing market category? Or do I want to create my own where if I can execute, I will earn two-thirds of the economics?" That's the decision that most entrepreneurs make, that they don't know that they made. And at its heart, category design is about the most radical kind of differentiation.

(00:21:52):
So most companies actively seek comparison. If you go to, well, if go to many software company's website right now on their homepage, you'll see a Gartner report or a Forrester report on their homepage. You'll see ads and/or content that say, "Here are three competitors and a list of features," and there'll be 25 features, "And then there's us," and there'll be 125 features. And they're actively inviting comparison. You even hear it in ads. If you listen to what marketers say, Lenny, we say the stupidest shit. Don't take our word for it. Anyway. And so the legendary innovators over time, they did not compare their innovation to the past. They broke and took new ground. They wanted to be irreplaceable. They wanted to be so much value in the minds of customers that not only were the switching costs horrible, switch to what?

Lenny (00:23:07):
To follow this thread a little bit, companies that you're pretty familiar with, maybe just a rapid fire sharing of their category to give people a concrete sense of what does it even mean to have a category?

Christopher Lochhead (00:23:21):
Okay, let's go.

Lenny (00:23:22):
It's becoming obvious that they basically all came up with a different category that they wanted to win. And so Gong comes up as an example. I don't know if you know about Gong. I think they-

Christopher Lochhead (00:23:32):
I do.

Lenny (00:23:33):
So it's basically like sales analytics is what they pitch, is like, this is the first thing you can ever do to understand how your sales team is doing. Is there anything you know more about their approach?

Christopher Lochhead (00:23:43):
Yeah, I know the space very, very well, and they did something incredibly smart. So they were a little later in the space than some others. And so there were a whole bunch of companies in today which you could broadly refer to as the revenue space, right? In the spirit of full disclosure, I'm familiar with Clary. I'm good friends with Andy. I know the team. I've done some work with them. So all disclosure. Clary, and a handful of others, in the beginning started to create the space that ultimately became RevOps. And the interesting thing that Gong did, very smart, was as RevOps started to emerge, they were smart enough to realize that revenue was going to be a big new important space. That CRM didn't actually do it. That ERP didn't actually do it. BI didn't actually do it. And so there was this sort of emerging set of thinking around, "We need a different approach to revenue."

(00:24:44):
They were smart enough to realize that if they went for the whole enchilada, it's not credible from a startup that you're going to go build, that you're going to show up and say, "We have a suite that's equivalent to that of SAP, just for this other area." So they picked off a very tight part of a broader emerging category, and they executed incredibly, and they dominated that part. But here's the mistake they made. In all new mega categories, they start like this. This is exactly what happened in CRM. I could walk you through the history if it matters, but there were companies in support, there were companies in help desk, there were companies in sales, there were companies in marketing, and there were a whole bunch of sub-niches underneath that. There was a point in time in the Salesforce automation category, when that was a standalone category, that some of the hottest companies in that category were sales configurator companies, a further down niche.

(00:25:44):
And so as these mega spaces emerge over time, no one company can fulfill the needs of a customer. And so there's all these niches. The mistake that Gong made, as well as the vast majority of others in that space, is they stayed in their micro niche. So the strategy in the beginning that was genius and exactly what you should do as a startup, all of a sudden, when they didn't expand and set the agenda, the design for the big category, they got fucked. Because now they're niched. And there's a big learning in this Lenny, which is, if you're a company that's already up and running and you're winning, and let's say you're becoming the category queen in your space, every entrepreneur, every CEO, faces a fascinating moment. If they become successful in the first five years or so, which is they realize their biggest barrier to growth going forward, is their current category, because you can only be as big and successful as your market category.

(00:27:02):
And so you have to continuously expand the vision for the category and continuously build on that. And if you don't, and somebody else frames, claims, and names, the bigger agenda, as has been the case, and look, I'm biased, as has been the case with Clary, Clary's crushing everybody in this space right now, and the Gongs and all the other players are now in this horrible position, which is they basically only have two choices. One, they can stay in their niche, which is what most players do, and they argue best of breed "Oh, well, we're the best revenue carbodingulator. And you could go buy an end-to-end revenue platform. But if you do that, you won't get the best functionality in the carbodingulator space. So buy our revenue carbodingulator." That doesn't work. Microsoft proved it over 30 years ago, and we can talk about that if you want.

Christopher Lochhead (00:28:00):
Microsoft proved it over 30 years ago, and we can talk about that if you want. You either stay in your niche and get diminished over time, or you uplevel and you go to play for the whole enchilada. The problem is for them and all the others in this space who didn't do that, if they were to do it today, well over a year after Clari did, they're just a Clari copycat. And so basically you either go compete with Clari for who can be the category king, or you stay in your niche and get diminished over time. And if you're going to go compete with the company that is laying down the category design that's picking up the most momentum for the overall market, you better know how to do a fifth dan black belt category wars.

Lenny (00:28:58):
Following that thread, there's a bunch of threads I'd love to follow, but something I definitely wanted to touch on is, in this concept of the better trap, which is where most people go, where they try to be the better solution in an existing category. And just to reinforce that point, what have you seen? What have you learned about just why that is often, and maybe always the wrong approach?

Christopher Lochhead (00:29:19):
Let's take a very current example, Threads. We just wrote about this. When Threads came out, and I can show you all the headlines if you want to see them, New York Times, nevermind tech... All these places. Twitter killer, Twitter killer, Twitter killer, Twitter killer. And at the time there's all this discussion of Musk and Zuck having a UFC cage fight. And so there's all this buildup into the launch of Threads and there's all this supposed Twitter hate, and, quote, unquote, "Everybody's leaving Twitter." All right. So Threads comes out. What happens? Threads surpasses GPT as the fastest growing app ever.

(00:30:08):
Now the headlines, Lenny, are coming. This is it. Zuck's a genius. It's incredible. And by the way, this sits inside one of the newer stupid axioms in Silicon Valley. So this is a side note, but when somebody says something in Silicon Valley that enough people think, "Yes, that's smart." They just parrot it. They don't actually think about it. There's a current thinking in Silicon Valley, and this was real loud as Threads was coming out, this was the reason why Threads was the Twitter killer. What you need, Lenny, is brand and distribution. That's what you need, especially distribution. I would assert to you that Threads had the greatest distribution advantage of any new piece of software ever launched. If there's another one that has a greater distribution advantage, I'd like to know what it is.

Lenny (00:31:11):
No, that seems right. Seems right.

Christopher Lochhead (00:31:14):
Massive distribution, incredible, easy up and on, incredible. Free product, not even freemium, free. Awesome. And Facebook Meta, you tell me, one of the 10 most powerful brands in tech?

Lenny (00:31:32):
Absolutely.

Christopher Lochhead (00:31:33):
How many users does Facebook have today, Lenny, do you know?

Lenny (00:31:35):
Over a billion? Might be more.

Christopher Lochhead (00:31:37):
How many billion person apps have there been in the history of apps?

Lenny (00:31:42):
None.

Christopher Lochhead (00:31:43):
Right.

Lenny (00:31:43):
I think.

Christopher Lochhead (00:31:44):
Legendary brand, the greatest distribution advantage in history. What happened? It cratered. It's gone. It's still there, but nobody's there.

Lenny (00:31:59):
They're launching the [inaudible 00:32:00] soon so they have another shot.

Christopher Lochhead (00:32:02):
Oh yeah. Now why, why did that happen? Why did one of the richest people in the history of the world, who's potentially one of the smartest people in the history of entrepreneurship in tech, fail so miserably when the entire world said he was going to "kill," quote, unquote, Twitter? And after the initial, quote, "success" of Threads everybody said that's exactly what was going to happen. And now all those experts are surprisingly quiet. The legendary Kevin Maney said that category design is a new lens on business. It's a different lens. It's sits next to the product lens, it sits next to the competition lens, but it is equally important. So here's what happened with Threads.

(00:32:54):
They attacked an existing, well-known, well understood, incredibly well-defined problem with a direct copy. They even were celebrating that it was Twitter, just better. They said virtually those words. So known existing problem with a known existing solution that was, quote, unquote, "better" and integrated with the rest of the Meta shit. Quote, "Everybody checked it out and everybody went away." Why? Here's the aha.

(00:33:33):
Problems create categories, and you either have to A, solve a new problem, or B, reframe, name and claim an existing problem in a, I'm going to use these words on purpose, very different way. And if you reframe the existing problem such that people see it in a different way, that's when they'll be open to a new solution. But the mistake is the impasses is on the wrong [inaudible 00:34:11]. The impasses is on the product. Because we live in a world where just like the availability of oxygen, we believe the best product wins. Zuckerberg is going to blow in excess of a billion dollars on Threads and it will fail. It already has failed. Because you can't take an existing problem with an existing solution, launch exactly the same shit, tell the world it's better and have the world embrace it. Because the problem makes the solution the other way around.

Lenny (00:34:51):
So classic advice along these lines is, if you're, say, 10 times better than the existing product, you have a good chance at getting people to care and having success. Is there a line of just like it's the same thing but 10 times better? Or do you have to, in your experience, reframe? And I want to talk about that.

Christopher Lochhead (00:35:07):
Let's just look at the evidence. We could agree that Jeff Bezos is not a dumb person, yes?

Lenny (00:35:14):
Yes.

Christopher Lochhead (00:35:16):
Do you have an Amazon Fire phone?

Lenny (00:35:19):
I don't.

Christopher Lochhead (00:35:20):
Neither do I. Why not?

Lenny (00:35:24):
I'm very happy with my iPhone.

Christopher Lochhead (00:35:27):
And so, Bezos launched a better product and nobody bought it. And the reason nobody bought it is the problem. And therefore the solution that you think you're solving with your iPhone is solved with your iPhone. When was the last time you enjoyed a Red Bull Cola?

Lenny (00:35:48):
Not once.

Christopher Lochhead (00:35:50):
Red Bull made exactly the same mistake that Zuck just made with threads. What Red Bull believed was, "We built one of the greatest brands in the world." Which they have, but they didn't understand why. The category made the brand not the other way around. Energy Drink made the category, so they go, "Great, we can put our brand on anything and it'll sell. So let's make Cola." They lost a bazillion dollars. It's reported that Microsoft lost somewhere between 400 and a billion dollars in Microsoft Stores. Did you ever go to a Microsoft store, Lenny?

Lenny (00:36:28):
I walked by them in the mall and I don't think I've ever entered.

Christopher Lochhead (00:36:32):
Well, they look exactly... If you remember, they look exactly like an Apple Store. And Ballmer famously told the team, when the Apple Stores took off, he famously told the team, "Go to the Apple Stores, study everything they're doing and let's copy it exactly." Google that shit, it's out there. Well, it didn't work. Why? Because you can't attack an incumbent category queen unless you frame, name and claim a new or different problem. Because when the existing problem is well understood and the existing solution is well understood, there's no need for a new solution. Even if people, quote, unquote, "hate Twitter," didn't do anything to Twitter, and now Zuck's going to have to write off probably over a billion dollars on Threads. And the funny thing is, Lenny, this just keeps happening over and over and over. Venture capitalists in the next five years will blow at least half a trillion dollars in the AI space alone, on me too, demand chasing existing category competing startups that have a 10x better product, no one cares.

(00:38:02):
And look, we're all going to sit here and watch them do it. And we, category pirates, and those of us in the category design world will say, "Told you." And they're just going to keep doing it. More importantly, because the big companies in many cases can afford to continue to fail and make this mistake. The tragedy in this is how many legendary innovative products never got to see the light of day because the inventor, the creator, the entrepreneur, believed in the product, but didn't know that every solution has to fit into a problem of value for people. And so their innovation went nowhere.

Lenny (00:38:51):
Let's talk about how to actually go about designing a category. You've used this phrase a few times, and that may be the best lens to approach it. If not, we can go at it from a different direction. But this idea of framing, naming, and claiming, how do you do that? What's that process like?

Christopher Lochhead (00:39:08):
Great question. It starts somewhere where most people don't want to start, and that is, the first law of category design is thinking about thinking is the most important kind of thinking. Thinking about thinking is the most important kind of thinking. If you're going to think about thinking, we have to define thinking. Now, the minute I start down this path, there's a meaningful percentage of people whose eyes rolling, going, "Here comes some bullshit," right? "Just tell me how to do the SEO, Lenny. Where's the SEO? Or where's the..." Whatever the tactical thing is.

(00:39:47):
So the first thing we have to do is break down thinking. Roger Martin is considered to be the greatest management thinker, or certainly one of them alive today. We were lucky enough to have him on the podcast when his most recent book came out, which if I'm remembering correctly, is called the New Way to think. People call him the new Peter Drucker. And he describes it as effectively as anyone I've ever heard. And at a high level, and this is me paraphrasing, so give me some license, but he's the source. At a high level there's two kinds of thinking, reflective and reflexive. And now, this is my editorializing. What most people think is reflective thinking is actually reflexive thinking. What's reflex versus reflective? Reflex is simple. You go for an annual checkup, yes?

Lenny (00:40:41):
I should be.

Christopher Lochhead (00:40:43):
Have you ever had a doctor whack your knee with the little pink?

Lenny (00:40:46):
Yeah.

Christopher Lochhead (00:40:46):
And your knee goes whoop.

Lenny (00:40:49):
I do [inaudible 00:40:49] .

Christopher Lochhead (00:40:50):
And she's testing your reflexes. And that's an involuntary thing, when you're sitting on the doctor's table and your legs are hanging like a little kid and she goes whack, your leg just does this twitch, right? So that's a reflex. And reflexive thinking is very, very powerful. You have a driver's license, I'm guessing.

Lenny (00:41:11):
I do.

Christopher Lochhead (00:41:12):
And when was the last time you were in a vehicle, driving?

Lenny (00:41:15):
Yesterday.

Christopher Lochhead (00:41:17):
And if you're out on the road driving and somebody cuts you off, what are you likely to do?

Lenny (00:41:25):
I get a little upset and then I keep driving.

Christopher Lochhead (00:41:29):
But I would assert, Lenny, you do something before you get upset.

Lenny (00:41:31):
I guess I try to avoid hitting this car.

Christopher Lochhead (00:41:34):
Yes. And maybe you swerve, maybe you hit the brakes, maybe you do both. My point is this, the car cuts you off and we instantly, no thinking, react in order to save our lives, not damage our vehicles, not hurt anybody else. We didn't think about that. We literally just reacted. That's the way people think about most things. I say to you, Lenny, let's talk about guns and abortion and immigration rights in America.

Lenny (00:42:14):
No, thanks.

Christopher Lochhead (00:42:15):
Now you have opinions about those things, right?

Lenny (00:42:17):
I do.

Christopher Lochhead (00:42:18):
As do I. Most people don't challenge their own thinking. Most people say, "Now, why do I only think what I think about abortion? Where did I learn that? What do I really think about abortion? What do others think about abortion? Are there smart people in the world that I admire who are more educated and experienced in this field that have meaningfully different opinions than my own? There are. Why is that?" Et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. We don't fucking do that, we say our opinion on abortion is the opinion on abortion. And in the United States of America in the political domain we say, "And anybody who thinks differently is trying to kill America." That's not thinking. So reflexive thinking is, what do I really think? Why do I think that? And in the business world, most people unconsciously assume the future is a continuation of the past. That's not what legendary entrepreneurs do. Legendary entrepreneurs don't just think they know the future is going to be different, because they're designing that different future. And the problem they're focused on matters to them so much that the fact that the problem continues to persist makes them batshit crazy. RJ... Is it RJ or JR? I can't remember now... The founder of Rivian, obviously Musk at Tesla, these guys are obsessed. It drives them insane. They don't understand why we're not all in EVs already.

(00:44:12):
And so my friend Mike Maples, the legendary venture capitalist from Floodgate, says, "The greatest entrepreneurs are visitors from the future telling us how it's going to be." And the reason many of them are so irascible is because the fact that the present is not already at the future that they see makes them insane. And so the point being legendary entrepreneurs and creators make the future different. They literally are in the design different futures business. Can I tell you a story?

Lenny (00:44:46):
Please.

Christopher Lochhead (00:44:50):
We're friends, and we've done some work with the guys who created Lomi. And Lomi is the first kitchen appliance in 20 years to earn a spot on the kitchen counter. A, it's one of the fastest growing new consumer items in the last 20 years. And B, if you think about your kitchen counter, do you have a toaster?

Lenny (00:45:19):
Yep.

Christopher Lochhead (00:45:21):
Coffee maker?

Lenny (00:45:22):
Yeah, I don't drink too much coffee, but we do have one.

Christopher Lochhead (00:45:25):
Any other devices on the kitchen counter?

Lenny (00:45:27):
We got a rice cooker and the rest is hidden away.

Christopher Lochhead (00:45:33):
Perfect. So what's Lomi? Lomi is the category designer of the smart home composter. Imagine a device that's one and a half or twice the size of a good size toaster. And what Lomi does is you take your food scraps, and it turns out that depending on whose numbers you want to believe, in America, we throw away somewhere between 40 to 60% of our food. And it turns out that food garbage, food waste is some of the most damaging to the environment. So what does Lomi do? You take your food scraps, you dump it into Lomi, you fill that shit up, Lomi's got a button on the front, you press that button, and what used to take three to six months to compost gets composted in three to six hours.

(00:46:29):
And even, this is weird, it smells good to me. Lomi did not say that, "we're better garbage, that we're different garbage, that we're better recycling." What they said was, "We are a different way of solving this huge problem." And they use both personal motivation, nobody likes throwing out garbage, nobody likes a big mess in their kitchen, et cetera, and an altruistic vision, which is... And oh by the way, if we do this, we will do something that governments heretofore have not been able to do, which is take a massive amount of environment hurting gases out of the atmosphere. And it turns out because of global climate change that we're creating more and more sand and we have dirt traces. Lomi dirt has been shown to be amongst the most nutrient rich dirt in the world. Here is a company with a breakthrough technology that truly makes a difference in the world with a business model that allows them to build a highly profitable high growth business.

(00:47:48):
And the way they got there was by designing a new category and showing the world why, by making room in your tight kitchen for this new device, you'll make a difference for your family and the world. And if all they had done was what, by way of example, Dean Kamen did when he launched the segue, which is, isn't this cool? Nothing would've happened. So my point is, the Lomi guys designed a product, a company, and a new market category. They created demand out of nothing for, I think the average price is around 400 bucks. The sum total of the market for smart home composters when they launched was fucking zero. And their vision for the new category was so compelling, Jay-Z was one of their first investors.

Lenny (00:48:53):
I have their site up. Thinking about this framework of, frame it, name it, claim it, they framed the problem in this unique way of... Is it the framing of the problem or framing of a solution? The framing step, best way to think about that.

Christopher Lochhead (00:49:09):
There's something in category design called languaging, which is the strategic use of language to change thinking. And a mistake that a lot of entrepreneurs make is they use old language to describe their new thing. And we can't use so much new language that nobody knows what the fuck we're talking about, so we have to meet the category where it is and bring them forward, but we have to create new language. Can I share with you one of my favorite, most recent, favorite category design stories in this regard?

Lenny (00:49:42):
Please.

Christopher Lochhead (00:49:44):
You've been on an elevator, yes?

Lenny (00:49:45):
Yes.

Christopher Lochhead (00:49:47):
Have you ever looked at the floor and seen a logo on the floor of the elevator?

Lenny (00:49:53):
I can't recall. I imagine it.

Christopher Lochhead (00:49:55):
Well, if you do, you'll more than likely see this name, Otis. Otis Elevator. Most people don't know why Otis is the category queen of elevators. Well, here's why. Elisha Otis invented the elevator. Now, pre-Elisha, there were no skyscrapers. Because how could you get to the top floor? How could you build the top floor, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So when he creates the elevator, there's no known problem for it to solve. So he demonstrates it, people think it's cool. He shows it at like fares and shit. Because the big problem with prior elevators was they would crash. And so he built this safety system to catch them if the wiring would crash. And the category name, he actually used, Lenny, he called it the safety elevator to address the current problem in the space, which is... I don't know. People still went, "That's interesting, but why do I need a safety elevator?" It's a solution with no problem.

(00:51:14):
So what does he do? Languaging. And in category design, one of the breakthroughs is this thing called a point of view, which helps you frame, claim and name a problem and educate the world on why they should move from the way it is to, we call them frotos, from to, a new and different way. So Elisha has to make the market, there's zero demand. It's what many of our smart VC friends call a zero billion market, which is what you want. So what does Elisha call it? The vertical... Railway

Lenny (00:51:57):
Beautiful.

Christopher Lochhead (00:51:59):
And people understand what a railway does. It moves people and shit this way. And he said, "Great, we've now got a vertical elevator that moves people and shit this way." And if you have a vertical elevator-

Lenny (00:52:11):
Vertical railway.

Christopher Lochhead (00:52:12):
A vertical railway, thank you. You can have a new category of building. This is no different than anybody today, for example, in the technology space, who's building a new part of the technology stack for AI. So if you've got a new important security layer for AI that enables a new highly secure AI application. From a languaging perspective, if you just use existing languaging, you'll be like Elisha in the beginning where people go, "That's really cool, man. Fucking A, didn't think that was technically possible. Wow. It's like you've broken gravity, dude, incredible. Don't know why we'd ever need this. See you." And he goes, "Wait a minute, wait a minute. What if it was a vertical railway?" "Well, what could we do with a vertical railway?"

(00:53:09):
This is why thinking matters. The way you think about the problem, the way you frame claim and name the problem. One of the core tenets, Lenny, in category design is listen to the words. Listen to the words. And when you listen to the words, you will hear things that you don't normally. And so he created new languaging, what in category design is called a point of view, to frame, claim and name a problem, which is, how do I move up and down versus across land? And in so doing the aperture of people's minds created what you could think of as new mental scaffolding for a whole new kind of innovation. And thanks to Elisha Otis, we have tall buildings.

Lenny (00:54:01):
I really like this idea of languaging. Are there any other examples come to mind, awesome examples of languaging in action that worked out?

Christopher Lochhead (00:54:07):
I got a bazillion of them. Another one of my favorites. When Starbucks first starts a coffee is 10 cents. You sit there and you go, "We can't make money at 10 cents." That doesn't make sense, right? Unit economics don't work for what we're trying to get done. If the ASP in the industry is 10 cents, we want to have an ASP of three bucks. Fuck. Well, here's the aha. It's very hard to charge three bucks for a thing that everybody currently pays a quarter for, if you call it the same thing.

(00:54:50):
So they create new languaging, they teach, they literally teach consumers new language. That's why you and I walk into Starbucks and say, "I'd like a double grande latte, please." 25 years ago, that was not languaging that you and I used. And they use it as a mechanism for radical differentiation and radical value/price differentiation. And they made up the fucking word. It sounds kind of Italian, vente. But the truth is, by the way, it's a milkshake, but that's a whole other conversation. They're the number one milk seller in the country. They're a milk company, not a coffee company. But that's, again, a whole other conversation. The point being, if you want to charge three bucks for something that heretofore has been 10 cents or a quarter, change the language. And you know it's Starbucks language. Where I live, there's a shit ton of new hipster independent coffee shop type places. Where they paint the Mona Lisa in your latte before-

Christopher Lochhead (00:56:00):
... where they paint the Mona Lisa in your latte before they give it to you and all that shit. If you walk into one of those hipster places and ask for a double grande latte, the super hipster gal or guy behind the counter with the nose ring and shit is going to give you a bit of a grizzle, because you are using Starbucks languaging in their location, and that's the other breakthrough. This is really important in the technology industry, the company that creates the languaging for the category wins.

(00:56:39):
Oh, you see that today, OpenAI. Not that long ago you did not hear the term large language model. Correct?

Lenny (00:56:51):
Correct.

Christopher Lochhead (00:56:52):
That was not a term we were talking about.

Lenny (00:56:53):
That's right.

Christopher Lochhead (00:56:56):
And today the entire industry is talking about LLMs. Here's another thing that they created, training data. Well, those of us who've been around for a long time, we understand what data is. We know what a database is, we know what data in motion is, we know what data at rest is. We know what structured data is, we know what unstructured data is, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.

(00:57:19):
I'm not a data expert by any stretch, but I've been in the industry for 37 years, I know some about shit data. We'd never heard the term training data, and I'm still frankly looking for a breakthrough in languaging to describe it to people, because I think when most people realize the difference between data/content and training data, there's a massive breakthrough that can occur there. The languaging is still not sufficient, but we're getting there.

(00:57:53):
New languaging creates new thinking, and a demarcation point in language creates a demarcation point in thinking, which can create a demarcation point in perceived value, and she, who changes and or creates net new value perceptions wins.

Lenny (00:58:19):
This episode is brought to you by Round. Round is the private network built by tech leaders for tech leaders. Round combines the best of coaching, learning, and authentic relationships to help you identify where you want to go and accelerate your path to get there, which is why their wait list tops thousands of tech execs. Round is on a mission to shape the future of technology and its impact on society.

(00:58:42):
Leading in tech is uniquely challenging, and doing it well is easiest when surrounded by leaders who understand your day-to-day experiences. When we're meeting and building relationships with the right people, we're more likely to learn, find new opportunities, be dynamic in our thinking and achieve our goals. Building and managing your network doesn't have to feel like networking. Join Round to surround yourself with leaders from tech's most innovative companies, build relationships, be inspired, take action. Visit round.tech/apply and use promo code Lenny to skip the wait list. That's round.tech/apply.

(00:59:20):
I think you've made a very compelling case for why people should design a new category. To give people one more tactical tool for coming up with and figuring out the category they want to go after and framing it and even naming it, you mentioned this idea of having a point of view. Maybe that's the best way to approach this question, or maybe there's another framework of just how can people best think through and spend time thinking about what this new category they should be creating ends up being?

Christopher Lochhead (00:59:51):
Great question, Lenny. Two things, at least. First, spend more time on the problem than the solution. There's a very early stage, security startup I'm working with right now in the AI space that's doing absolutely mind-boggling things, and the founders have incredible backgrounds with large transaction systems and deep security, just an incredible company.

(01:00:21):
I had a call yesterday with the founder and some folks on the product team just getting an update on where they're at and this and that and the other, and we're sort of starting to want to talk to people externally. We've raised a seed round, VCs are coming, they're very ... Anyway, we're sort of slowly starting to want to come into the world and begin to have a conversation.

(01:00:46):
The founder CEO sends me a text yesterday and says, "I'd like you to, if you're open to it, have a call with so-and-so. He's a very important person, knows a lot about our space, blah blah. Known him for a long time," dah, dah, dah, dah, dah. Great. I said, "It sounds wonderful, but why? What's the purpose of my conversation with so-and-so?" The founder literally said to me, "I would love it if you would be willing to invest some time in listening to some of our customers to hear from their perspective what the problem is and what the solution could be, not just from me and our team."

(01:01:27):
That is a founder who's obsessed with the problem. That's the first piece. The second piece of advice I'll give you, I mentioned Mike Maples, he's got a very powerful way of framing this. He calls it backcasting as distinct from forecasting. You're nodding your head, you're familiar with this.

Lenny (01:01:54):
Yeah, I've read this in length in the show notes, it's amazing.

Christopher Lochhead (01:01:56):
Yeah. Here's the idea. What most people do is you and I are entrepreneurs, we have this idea for a product, this problem we can solve. We think we're going to be bazillionaires, we think we're going to help a lot of people, we think we're going to have a lot of fun, and so we have at it. And whether we realize it or not, the mental scaffolding we use goes like this: Lenny and Christopher are sitting here now, we have these big dreams. We think, let's say, five years out into the future, "What do we want to do? Oh [inaudible 01:02:32]. Why don't we go through all the dreams? Great." Then we ask ourselves, most of this is subconscious and then it shows up in business plans and other things, "What do we need to do to get from here to there?" Have you ever done any backcountry hiking, Lenny?

Lenny (01:01:56):
Yeah, I have.

Christopher Lochhead (01:02:52):
Yeah, so if you and I were going to go on a four or five-day trip in the Sierras, we would have a start point, right?

Lenny (01:03:00):
Yeah, absolutely.

Christopher Lochhead (01:03:02):
And we'd know where we were coming out, right?

Lenny (01:03:03):
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Lochhead (01:03:04):
And we'd have way points along the way, yes?

Lenny (01:03:06):
Yeah, probably.

Christopher Lochhead (01:03:09):
Because we knew we were going to be out four days or six days or whatever, we would try to plan our food appropriately.

Lenny (01:03:14):
Absolutely.

Christopher Lochhead (01:03:14):
And the whole plan would be predicated on "We're going to start here and we're going to end here," and what do we need to do to get from where we start to where we end, yes?

Lenny (01:03:25):
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Lochhead (01:03:26):
Now, when going on a backcountry hike, that's a very smart fucking thing to do, because if you've ever been on a backcountry hike and you're four days in only to realize you don't have enough food, that's an experience you don't want to recreate. Okay, turns out that while that's highly effective for a hike, it is intergalactic disaster for a startup. Here's why. Your point of reference is everything. Thinking about thinking is the most important kind of thinking.

(01:03:59):
When we do it that way, mentally we are standing in the present, which is an extension of the past, and we're saying, "What do we need to do to go from this present to the different future we want, and what are the obstacles in the way?" Here's the mental scaffolding. That's forecasting, here's backcasting.

(01:04:26):
We do an exercise, we abandon everything. In category design you get taught to what's called reject the premise, so I reject everything about the way that it is, all of it. You and I now envision this future five years out and everything's gone incredibly, it's exceeded our expectations. We make that true in our minds. We write out, we brainstorm out "What's it going to be like? What kind of technology are we selling? What are we doing for customers? How big's our company? How many people will hire?" Da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da. Then we say, "Okay, standing in that future, five years out, looking back to the present, what did we do to make this different future happen?" That's category design. That's how you unshackle yourself from the past. See, one of the biggest disservices in our industry is this word disrupt. "Oh, [inaudible 01:05:26] we're going to go disrupt the engineering industry." Nah. Well, if you're disrupting something, by definition, your reference point is the something. And when your reference point is an existing thing, your reference point is the past. If we want to be able to think in unconstrained ways about a radically different future, the more we drag the past forward, the worse off we are. What reject the premise teaches us is let's forget everything we know and start fresh. My friend, a legendary designer, John Bielenberg, does this course on innovation and design with kids in university. He does this multi-week exercise and the objective of the exercise, Lenny, is design a bicycle. That's the objective. And there's only one design point. It cannot be rideable.

(01:06:25):
And the reason John makes him do that, his philosophy, he calls it thinking wrong. That's his version, if you will, of reject the premise. The reason for it is when you take away the premise, it must be rideable, you open up the aperture for legendary new thinking, radically different possibilities, radically different futures. This is the mistake that many, many entrepreneurs make, is whether they realize it or not, what they're doing is incremental better and they're fighting for market share, fighting for existing demand with something that's incrementally better. And the reality is that's why most entrepreneurs fail. Now, you could fail doing it exponentially different, it sounds medically insane to say "What you want is a zero billion dollars market." However, as crazy as it sounds, it's the only thing that leads to meaningful success. And the proof is in the data.

Lenny (01:07:34):
Yeah. You talk about this in your writing, that on the surface it feels very hard and expensive to design a category, build a category, convince everyone this is a new problem. But your point is there's no other option really if you want to build a large business. Is that right?

Christopher Lochhead (01:07:49):
Correct. And the other thing is people say, "Oh, it's really expensive and it takes an amount of time." As compared to what? You've lived a lot of your life in the product world, yes? As have I. Well, if you ask smart VCs, if you ask Brian Roberts at Venrock, the number one healthcare tech investor in the world, I believe he says it's eight to 10 years for a product to really have some maturity and be really stable. And I don't know whether he's right or not, but he's a super smart guy. We know how long does it take to create a legendary culture, how long does it take to get a legendary innovative business model to really hum. "Ah, it's mainly hard." Well, so is building a product, so is building a company, so is raising VC, so is doing sales, so is doing marketing, so is doing HR. If you want to be easy, go work at the fucking DMV. That's point A.

(01:08:53):
Point B is the reality, Lenny, when you look at it, the vast majority of innovation comes from startups. People say, "Only big companies can do this." Listen, my collaborator partner Eddie Yoon, is the Obiwan Kenobi of category design in the Global 2000 Arena and particularly on the consumer side. And he will tell you that most of these major companies... And he's worked for, you name a big food company, you name a big beverage company, he's worked for many of them. They fail miserably. The reality is six people with a small investment from a rich uncle can stand something up that has the potential to be worth $3 trillion dollars. That's what Apple is.

(01:09:52):
And I sat there with Don Valentine and asked him about why he signed the check to Steve and Steve, and he said it was the stupidest use case he ever saw. The use case was a stay-at-home mom, keeping track of her recipes on the Apple personal computer. This is the stupidest use case ever. However, Don could see the potential in the category and in the guy's willingness to go get after it. And so for a VC, if you're going to raise money, the VCs who invest in early stage mass potential companies are the ones who see your different future.

Lenny (01:10:40):
Along those lines, I had this note that you had this quote around product market fit and it's this hot take that product market fit is a very dangerous idea. I'd love for you to speak to that, because I think most people are in the opposite camp that it's the only thing that matters. Why do you think it's such a dangerous idea?

Christopher Lochhead (01:11:01):
There's a bunch of these product myths. Product led growth is another one, but let's go to product market fit. And God bless Mark Andreessen, he's the guy that framed it. And Kevin just wrote a really super thoughtful piece on why it's backwards, and I'm happy to send that to you if you want. Kevin Maney, genius. Here's the aha, again, category design principles. Listen to the words, product, market, fit. Product market fit. Now, let's think, what there is for me to do is find a way to fit my product into a market.

(01:11:48):
Pretty simple way to determine or to distill product market fit. And what product market fit has come to mean is, we're a brew pub, you and I want to start a craft beer place like everybody else on the West Coast, and we're going to make a bunch of samples and shit, and we're going to feed those samples to our friends and to our ideal customer profile that I learned from Lenny. And if enough people amongst my friend group and my ideal customer group say, "That's a yummy IPA, I like it," then we're going to build it. And then if people start buying that IPA, we have, and these are the words people use, "achieved product market fit."

(01:12:43):
Okay, well, Threads achieved product market fit faster than any product in the history of the world. Here's the aha, categories make products not the other way around. What you want is you want to design a market category for your product, not fit your product into a market category. And the problem is, our industry, like many others, but the tech industry, is full of product bigots, because they really, really, really, really, really believe, like they believe in the availability of oxygen, the best product wins. They really believe it. And they believe what marketing's job is, "Could you put a demo on our website and get a demo? Can we get a viral video that's a demo? Because once people see how much better, faster, cheaper, smaller, bigger, whatever our thing is, they're going to buy it," and they don't. What they buy is a new insight around a problem/opportunity that requires a different solution. That's what they buy. Here's another simple example. This is the one I hear right now a lot, "What we need now the story, we need a story brand. The number one thing you can do in marketing as a startup founder is to share your startup founder journey. Share your journey." This is all the shit we're hearing. We've been hearing this for a while. Well, guess what? No one gives a fuck about your journey. They really don't. You know what they care about? Themselves. Their problems, their needs, their opportunities. For our book, Snow Leopard, we did the first ever comprehensive data science research ever done using Nielsen data to study nonfiction books. And we know that because what Nielsen told us, and we had to sign an NDA that would choke a horse in terms of what we can say and can't say about the data. But one of the things we wanted to understand is what categories of business books sold and which categories didn't and why. We can get into all that if you want, but here's the aha. Guess what the number one category of business books, nonfiction books is by a mile.

Lenny (01:15:13):
Oh my god. Sales? Marketing, marketing-sales. No.

Christopher Lochhead (01:15:19):
Personal growth.

Lenny (01:15:20):
Okay, that makes sense. Self-help.

Christopher Lochhead (01:15:22):
Self-help. And number two, personal finance. Biographies are way down on the list. The point being, no one cares about our product. No one cares that it's 25 mega flips faster, cheaper, whatever, they don't care. You know what they care about? Them, their needs, their wants, their problems. And categories are about customers and their wants, needs, problems and opportunities. Branding and marketing is about our product. And the greatest innovators in the world don't stop at innovating a product or technology. They design a new innovative market category where they standalone.

Lenny (01:16:12):
We're definitely going along, which I expected. And we've actually gone through most of the questions I had, but I have just a few more to close out the conversation. One is positioning. That's something you hear a lot about. How do you think about positioning versus categorying? Are they essentially the same thing? Is positioning just a way to phrase and describe your category? How should people think about that?

Christopher Lochhead (01:16:32):
What positioning today has become is essentially how do I tell a story about my shit in a unique way, in a compelling way? That's really what people mean when they say positioning. The parts they never stop to consider, again, listen to the words positioning as it relates to what? Because you, again, listen to the words and fucking think, "You position against competitors." How do we position against the competitors? That's a phrase people use. The question is, what are you positioning against? And the answer to that question almost all of the time is competition. If you're doing positioning in that context, you just decided you're fighting for 24% of the demand designed by somebody else. And we think in the tech space where one company earns two thirds of the economics, if that's your starting point, you fuck yourself from the start. To put it simply, positioning in the modern context is for losers. That is to say people who are fighting over the 24%. That's positioning.

Lenny (01:18:15):
I love it. Getting spicy over here.

Christopher Lochhead (01:18:17):
Well, it's factually correct. People go, "Oh, [inaudible 01:18:21]." Okay, so you mean to tell me that in tech one company doesn't take two thirds of the economics? Okay, believe that. And you can believe gravity doesn't exist. It does, but you can believe that Bigfoots are installing misters on 5G towers to make us all sick, if you want. You can believe anything you want, it doesn't make it true. What's true is one company wins and everybody else gets fucked. That's what's true. Look at any space you want. You want to go back to your list? We can go through the list. Positioning has become sort of category design for the cowards. It's like, "Well, I know that we could really be as radical as to create our own space, so let's just see if we can carve off our little niche over here." Okay, great.

Lenny (01:19:20):
A big part of positioning, just to expand on this a little bit, is differentiation. Differentiating yourself. People always talk about the importance of differentiation. Do you see that as the same potential pitfall, or how do you think about differentiation?

Christopher Lochhead (01:19:34):
Okay, this is really, really powerful. In category design, we don't compete, period, full stop at the brand to brand or product to product level. Category designers do compete, but not against a product, not against a company, not against a brand. Category designers compete against the status quo. Let me be specific. There's a category called cycling. You look like you might be a biker, Lenny, are you?

Lenny (01:20:09):
Very casually, mostly an e-bike.

Christopher Lochhead (01:20:13):
Those are really fun.

Lenny (01:20:14):
They're so fun. Mountain bike. Yeah.

Christopher Lochhead (01:20:16):
But you've been on a mountain bike. You've been on a road bike, you've gone out with friends, done this, right?

Lenny (01:20:20):
Yeah.

Christopher Lochhead (01:20:21):
Anybody who bikes on any kind of regular basis has been in an accident. And if you bike on a real regular basis, you've been in an accident with a vehicle that was not caused by you. That's true for every person I know that rides a bike on any regular basis, myself included. All of a sudden a new category shows up, and that new category is called indoor biking classes. And the category designer is a company called spinning.

(01:20:53):
And they say, "Hey, biking's great. It's an incredible source of exercise, but you don't want to get killed doing it, so come take a class." And what they're doing when they do that, they're competing category to category, not brand or product to brand. And that's a strategy that's called damming the demand. What does a dam do? There's a bunch of water running in the direction, a dam takes that water, stops it and moves it, does something to it. Interrupts it and changes it. Here's what spinning does. They say, "Why risk your life on a bike when you can take a wonderful class and not have to worry about it and get your exercise?" What dam the demand, Lenny, is you thought you wanted this, but what you really need is that.

(01:21:52):
Then what happens? The next iteration in that space comes from Peloton. Again, when Peloton launches, they don't say, "Hey, our bikes are better than spinning bikes. Our bikes are 12 mega flips, faster, cheaper." They don't do any of that shit. They don't shit on spinning, they don't attack spinning, they don't attack road biking, they don't do any of that stuff. They say, "Why drive to the gym when you could do it at home?" They dam the demand for spinning, they don't compete against it. And they reframe the problem called "How do I get a great workout in a group environment without getting killed?" And they achieve that massive success.

(01:22:41):
And I can give you many other examples. The mistake is competing directly product to product. The enemy is the status quo. That is to say the way it is now. If you go back to Lomi, the enemy, the way it is now, the status quo, is a nasty garbage in your kitchen that stinks and smells and gets all over the floor that you have to drag to the green bin and then the squirrels and the fucking raccoons eat it. That's the personal upset. And the environmental one is, we're destroying the planet. No, by the way, rather than destroy the planet, why not create this super awesome compost dirt? In category design, we call that a from to a Frodo. Category designers are leading the world from the way it is to a new and different way. They're not saying, "My carbide ingulator is better than their carbide ingulator."

(01:23:32):
Here's a simple example. This is another reason the word disrupt doesn't work. Les Paul is the innovator of the electric guitar. Today most guitar players have an electric guitar and an acoustic guitar. Matter of fact, most guitar players have more than one, very few guitar players, some, but very few said, "Oh, now that the electric guitar is invented, fuck the acoustic guitar." Very, very rare. The net new category called electric...

Christopher Lochhead (01:24:00):
So the net new category called electric guitar as opposed to the prior category, acoustic guitar, actually increases the overall guitar TAM. Doesn't disrupt shit. So in that case, you're actually creating net new demand. In the Peloton example, you're both creating that new demand and you're getting your start. And this is where I think a lot of the discussion that you have and a lot of your work, Lenny, around growth, is really powerful, because what's really going on when growth works is effective digital damning of demand. That's what's really going on, when it works.

Lenny (01:24:41):
I think somewhere maybe wrote this, "Damn the TAM" is an awesome phrase. If you haven't, you should use that. Damning the TAM, increasing the TAM. So you have a number of books you put out. I'm going to link to all these. Play Bigger, I think, was your first, Niche Down is the other. And your newest book, I believe is your newest book, is the 22 Laws of Category Design. So maybe just as a last question, can you just share a few of these laws, maybe two or three of your favorite laws from the book just to give people a sense of the book?

Christopher Lochhead (01:25:09):
I think we talked about law number one, which, in a lot of ways, is probably the most important. Another one to think about is something we call the magic triangle, which we've touched on, but maybe not explicitly, which is, in order to build a legendary company, you've got to get product, company, and category right at the right time. And so some people hear the category design discussion and they think it's somehow pejorative to product as if product doesn't matter. The reason for category design is because we love the products. Products fail because they don't get category designed. So I think the aha of the magic triangle is product, company, and category are equal in importance, and so getting that right I think is very powerful.

(01:26:05):
I'm just riffing off the top of my head. I don't have it in front of me. Another example is lightning strikes versus peanut butter. So what most marketers do is they take their marketing budget for the year, they quarterize it, and maybe there's slight variance in the quarters, but essentially it's a similar amount of spend. And they do campaigns. And they do "keep the lights on" and maybe they launch a product and maybe they have a big push around the product. And they're trying to drive the funnel and they're trying to deliver sales or deliver leads, B2B, doesn't matter. And that's what they do. And what they don't realize, Lenny, is that approach, that peanut butter approach, is predicated on almost 100-year-old mental scaffolding and marketing called reach and frequency. And what reach and frequency was about, which was, I want to get my shit in front of the most amount of people the most often possible.

(01:27:07):
And if you listen to a lot of the shysters and hustle porn stars, the Gary VDs, and this is of the world, "You got to release 400 pieces of content today on every platform." All this stupidity. That's just a reswizzle of reach and frequency from over 50 years ago in the new medium. Well, it turns out reach and frequency doesn't work. Because the number of marketing messages we get is massive, they're experts who say we get up to 60,000 a day, whether it's logos on coffee cups or ads on the internet and everything in between. And so it's virtually impossible to stand out in a reach and frequency mode. Now I'm not saying you shouldn't be doing keep the lights on marketing. Of course you need to do keep the lights on marketing. But, here's what the lightning strike model and category design teaches us. I'd rather matter for one week a year than be irrelevant for the rest of the year.

(01:28:07):
And so what we did, candidly Lenny, was we ripped off Hollywood's model for launching movies. We said, "What if you did that as a software company? What if you launched a thing, be it a product or something else, the way Hollywood launches a movie?" And so what a lightning strike is about is getting very, very clear, if you go back to your ICP thing, "Who's our ideal customer? Where is that customer? Where does she hang out?" Ideally, in the digital world first. One of your recent episodes, I was listening to the Growth Hacker Gala, how she went on to Reddit and stuff. That's a well-known strategy and I love that strategy. Go hang out where they are, put something provocative and engaging in front of them, and matter in that moment. So the idea of a lightning strike is, if you are in our target audience for that day or that two days, we are going to be all over you.

(01:29:09):
We're going to be undeniable. And so we put a disproportionate amount of our effort, if we're in B2B, probably one to two lightning strikes a year. If we're in B2C, two to three. One a quarter if you're a really big company. It's hard to pull off one a quarter if you're a smaller company. And much more than that, if not a lightning strike, it starts to blur back into peanut butter. But, that is a very powerful concept. On the execution side for marketers, that's different. The other thing I'd say and probably should have started here, so I'm a three-time public company CMO. I've advised over 50 venture-backed companies in category design and marketing. Guess what I've never seen in a marketing plan ever?

Lenny (01:29:59):
What's that?

Christopher Lochhead (01:30:00):
Word of mouth. This boggles our minds, those of us in category design, because WOM is was and always will be the most powerful form of marketing. And in the native digital world, WOM can spread in a way that was never possible on the analog world for all the reasons we all understand. So if you take the concept of a lightning strike, then you take the concept of a category point of view that is all about frame naming and claiming a problem. And then there's one other concept I'll introduce.

(01:30:32):
It sits next to your ideal customer profile. It's what in category design we call super consumers. So it turns out that in most categories, roughly eight to 10% of the buyers are responsible for the vast majority of the profits. And more importantly, they are the zeitgeist. They are the thought leaders in the industry. They are the customers, the users, the purveyors of whatever the thing is that others look up to as being the ones to admire, the ones to aspire to, the best practices, et cetera, et cetera. That's a super consumer. Okay. So in category design, when you understand who your supers are, i.e. your ideal customer profile, you understand where they are primarily in the native digital world, how do we go hang out? And remind me what that gal's name was? I thought she was awesome.

Lenny (01:31:23):
Meltem. Meltem Kuran Berkowitz.

Christopher Lochhead (01:31:23):
Melson?

Lenny (01:31:26):
Meltem. M-E-L-T-E-M.

Christopher Lochhead (01:31:29):
What a name. That's a great name. Anyway, I thought Meltem was awesome. She's absolutely on point. So we know who our ideal customer, aka super consumers are. We know where they hang out in the native digital world. We have a radically compelling different point of view about framing, claiming, and naming a problem that, if we do effectively, we'll resonate with them. That's why we spend time crafting that POV. So we evangelize the problem. We participate in a native digital community where they already are. And we do it from the perspective of not a marketer, not a seller, an educator. We're teaching people about a new and different way to think about an existing problem or a problem they hadn't thought of, that when they have an aha moment, because we articulate it well with our point of view, they go, "Oh, tell me more about that problem."

(01:32:21):
Right? As they do that, we take an education standpoint, mental framework to it. We open them up, we participate, and sooner or later somebody says, "Huh, tell me again what you do." And bam, away that we go. And here's the aha. When you understand supers, you understand the targeting, you understand a radically different point of view, reframing the problem, presenting a radically different solution. Well guess what? It's the ultimate growth engine. And you can grow for a very small amount of money. You could send email to 300 people and drive a breakthrough in sales.

(01:33:05):
Why? Because when you take this approach, you're not just driving near-term revenue, very, very important, you are driving WOM. A big part of why you want to have a point of view that can be articulated very quickly is marketing's job is to put the right words in the right mouths and to get that WOM to scale. And so when we have a category POV, that's about them, not us. Remember, brands are about us. Categories are about customers. We care about what they care about. And so when you have a powerful category POV, that drives WOM. And then when you do that in the native digital world, you get a tremendous amount of uplift from native digital viral WOM. And category design is the only business strategy whose primary execution focus starts with WOM.

Lenny (01:34:06):
What an awesome way to wrap up our conversation. It's basically a very tight go-to-market strategy is what you just shared. For folks that want to dig further, I'll just share a few of the places they could learn more. And then Neil, at the end, I'll ask you where to point people. But, you have an awesome Substack category, pirates. That's substack.com. You have your books, which I think maybe the best way to, I guess you tell me, is to find them as go to your last name. com, lochhead.com, L-O-C-H-head.com. Is that right?

Christopher Lochhead (01:34:34):
Yeah. And of course you can go to category pirates.com.

Lenny (01:34:36):
Okay. Even easier. Amazing. So we have the lightning round coming up. Is there anything else you want to share as closing words or advice before we get to a very exciting lightning round?

Christopher Lochhead (01:34:47):
Yes, I do.

Lenny (01:34:48):
Okay. Let's do it.

Christopher Lochhead (01:34:51):
So I'm 55 years old, Lenny. I started my first company when I was 18. I got thrown out of school. I don't have a GED. And I've been in the tech industry the whole time. And the first thing I would share is anything's possible. Don't listen to anybody who shits on you. I've a chat on as much as you could possibly imagine. I have four or five different learning differences. ADHD, dyslexia, dyscalculia, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. I was told I couldn't read. I was certainly told I couldn't write. I've written 14 number one fucking bestsellers, et cetera, et cetera. And so my point is, if you are somebody for whom you want to spend your professional time working on the exponential different as opposed to the incremental better, which I got to believe is a meaningful percentage of the people who consume your shit, if you want to work on the incremental better, incremental better is important.

(01:35:52):
I want the Boeing engineers working on the incremental better. I don't want the air traffic control system that's the exponential different. No. And a lot of incremental improvement over time can be exponential. So if you're a product manager and you're running a highly successful product with a massive install base, and you're looking at your next rev, and you're trying to figure out of the 472 features that you could build. What are the 26 that really matter? And you want to go talk to your customers to find out what those incremental improvements are and to stack rank them into all that good. PRD, MRD, IUD, all that shit. There's a big place in the world for all of that. It's incredibly important. That's not category design. So with that said, I think, Lenny, we are at the greatest time in history for our industry.

(01:36:48):
I think all the indicators show that the amount of innovation that is going to happen in the next five years will eclipse the amount of innovation that happened in the last 20 years. It's accelerating. AI is insanely exciting, dangerous, concerning. Do we need to focus on the downside? Do we need to be smart? Do we need to be thoughtful? Do we need to learn? Do we need to work with regulators and legislators? Absolutely. Could it go horribly? Oh, sure. But, that's always true. AI feels a little bit different, but it's always true. And for the record, the Luddites are always wrong. The point being now is the greatest time in history to be a creator, to be an entrepreneur, to be a marketer. I've been a marketer for my entire adult life. It's never been greater than it is right now. And so here's the big thing that I would share.

(01:37:43):
If you are somebody for whom you want to make an exponential difference, you want to innovate, you want to create new value where there wasn't, you want to have a legendary career where you can look back on your career and go, "You know what? I was part of this and that. And I was on this team." Now is the greatest time in history. And what I would say to you is the future needs you. Most people are not working on the exponential different.

(01:38:14):
And so the future of our world requires that the innovative people, that the entrepreneurial people stand up, take advantage of these incredible technologies. And a lot of people, particularly in my age group, Lenny, shit on millennials, Gen Z, what are lovingly referred to as native digitals. Absolutely not. I'm inspired by them. And I think the next generation of our entrepreneurs will be our greatest generation of entrepreneurs. So my point is, now's the time. The future needs you. Don't listen to any of the bullshit. I don't care what the boo birds say. Absolutely, go for it because there's never been a greater time to design and dominate new categories of innovation than right now.

Lenny (01:39:02):
I love that message. You're just passion and energy for creating and inspiring comes through really clearly in all your writing. And so I love hearing it in person. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. What are two or three books you've recommended most to other people?

Christopher Lochhead (01:39:22):
Richard Bach, Illusions. And then in terms of business books, I'll share with you one, because I know people recommend all the same shit. I'll share with you one that I think it may still be in print, but if not, it's easy to get. Mark McCormack's What They Don't Teach You At The Harvard Business School. So on the personal side, Richard Bach, Illusions. And for one that you may not have heard of Mark McCormack, What They Don't Teach You At The Harvard Business School.

Lenny (01:39:55):
What is a favorite recent movie or TV show that you really enjoyed?

Christopher Lochhead (01:39:59):
Oh, right now we're watching Designing Anna or Inventing Anna or whatever that's called. So that's been fascinating to watch. I think it's been incredibly well done.

Lenny (01:40:10):
What a wild story, that one. What is a favorite interview question you like to ask candidates when you're hiring people?

Christopher Lochhead (01:40:18):
So there's actually two. And I'll start with the second most important interview question, which I think is the most important question. But in a job interview setting, for me it's the second most important. And that is, it there anything else? And you know this as a podcaster. I end every single one of my podcasts with, is there anything else? And the interesting thing about that question, you can spend three hours with somebody talking about very important shit. You can think you got all the detail. You could have asked all the questions about the technical architecture and the campaign and the distribution and I don't know what.

(01:40:56):
And at the very end you say, "Hey, Susan, before we wrap, is there anything else?" And often, Lenny, the most important thing for that person to communicate comes out then. It happens so often, it's bizarre. I use that in medical situations. Family member is in the hospital going for an operation. "Okay, doc, tell me." I tell you all the shit. Is there anything else? I will tell you that eight times out of 10, the most important thing about the surgery with your loved one will come after that question. I will even use it during a conversation as we transition from various different points.

(01:41:37):
So in an interview situation, maybe you're asking somebody about their background. You might say, "Well, is there anything else about your background you think I should know?" It's the most powerful open question. But in an job interview situation, it's my second favorite. My first favorite is, so Lenny, are you legendary?

Lenny (01:42:01):
You want me to answer that?

Christopher Lochhead (01:42:03):
You can if you like or not.

Lenny (01:42:05):
No.

Christopher Lochhead (01:42:06):
But, the answer to that question...

Lenny (01:42:08):
What are you looking for?

Christopher Lochhead (01:42:09):
... Is always radically illustrative. I'm not looking for anything. I'm looking for your answer. Some people will say, "Yes." And they'll tell you why. Some people will say, "Well, that's a big word." Whatever they're going to say. But, it is a purposely provocative question with one of, I think, the most powerful words in the English language, because I want to get a read on that person and how they respond to a purposely provocative question about themselves.

Lenny (01:42:42):
Amazing. Okay, just a couple more questions. What's a favorite life motto that you like to repeat yourself or share with other people?

Christopher Lochhead (01:42:50):
If you're lucky enough to make it to the top of a mountain, throw down a fucking rope. And for me on that, Lenny, I'm somebody who has had and continues to have a radical amount of love and support in my life. When I was young, I started with nothing and I got thrown out of school. And I didn't know until I was 21 because when I was young, learning differences weren't a thing. And by the way, the way most of the world and education system deals with learning differences is completely fucked. But, that's a different conversation. It's definitely improved, but it is nowhere near what it needs to be. And so I just think that we should never be held back by those views of others. And so we need to be unencumbered.

Lenny (01:43:42):
I love it. Final question. It's a dumb question. Maybe to lead to something fun. You're a category pirate. Do you have a favorite real pirate?

Christopher Lochhead (01:43:51):
I have actually a lot of favorite pirates. I'll tell you about one of them. His name is Tony Etherington, but virtually nobody calls him Tony. Virtually everybody calls him Doris. And Doris is a legendary surfer and surf explorer from the Gold Coast of Australia. And I went on my first ever boat tour, surf adventure in Indonesia with Tony.

Lenny (01:44:22):
You make this giggle.

Christopher Lochhead (01:44:30):
There's a horrible story I'm thinking of telling you. Anyway, you haven't been with a real pirate until you've been in stormy seas at night with Doris smoking cigarettes, drinking Jack Daniels in the bridge thinking maybe we're going to die, but this guy's probably not going to let that happen. And so Doris Etherington would be one of my top pirates of all time. And he's got the voice. And he's got the attitude. When I was having problems surfing, he would say to me, "All right, sit you down mate." Always smoking a cigarette. He's like, "I'd smoke long if we could have ciggyed up now." He goes, "You paddle out, wait for the biggest wave, lean into it, and get right up on it."

(01:45:21):
And so in our world, get right up on it is has become an expression for go for it. So I think we can all heed the words of Doris and get right up on it.

Lenny (01:45:36):
I love that this question led to something fun and interesting. Chris, thank you so much for being here. This conversation was entertaining, insightful, spicy, fun, funny, everything I hoped it would be. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to learn more and keep reading? And then two, how can listeners be useful to you?

Christopher Lochhead (01:45:54):
Probably categorypirates.com is the simplest spot to go. And how listeners can be useful to me?

Lenny (01:46:03):
Yeah.

Christopher Lochhead (01:46:04):
It's what we talked about a moment ago. The future needs you. And the future needs the people who have the courage to make a difference, because the people who are different are the ones who have made the biggest difference. Every time. And we live in a world where we are rewarded for our sameness, for fitting in. Our education system teaches us what we're trying to do is find our place in the world. And listen, some of us do. I know people who wanted to be a vet from the time they were kids, and that's the path they chose. And they became vets. And they love it. And they're wonderful people. And they have great careers. And they make a giant difference. And they've always known. And fucking a. And so if you are somebody for whom you have found your place in the world, congratulations. That's awesome. And we also know, particularly in the innovator, entrepreneur, creator, marketer world, many of us, there was no place.

(01:47:13):
And so my hope is that you either find your place or if you realize there's no place for you, that you further realize that you can make your place in the world. And fundamentally, that's what category design is about. It's about making a distinct, unique place in the world for yourself, for your product, and for your company. Because the people who are different make the biggest difference. And so the great thing that people can do for me is to go into the world and make a different place for themself in a way that delivers massive value to others.

Lenny (01:48:00):
Beautiful. Chris, thank you again so much for being here.

Christopher Lochhead (01:48:04):
Lenny, bless you. I love all things, Lenny. Thank you.

Lenny (01:48:07):
Thanks Chris. Bye everyone.

(01:48:11):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast. com. See you in the next episode.

Emilie Gerber (00:00:00):
No one ever gets this tactical in PR. There's just so much theoretical conversation and examining the big blunders, but at the end of the day, if you're a startup that wants to get coverage for your company, you need to know actually the steps to take to do it.

Lenny (00:00:13):
You mentioned a bunch of amazing companies you've worked with, Ram Perplexity. Most products won't have this interesting of a story to tell. How do you help find something that is a nugget?

Emilie Gerber (00:00:21):
You can get so in the weeds with your own messaging that you want to set up this massive problem statement, you want to make it a huge trend story, but if you're very straightforward and you're pattern matching, it's generally actually going to work.

Lenny (00:00:32):
So I asked you to bring some examples of pitches that are great and also examples of pitches that could be better.

Emilie Gerber (00:00:39):
I want to read one to you and then I want to see if you can tell me what this company does.

Lenny (00:00:44):
Deal. Today, my guest is Emilie Gerber. Emilie is the founder and CEO of Six Eastern, a PR agency that has worked with over 100 tech companies, from stealth startups to publicly traded companies, helping them get press, build awareness, and level up their PR and comms strategy. Before starting her own firm, she worked at Uber where she led PR for the business development team and B2B programs. Prior to that, she worked at Box on product communications with a focus on product launches and partnership announcements. In our conversation, Emilie shares so many golden nuggets of advice on how to get press that I lost count.

(00:01:23):
We talk about which publications to target depending on your market and story, how to craft your pitch and your outreach to reporters, how to actually reach reporters, and also how to craft your product story for people to pay attention to what you're doing, why warm introductions to reporters aren't actually that important, how to find podcasts and newsletters to pitch that might be even more effective than traditional media, how much it would cost you to work with a PR agency instead of doing it yourself, and how much lead time you need if you do that.

(00:01:50):
Also, we go through a few real-life examples of press and outreach, both good examples and bad examples, and what we can learn from those. Also, we look at a pitch that Emilie sent to me about a podcast guest that is a client of hers that worked, and this guest is coming out in the future, so we look at what was effective about that pitch, and so much more. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow on your favorite podcasting app or YouTube, it's the best way to avoid missing feature episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Emilie Gerber after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:25):
Let me tell you about a product called Sprig. Next gen product teams like Figma and Notion rely on Sprig to build products that people love. Sprig is an AI-powered platform that enables you to collect relevant product experience insights from the right users, so you can make product decisions quickly and confidently. Here's how it works. It all starts with Sprig's precise targeting, which allows you to trigger in-app studies based on users' characteristics and actions taken in product. Then Sprig's AI is layered on top of all studies to instantly surface your product's biggest learnings. Sprig Surveys enables you to target specific users to get relevant and timely feedback. Sprig Replays enables you to capture targeted session clips to see your product experience firsthand. Sprig's AI is a game changer for product teams, they're the only platform with product level AI, meaning it analyzes data across all of your studies to centralize the most important product opportunities, trends, and correlations in one real-time feed.

(00:03:27):
Visit sprig.com/lenny to learn more and get 10% off. That's S-P-R-I-G.com/lenny. This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next-generation AB testing and feature management platform built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams. Companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp, and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth and for understanding the performance of new features, and Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most was our experimentation platform. Bracket set up experiments easily, troubleshoot issues, and analyze performance all on my own. Eppo does all that and more with advanced statistical methods that can help you shave weeks off experiment time and accessible UI for diving deeper into performance and out-of-the-box reporting that helps you avoid annoying prolonged analytics cycles.

(00:04:29):
Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insights with your team, sparking new ideas for the AB testing flywheel, EPO powers experimentation across every use case, including product, growth, machine learning, monetization, and email marketing. Check out Eppo at getepo.com/lenny and 10 X your experiment velocity. That's get E-P-P-O.com/lenny. Emilie, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Emilie Gerber (00:04:59):
Yeah, thank you for having me.

Lenny (00:05:01):
So we're going to be talking about press. A lot of people say that trying to get press isn't really worth your time. It doesn't drive signups, it doesn't drive growth. You could spend your time on other things and have a lot more impact there, and I know that you have a really interesting perspective on second order effects of press and other benefits. So I'm curious to hear, what's your perspective on this idea, that press isn't really worth people's time and how can press be helpful?

Emilie Gerber (00:05:27):
Yeah, when we were emailing about it, talking about some of the articles that you were in, some of the coverage that you got, I was thinking about how, in your case, you have multiple audiences. You have your customers, which in a way, are your listeners and the people that are engaging with your content. So in a way, you're a B2C business, but in another way, you're a B2B business. Obviously, you have sponsors and you're trying to attract really great guests to come on the show, and so there's a second order piece of the press is validating that you're something that a software company wants to sponsor. So internally, they're making those decisions. Not everyone might know Lenny's podcast, but they could send around a CNBC article and see that this is something very legit and something that people care about. It just signals that third-party validation that I think is really important, and that ties back to, when you look at a SaaS company or something and they're making decisions, having that validation, I think, and that credibility goes a really long way.

(00:06:24):
Especially for a company that might be early stage, they've raised a little bit of money, I think sometimes the buyers are skeptical of engaging with new tools, because they're worried they might not raise more funding, or it might go away tomorrow, and so the more that you can validate the business through things that's not just you doing personally that other people are doing, I think the better. So I think, yeah, that's the value from the B2B perspective and it's not necessarily going to directly drive signups, but when that AE is sending their sales emails and they can link to a story, I think that really helps. Also, candidates too, when you're reaching... If it's a recruiter reaching out on LinkedIn and they only have 100 characters to make their pitch, linking to that story can be really powerful.

(00:07:03):
So those are some of the second-order effects for B2B. And then, on the consumer side, it's a much more complex issue. There's affiliate marketing, which is this whole world of paid, where you're getting product reviews and that sort of thing, and that's not really an area that I'm an expert on, but we do work with some consumer companies where press is a major driver of growth. So for instance, Perplexity, they have invested essentially zero in any paid marketing, they don't have a marketing person even, but they do do PR. And so essentially, after their most recent announcement, they saw a massive spike in growth, a massive spike in signups, pro users, all of that. And I think, in that case, the reason PR works so well is...

(00:07:47):
First of all, it's something that's very easy to grasp. Google alternative. I know how to use Google, I've used Google a million times, you can go to perplexity.com. The barrier to trying the product is very low, you can quickly type in a query, get the answer, and then see the power of the tool. It takes one time to see the power of the tool. So in that case, I think just organic press is enough to generate that. There's not a long process to get the customers interested, so... Yeah. I mentioned very case to case, but in those instances, it works well,

Lenny (00:08:18):
Man, there's so many threads I want to follow here. That was such an interesting answer. And by the way, I love Perplexity. I once tweeted a result I had when I was using Perplexity, and that was one of their default questions you could ask about strawberries. Apparently, strawberries are not one fruit, strawberries are a bundle of fruits and every little piece of a strawberry, those little red things, are individual fruits all bundled together, which blew my mind. I was like, "I need to share this," and so I wonder how much of their growth just comes from crazy things like that.

Emilie Gerber (00:08:45):
Yeah, it's like the kind of tool where your mom could try it and instantly know how to use it. Yeah. It's good for weird questions, like what you just shared. That's where it comes in really handy.

Lenny (00:08:55):
You did a great job just defaulting, "Here's weird questions you could ask," and then, wow, what an answer. Okay, so on the B2B side, I think this is really interesting. When people are thinking about doing the calculus of, "Is it worth investing and trying to get press for a B2B business?" Related to what we were talking about offline. So when I got these stories in Fast company, I got a story in CNBC, I got a story in Entrepreneur Magazine, and I was telling you I've seen zero growth impact from all these stories. And you'd think like, "Wow." I had a story in the magazine, Entrepreneur Magazine, print edition, and nothing comes from it as far as I can tell.

Emilie Gerber (00:09:30):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:09:30):
And your point, which really stuck with me, is the real benefit isn't that first order growth impact, it's... And I've been doing this, it's when I'm emailing potential guests telling them, "Hey, check out my work or my profile in these magazines." And just having those little logos is really powerful, and that's why you see those logos on people's websites. So is your advice here, basically, for B2B businesses than most? If the pie chart of impact of press, most of that percentage is just having a logo of an awesome publication on your website and your outbound emails, and things like that?

Emilie Gerber (00:10:06):
Yeah, the logo is a piece of it and then also the storytelling part. Maybe they're not going to read eight paragraphs that you wrote about your business, but if it's in the format of an article, I think they're more likely to take the time to do it. One other, I guess, aspect of it is content. So for instance, the articles that people want to write about you are not about necessarily how great your podcast is, which it is, but more about how you created this business. And so it's more through the lens of you're an entrepreneur, you have built this media empire, and so that's not necessarily the kind of story that's going to drive your core audience to sign up, and so contents is part of it, too. And so we work with companies where we get them great stories about their company culture and cool initiatives that they're doing, because reporters are interested in that topic. That's not going to help their sales, but it might help with something like recruiting. And so yeah, I think thinking... That's the other piece of it, is thinking through the content.

Lenny (00:11:03):
That's such a good point, because the story they're going to write about you isn't, "This is the best product you've ever seen," this is, "Look at this interesting journey this startup has gone on," and that's not going to convince your customers, it's going to convince other people just to read this publication, but the fact that they wrote about you is really beneficial. And then you're saying B2C, most of the benefit is actually driving growth and you've seen lots of examples of press driving significant growth.

Emilie Gerber (00:11:27):
Yeah, I think it can be and I think this is one where, yeah, it's a little more case-to-case, because we have some clients where they need to invest heavily in affiliate, because product reviews are what they need or they want to be on lists of the best vacuum cleaner, or whatever category, and it's less about getting them big features. And so there's different ways of doing it for B2C. But yeah, I do think it's like... Yeah, there's two camps, affiliate or not affiliate.

Lenny (00:12:00):
Can you actually explain this affiliate bucket? Because I'm not actually that familiar with it.

Emilie Gerber (00:12:00):
I can. However, we actually don't do affiliate marketing, so there's probably going to be a lot of people that have a much more insightful perspective on it, but affiliate is essentially when you work with a publication to give them a percentage of any sales that come from the piece of the article. And so if you look at Business Insider's list of best personal finance tools, it'll say at the top that they're getting commission. So they track the links, they figure out a certain percentage, and then they basically get a percentage of all the sales that come in, and it's very common. I would say most consumer companies are doing this, but yes, there's entire agencies that are dedicated to that field.

Lenny (00:12:38):
Wow, I didn't actually know that was such a big thing. I've heard of affiliate marketing where you get paid for promoting something, I didn't know Business Insider did this as a revenue.

Emilie Gerber (00:12:48):
Yeah, and I don't want to call out just... I mean, I would say every publication that's doing product reviews for the most part, I believe, it's a very common practice.

Lenny (00:12:58):
Wow. All right, already learning a lot. Okay, so I definitely want to start talking about how to actually get press for your product, but one quick question about fundraising announcements. So I'm an investor in a lot of companies, very often, they email me and ask for advice how to get press and, most of the time, it's a fundraising milestone. When is it worth investing trying to get press and fundraising? Like always worth trying, rarely worth your effort? Does it have to be some really impressive fundraising moment? What do you suggest?

Emilie Gerber (00:13:32):
I also think not all PR people are going to agree with this, but I do think funding rounds, you can always get a reporter to cover if you go about it the right way. I mean, we scope out projects that are just for funding announcements, we've never had to not finish that project or we've never... I wouldn't do that if it wasn't possible, so I think there's a couple of reasons that it sometimes doesn't work out. But I guess just to take a step back on funding stories, a lot of founders automatically think that, "I raise money, so TechCrunch will cover this." The reality is... Someone tweeted, actually someone from another agency, I should... Propeller PR, they tweeted that they counted how many funding stories TechCrunch did in a week, and it was nine, so they had written nine funding stories in one week. And then they counted how many funding rounds actually happened that week by looking at Axis Parata and Fortune Term Sheet, and it was like 50.

(00:14:26):
So it seems... When you go to TechCrunch, it looks like, "It's all funding stories, so mine should be one of these." That's not the case at all. But I do think, if you go about it the right way, you can be one of those nine. And I'm talking about TechCrunch specifically here only because the reality is they are the publication that's going to be most likely to write your funding story, that's just kind of the way it works. And it's not a bad thing, they're actually... They don't have a paywall, they tend to do a very good job, they understand it. It's a well-oiled machine, and so we know if you've done a story with them, it's going to pretty much go how you want to plan it. So when you go to pitch a funding story, I think the first thing that founders, or whoever is reaching out on behalf of the company, does wrong is they convolute the message.

(00:15:10):
When we pitch a funding story, we make it very clear, "Hey, we're reaching out with a startup launch or funding. We're offering this to you as an exclusive, meaning we're not going to pitch anyone else if you take the story. Here's the amount that's raised, here's the space that... Here's the space they're in and here are the investors." I think you can get so in the weeds with your own messaging, that you want to set up this massive problem statement, you want to make it a huge trend story. You don't really say what you're trying to accomplish from it, but if you're very straightforward and you're pattern matching, "Hey, this TechCrunch reporter is the one that covers FinTech. I have a FinTech funding round, here's the reason my FinTech funding round matters." It's generally actually going to work and now it does 100% takes follow up.

(00:15:50):
You're not shooting off one email, you are respectfully following up. When I follow up, I like to come in with some new information, whether it's something they had tweeted in the past couple of days, a new article that they wrote, very respectful. I try to wait three or four days. If it's not going anywhere, then try someone else. Do that three or four times with the most relevant reporters. Generally, I think it works. Yeah, I think if you can just be really concise and direct and say what you're looking for out of the relationship, it tends to be a pretty easy process. And yeah, TechCrunch is one publication, but this actually goes for a bunch.

Lenny (00:16:24):
Amazing. I love that we're already getting into tactical advice for how to actually get press. So that was essentially for fundraising and the notes I took is keep it really simple, "Here's how much we raise, here's our investors. Here's one line about why this matters." I want to talk later about how pitching press is different for customers, because with customers, I think this is probably the mistake a lot of people make, and we don't have to get into this just yet, but you want to paint the picture of the market and trends and, "Here's where the market's going and why this is huge and why this is a solution to your problem," versus, "Bam, this is interesting for this reason," and that's it.

Emilie Gerber (00:16:56):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:16:57):
Okay. I want to talk about publications to target and what each one is best suited for. So you're talking about how TechCrunch is essentially really good for fundraising. When I think about other publications, there's like Axios and Verge, I don't know if they do press stories like this. Wall Street Journal, New York Times, things like that. So I guess, what are the different publications people should have on their list of target? And then, what are each of them most aligned to, story-wise?

Emilie Gerber (00:17:28):
I really love this question. I feel like no one ever gets this tactical in PR. There's just so much theoretical conversation and examining the big blunders and... It's all so high level, but at the end of the day, if you are a startup that wants to get coverage for your company, you need to know actually the steps to take to do it. So yeah, I appreciate that question. I'm going to answer it, but also answer it with the caveat that media changes so much and so fast. For instance, just a couple weeks ago, TechCrunch decided they no longer accept op-eds, which is... It's actually huge news for us, because we love doing op-eds in TechCrunch, and so things change all the time, but I will talk about it in its current state. So yes, TechCrunch, a go-to for a lot of funding announcements. A go-to for some product news, too, even sometimes.

(00:18:15):
I would say the areas where they don't have dedicated beat reporters, where we tend to end up not working with them, are health tech-related companies and even MarTech, too. We've struggled to find the right folks to cover those kinds of stories. So not everything, but generally, if you do your digging, you're able to find a relevant beat reporter or a couple of relevant beat reporters, and it's not just about getting coverage there. They have TechCrunch Disrupt, you can apply for speaking at that conference, and that sometimes actually directly turns into coverage. They have The Found Podcast, which interviews founders, and so if you have a really compelling founder story or topical founder story, that can be an excellent avenue to go as well. They have The Equity Pod, which is investment advice, so it's not just thinking about getting that one funding story with them, there are other ways to work with TechCrunch.

(00:19:02):
And I actually have heard really great feedback from clients on TechCrunch driving website traffic, the day of the announcement, especially... I haven't really been able to pinpoint when that does or doesn't happen. I'm trying to figure out if there's trends among that, but I have... Clients have sent me screenshots from the day of the announcement and they've seen a nice pickup from TechCrunch, so I think a lot of that comes down to the fact that they don't have a paywall, but their stuff tends to do really well. So it's a great spot, especially for that first piece on your company. Axios is really strong on the FinTech side, on the healthcare side, they have some really great beat reporters. The one thing I'll say about them is they're very deals-focused, so 100% would need to either have funding. If you're announcing a partnership that has a monetary component, that they would cover that. An acquisition they would consider covering, but they're not going to be... You should never pitch them on a product announcement.

(00:19:58):
And I think they might just get annoyed. There's a couple exceptions, a couple of the reporters might have little columns where they feature product-related things, but that's just not their bread and butter. And actually, Axios recently launched, or I guess has been launching over the past year or so, local editions. So they're really branching into local news, and so that can actually be a really nice way to get an Axios hit if you have a region-specific story. So I highly recommend checking that out. Another publication that we work with a bunch is Business Insider. If you struggle to pitch your funding story but really want it out in the world, they are big on the pitch deck stories. Those are a little controversial. Some founders, they're like, "This is not what I want my story to be about, I do not want to share my pitch deck."

(00:20:44):
But if you are in the camp of... You're open to that and you can redact, it does not need to have all the financials, it does not need to have the growth metrics, that can be a really great way to get a piece of coverage on your business. And the way that I explain it to clients is you're just getting all your core messages out there in a very direct way. You're sharing exactly what you shared with investors, that's not necessarily a bad thing. And sometimes clients will put in some customer slides, too, and so you can really make it a little bit more like what you're looking for. So yes, if you're looking for a funding story, TechCrunch passed, others passed, that's a good option. They also are huge on the entrepreneurial journey pieces, similar to the CNBC article that you got, but they really want metrics, they really push for metrics, so how much you're making, how much you're spending.

(00:21:35):
They love those kinds of stories, so it's not necessarily about how much you raise, but for people that have really built a business. And then the last thing for Business Insider, they do a bunch of these lists of top startups, of top professionals in the field. We love doing those, they're generally a really light list, and they put out a call for submissions. Takes five minutes and it's a way to get into Business Insider. There's so many of them, it's become a joke within my newsletter, because every week, there's five more and it's the most obscure different categories. Like top sports marketing professionals helping TikTok stars. I don't know, it's always a very niche ask, but those could be really great. Then a couple more.

(00:22:16):
VentureBeat is huge for AI news. We pitch them all the time for any client that we work with that is building AI capabilities, has a new offering related to AI, perfect publication for that. Fast Company is perfect for anything related to future of work, how people work. Really great for design, media, I would say perfect for any company that fits in those categories. They're also really open to op-eds, especially with leadership advice in them. And last but not least, on the list of ones that we work with most often, I would say is Forbes. Especially on the award side, they have the FinTech 50, AI 50, Forbes Under 30, all of that. And you're not going to get a feature with one of their main reporters until you're a bit further along, but they do have that really strong contributor network, which is much... A lower bar in what they'll accept, in a way. They're more open to covering earlier stage companies, so that's worth checking out, too. So those are my top ones, I'll stop there.

Lenny (00:23:15):
That's amazing. And those are the most commonly requested and the ones you mostly go after?

Emilie Gerber (00:23:20):
Yeah, they're the most realistic for most startups. There are ones like The Verge, and they're a little more gadget-focused and just areas that we don't necessarily touch, but could be good for some companies as well.

Lenny (00:23:33):
Got it, and then... I was going to say this for later, but there's obviously New York Times and The Wall Street Journal. Thoughts on going after those?

Emilie Gerber (00:23:42):
Yeah, we do get those questions all the time. I would say it comes up on calls with founders, "I want one out of every five." And really, when you look at... I make a joke sometimes like, "If you want those, just have a crisis and they'll write about it." Fire your CEO or do really intense layoffs and have some regulatory issue.

Emilie Gerber (00:24:00):
Playoffs and have some regulatory issue and you'll get a story there.

Lenny (00:24:04):
Uber got a lot of stories there.

Emilie Gerber (00:24:06):
Yeah, I can show some examples there. When you look at earlier stage companies that are getting coverage in those publications, that's what's happening.

(00:24:13):
Now, let's say you're a tiny bit further along and you're series B, series C, maybe even series C, and you're looking for coverage in those publications, there's a couple criteria that they're always going to want if it's to write a feature on your company. One is your valuation, so that needs to be something that you're sharing on the record. Two is your hard business metrics, usually revenue, sometimes something else. And so oftentimes they'll tell founders that and immediately they're like, "Oh, well we're not sharing that." So I'm like, "Okay, well that's kind of the end of the conversation." Sometimes it can be shared on background, but as a general rule, you're expected to share that sort of thing. So that's kind of a nonstarter a lot of times.

(00:24:51):
I totally think it makes sense to build relationships with the relevant beat reporters and ideally shoot for... When I say build relationships, I just mean shoot for an intro meeting on behalf of the clients, or they can reach out directly with those kinds of reporters, but they're just not going to write a feature on your company. If anything, you are going to be one or two sentences in a larger story of something that they're writing about. And yeah, that's just the nature of their coverage.

(00:25:16):
And then when you look at something like CNBC, they're targeting people that want to learn about public markets. And so if you're not a public company, they have their CNBC Disruptor 50 list, which is focused on companies that will soon be at that stage, but it's not going to be a place for early stage companies.

Lenny (00:25:32):
When I have these pieces in past company and CNBC, it was such a weird experience where I chat with them for half an hour and then it just comes out, and I have no idea what they're going to write about. Could be a complete tear down of everything I'm doing and you have no idea. How do you help try to avoid that sort of story? I know you have no control. Obviously reporters can write what they want to write about. Do you have any advice for how to avoid them writing something really negative about you?

Emilie Gerber (00:25:58):
Generally, if it's something that you're being briefed in advance, unless it is around something negative that's going on, it's just not their intention, it's just not going to happen. But what is a bigger issue is it not being the angle or the messaging that the company wants. And so part of that, there's absolutely nothing that we can do. Reporters are not our employees. We're not paying them to write these pieces. They have to maintain their editorial integrity.

(00:26:25):
And so I consider it my job to educate the founders and spokespeople that we work with that we cannot change anything the story says. What we can do is correct any factual inaccuracies, and we do that all the time. If something is factually wrong, we can get it replaced. But if they don't like that they were called, put in a category of software that they don't identify with, that's not something that we can fix.

(00:26:50):
Another thing that you can do though to prevent that from happening is just really ensuring that the spokesperson before talking to the reporter is going to nail the messages that they want. The more that you can reiterate over and over again how you want the article to be, I think the more likely that it'll land in the reporter's head and make sure that the reporter really understands what you're building and what your goals are. And all you can do is really use the briefing and the materials that you provide to kind of sway and influence, but there's not much beyond that.

Lenny (00:27:20):
So we've talked about all these publications. These are ones to consider going after. You also mentioned podcasts and awards as something people go after. Is there a tip you could share of how to find aligned podcasts or awards, like how you find a list of here we should go after these?

Emilie Gerber (00:27:35):
We use Google. We just use search engines basically for finding everything. And the way that we go about it is first figuring out who their customers are and what vertical they're in, and then just doing searches for podcasts that are within that vertical.

(00:27:48):
But it's not as easy as just reaching out to the ones that pop up first. The next step is a qualitative analysis. First of all, do they have vendor CEOs or vendor executives on their show? Let's say your product is sold to product managers. Maybe they only have product managers on the show. So instead you don't put the CEO forward and you put the right spokesperson-

Lenny (00:28:11):
Who could that be? What podcast might that be referring to?

Emilie Gerber (00:28:12):
Yeah, right? But this could be for CFOs. So let's say you sell into CFOs. Don't pitch your CEO for that podcast. Get a CFO and then pitch your CFO for that podcast. I'm very for companies hiring folks, or hiring so the roles that they sell into, it helps us a lot. So if your audience is a CFO, it really helps if you have a CFO. If your audience is a CMO, it really helps if you have a CMO, and that actually when your earlier stage isn't always the case, and so it's a lot harder to pitch. So I think that's the second part of the qualitative analysis.

(00:28:48):
The third is, podcasts really come and go, make sure... It sounds obvious, but make sure it's one that's actively producing. When you Google ones, half of them are not going to be active podcasts. And then the third is actually listening to at least part of one episode, making sure the quality is high, making sure it's the kind of thing you even want to associate yourself with. And then just looking at who the past guests are, is that the kind of peers that you want to associate yourself with?

(00:29:14):
And then one other thing that you can do is just in conversations with customers, find out what they're listening to, find out what they're watching, find out their media diet. And it doesn't have to be a big crazy survey that you send to your entire customer base. It can be casual. If you're farther along, it's great if you can make that a more formal sort of process, but it doesn't necessarily need to be.

(00:29:33):
And then in terms of reaching out, I highly recommend figuring out who the host is, just doing the research, figuring out who the host is, and then just sending them a casual note. I'm a big fan of just reaching out on LinkedIn and saying, "Hey, love the show. Are you open to guest ideas?" I don't even mention the client or anything, just opening the door. I just feel like that's so much more approachable and friendly than starting with a big pitch. And I think so many people start with this very long email introducing themselves or going really deep and you don't have to do that. And especially because maybe only one out of every 10 replies, it'll also save you a lot of time if you just start with something really lightweight.

Lenny (00:30:15):
I think that actually works really well. That's what I find is if it's a simple little message, I'm like, yeah, let me know what you got in mind. Even though 99% of the time it doesn't work out, sometimes it works out great. And so I find, sure, let's just see what you got. And then usually I'm just like, "Nope, sorry, not a fit."

Emilie Gerber (00:30:28):
And you get the reply that way. If you send the initial pitch and the reporter or podcast host isn't interested, chances are they won't reply. But if you just start with something friendly and they reply, they'll feel like, I guess a little more of a connection there, and so at least you'll get an answer. Whereas otherwise, you might not get an answer at all.

Lenny (00:30:48):
On the survey piece I think that's a great idea, and I've seen a few of my sponsors do this where they ask their customers, what podcast do you listen to? What newsletters do you read? Which is such a simple idea, but I think people don't do that. And just from that you could figure out, okay, here's the podcast we got to get on. Here's the newsletters we want to run after.

(00:31:06):
I want to talk about how to actually pitch well. But before that, we've been talking a bit about who to reach out to and how to do that. So there's a few questions here. It's just like how important is it to have a warm connection to a reporter? If you don't have that, what's the best way to reach out to them? Is it LinkedIn, is it Twitter DMs, something else? What advice do you have about, just before we get into the structure of the pitch, figuring out who to pitch and then how to get to that advice?

Emilie Gerber (00:31:34):
Who are your relationships question comes up on a lot of our calls with founders as well. I'd like to pose the question to you. Did we have a relationship before this?

Lenny (00:31:43):
Nope.

Emilie Gerber (00:31:44):
Exactly. I'm of the belief that it does not matter as much as many people think it does. And I explained this on calls where they ask, "Oh, tell me about your Rolodex, or who is your relationships with?" First of all, media's changing so fast. So sure, maybe there is a reporter that we worked with recently. They might have a completely different beat in six months. They might be at a very different publication. So it's not sustainable to build an entire career on having relationships with certain publications.

(00:32:17):
And media is changing too. Now, podcasts and Substack and newsletters, it is just changing too fast. And so I think cold outreach done well is just as effective. The only thing that a relationship will get you is an open and an answer. And so any good reporter is not going to be making their editorial decisions based on who their friends are. That's just not the nature. It shouldn't be the nature of the industry, and it's not. Maybe it'll get you an intro coffee, but that's about it. It's not going to get you coverage. They're not going to cover your news because there's a relationship there. I think the much harder and more important part is being good at writing really thoughtful notes to the right people.

(00:32:57):
And in a way, now we do have a relationship, and so it can come from a cold email, but now it's easier for me to pitch you because you know my name and we've spoken and we've worked together. And so for me, I'm a big fan of being helpful to reporters, and I tend to just keep it professional and pitch them on stories. I don't necessarily feel like going to drinks or having coffee all the time is crucial to building those relationships. A lot of the reporters that I work with regularly, I've never met in person, and that's okay, but it can be great for getting answers I would say. That's where the relationships can be helpful.

(00:33:35):
And then once you have worked with a reporter on a story, it's true that maybe they'll be more likely to come back when they're working on something related, use you as a source, quote you in articles that are relevant. So once there's something there, that's great and you should totally nurture it, but it's not all about calling in favors.

Lenny (00:33:52):
Awesome. Okay. And then in terms of how to reach reporters, what do you find most effective?

Emilie Gerber (00:33:59):
Yeah, I'm pro all platform approach. So sometimes reporters will tweet that they're working on a story about something, and rather than me sending them an email with my pitch, I'll say, "Hey, 10 words on why this person is the person you should talk to," and then send a link to an article on them and that's my entire pitch. And honestly, it's sometimes more effective than when I spend 30 minutes writing a really thoughtful email. So I'm a fan of that. I'm a fan of DMs, short, concise, direct DMs. Sometimes LinkedIn, although for whatever reason I feel like that works better with on the podcast side with hosts.

(00:34:38):
And then of course email, we totally email. When I email a reporter, I love to make the subject line just as clear as possible as what the goal is and why I'm emailing them. And so let's say it's for a recurring column that they have, I'll put the name of that column and the person that I think should be included in the subject line. And even that for a reporter, it's like, oh, they actually know. They actually know I write this column and they're suggesting a guest for this column. It's so direct, it's so clear.

(00:35:06):
I think just saying what your intentions are right away. Are you trying to get a Q&A? Are you trying to get a story? Are you trying to get a funding story, like I mentioned before, is very crucial, and keeping it short. I would say my most successful pitches are three sentences and anytime... Sometimes it needs to be longer than that, and generally I feel like my pitch is weaker for that reason. Attention spans are short, and so the more concise you can make it, the better. And then just sometimes I'll start with one platform. I'll start with an email and that doesn't work, so I'll go somewhere else. But I try to make it very human and respectful. So using language like, "Hey, I know your inbox is probably slammed. Sorry to annoy. Trying you one more time here."

(00:35:49):
Another thing that actually can work really well is pointing out gaps in their coverage too, and talking about things that they should be talking about. Like, Hey, my client's noticing this trend. I know you've covered it from this point of view, but no one's talking about it from this point of view. That can be really helpful because it shows that you are actually paying attention to what they are writing, but in a way that you're demonstrating that you have some critical thinking going on, not just, I liked your article on X, which is a common practice that PR people use is I like this, and then jump to your pitch. So yeah, giving it a little more thoughtful, pointing out gaps in coverage.

(00:36:25):
And then the last piece is, especially if you don't have hard news that you're pitching, having something pretty controversial to say.

(00:36:33):
So we work with a lot of AI companies. If nine of them have one stance on something happening in the field and one has the other stance, chances are that one is going to be the one that a reporter wants to talk to because they are getting so many pitches on this topic, but they want to write a balanced article, they need that opposing view. And so we really push our clients to have something unique and different and bold to say. And it obviously has to be a strategic decision for the business. You don't want to go commenting on regulatory things if it sounds like you don't want to necessarily be a part of that conversation, but there are I think instances where it can make a lot of sense to say something that's a little bit bold and controversial.

Lenny (00:37:15):
That last piece is really interesting. Is there an example that comes to mind where you had a controversial contrarian pitch?

Emilie Gerber (00:37:23):
Yeah, so we work with a company called Clockwise, which essentially manages your calendar and allows time for focus time within your workday. They move things around for you. And a couple of months ago, Shopify got tons of positive press for essentially canceling all their recurring meetings, and everyone was very intrigued by this strategy. Press was generally quite positive towards it, and so we knew that if we just wrote another piece saying, "Oh, this is great," no one would want to publish that. It had been said in a million different ways. So we looked at the topic a little more critically and we're like, okay, is this actually enough to change meeting culture within a business? And we kind of identified all these other things that we think need to happen in order to really change the culture in a way that's going to be sustainable and long-term versus just blanket deleting of calendar meetings.

(00:38:14):
And so we ended up turning this into an op-ed, so something that together we wrote and then pitched a publication. And yeah, the title was "Shopify's Meeting Cost Calculator Does Not Address the Issue of Wasted Time". And so it wasn't necessarily saying it was a horrible idea, but it was putting a little bit more of a critical eye towards it. And Fast Company was interested in the idea and they posted the piece by the CEO, Matt Martin, and it was a great thing for us to comment on. And so yeah, I think it doesn't necessarily need to be something where you're coming out against it, but just proposing something that's a little more thoughtful on the topic.

Lenny (00:38:53):
Just hearing that it sounds like such an obvious thing to do. Basically a reporter is looking for an interesting story to write about. If you tell them something interesting that they could put out, that's a win-win for everybody. So makes a ton of sense. Let me try to summarize the advice you've shared so far when you're, say DMing a reporter, your advice so far is basically be very direct. Just tell them, "Hey, I'm looking for..." What's an example of being direct? Is it like I'm looking for a story on this fundraising announcement?

Emilie Gerber (00:39:19):
I wouldn't say I'm looking for. I don't know, just I would say if it was a DM, I would say, "Reaching out from X company. Would love to offer you the launch story alongside their funding if you're open to it." And usually I'd either say the amount and the investors or the company name. If you give them both, you're kind of just giving them the story and they could run with it right away. That's actually an important distinction. And so you could either say, "Reaching out with this Martech company that's raised 8 million from X Investors. Really interesting approach, they're taking on X incumbent. Do you want the exclusive?" That's kind of how I would phrase it.

Lenny (00:39:59):
Okay, awesome. Then, try to keep it to three sentences. And you're saying sometimes when you go longer, you actually end up backfiring each time. Sometimes include a link to a story they've written or some other story about the company that might give them some context. Is that right?

Emilie Gerber (00:40:15):
Yeah. And a caveat on that is, if a competing publication just wrote a bigger similar feature on that, they're not going to want to see that. And so I would use that strategically. If it's a piece from a while ago on a different topic that does share a lot of info, I'll include it, but I'm not necessarily going to include something that might seem like why would I cover this when this was just written about.

Lenny (00:40:37):
Good point. You also talked about how try to acknowledge their inbox is probably slammed, and this is taking some time maybe in follow-ups, especially like, Hey, I realize your inbox is slammed, just thought I'd come back to this. Then you talk about this idea of identifying gaps in the writing, like, Hey, it seems like you cover Gen AI. There's this trend that we've been noticing that maybe it would be interesting to cover. And then something controversial or something a little contrarian that would get them. Oh yeah, this could be a really interesting story.

(00:41:08):
Awesome.

Emilie Gerber (00:41:08):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:41:09):
Is there anything else broadly in terms of pitch advice to get the attention of a reporter that comes to mind? And I know this is a lifetime of experience and it's hard to summarize all of it, but anything else?

Emilie Gerber (00:41:24):
Well, one topic, maybe this would be covered elsewhere, but one topic I think is talking about incumbents that this company is taking on. So a lot of companies want to position themselves as category creators, and I actually hate that. It doesn't work. It doesn't land with press, and most of the time it's not totally true.

(00:41:46):
And so instead, it's actually really great when you can talk about how you are doing what X household name does, but better for X reasons, and that works so well. I'll put that in subject lines. I'll put company taking on whatever Salesforce with X approach. It's so successful because instantly it gives the reporter a frame of reference. And so it gives the reporter, oh, I know what Salesforce does, so I can understand how this solution would be better. And a lot of companies really want to position themselves as the first to do anything in a certain space. They love the idea of category creating, creating these little marketing phrases that they use for the new category. And that's fine if perhaps that works on the sales side, but on the PR side, I would never have put that in a pitch.

Lenny (00:42:35):
There's just going to be a meta comment, but the two topics that are most controversial in this podcast that I have both sides of opinions on is the power of category creation and jobs to be done.

Emilie Gerber (00:42:48):
Oh, really?

Lenny (00:42:49):
There's a lot of passion on both sides.

Emilie Gerber (00:42:52):
I mean, sure, you can point to examples of the two companies that have done category creation well, but it's two out of what, thousands?

Lenny (00:43:06):
I love it. I'm going to keep poking this hornet's nest. I love it. Okay. But you're saying in your experience doesn't work when pitching reporters?

Emilie Gerber (00:43:10):
For PR. Yeah, simply for PR. In other areas of the business I can't comment on, but for PR, it's just not a useful tactic.

Lenny (00:43:18):
Okay, awesome. This episode is brought to you by Vanta. When it comes to ensuring your company has top-notch security practices, things get complicated fast. Now, you can assess risk, secure the trust of your customers, and automate compliance for SOC 2, ISO 27001, HIPAA and more with a single platform, Vanta. Vanta's market leading trust management platform helps you continuously monitor compliance alongside reporting and tracking risks. Plus you can save hours by completing security questionnaires with Vanta AI. Join thousands of global companies that use Vanta to automate evidence collection, unify risk management, and streamline security reviews. Get $1,000 off Vanta when you go to Vanta.com/lenny. That's Vanta.com/lenny.

(00:44:12):
So I asked you to bring some examples of pitches that are great, and also examples of pitches that could be better, and I know... Yeah. Okay, cool. So thank you for doing the homework. Let's pull them up and then I'd love to just show people what you find has been really effective and works great about these examples and then what somebody could have done better, whatever you want to share about that example.

Emilie Gerber (00:44:35):
Sure. Sounds good. I guess since we're on the topic of category creating versus not category creating, I'll start with an example that's very relevant to that. So we worked with RAMP in their very early days, and one of their first product announcements that we did together was the launch of their bill pay offering. And so at the time, I think they were like a three billion dollar company, something along those lines. So big, but not as big as they are today. Product news rarely gets big feature coverage, especially for something along the lines of a bill pay offering for B2B companies.

(00:45:09):
And so essentially the way that we framed the story was how RAMP was now able to take on Bill.com, which at the time I'm not sure if it still is, was one of the best performing FinTech IPOs public company that really had still only captured two percent of this market overall. And so by positioning it as allowing them to take on this massive incumbent that was getting a lot of press, we actually were able to get a CNBC story on the launch of this product. Generally they won't even consider product stories, but they really liked the angle of this underdog doing something that could take on a piece of market share from them.

(00:45:47):
And the next day there was actually another story about how Bill.com stock had gone down and they did make mention of RAMP's news in that story. So it ended up really just, it was a very powerful way of telling the narrative there.

(00:46:02):
And another way, if we hadn't pitched it like that would've just been RAMP brings simple, seamless, streamlined ability to do vendor payments and new finance offering, first of its kind. All these things that might be how you would talk in your customer emails, but if I had pitched it that way, probably wouldn't have been a story. So if we had pitched it as them creating a new category of this all in one software, which I mean, yeah, it could be argued, that's another way to tell the story. I don't think CNBC would've been interested.

Lenny (00:46:34):
Awesome.

Emilie Gerber (00:46:36):
So, okay, another example, we work with a company called Column Tax, which is embedded tax filing software. So essentially they work with other FinTech's to allow people to file their taxes within the tools that they already use. And last year they partnered with a company called Propel that offers SNAP benefits. So essentially for low income families to receive the government benefits to offer tax filing directly within the app that they've created.

(00:47:04):
And that was one thing that they were doing amidst many other customers, that they had lots of different threads we could pull on with them, but we decided to really just focus our press strategy on that one initiative because it allowed us to tell macro story about TurboTax had to pay all these fines for practices that many considered unsavory around calling themselves free but not really being free. The IRS is building a free filing system, but it's in its very early days.

(00:47:35):
So the fact that they were having this offering that was supporting a lot of low income families, and I believe 40% of the people that filed their taxes with Column hadn't filed taxes in the previous year, so hadn't gotten a return. It's like identifying the piece of the story that's most interesting and then doubling down on that. So we were able to get a great fast company piece instead of pitching this macro here are Column Tax's latest growth metrics, and they're announcing a partnership with Propel. And so it's like...

Emilie Gerber (00:48:00):
Growth metrics, and they're announcing a partnership with Propeller. And so it's figuring out how to tie it to these things that people actually care about, and not just the company's messaging I think is our job.

Lenny (00:48:12):
Amazing, is there any other examples? Otherwise, I'll share your pitch of someone coming on my podcast, and what worked about that.

Emilie Gerber (00:48:20):
I do want to share one more, because it's my favorite. I want to share my favorite funding story that I worked on. And so I'm actually going to pull it up, because this one is very graphic, in terms of how we went about showing the product. So we worked with a company called Gamma, which is essentially bringing a PowerPoint into something that's much more modern, and interactive, and usable. So when we did their launch, they were a seed stage company, we tried to get really creative with how we could display or talk about the company. And so instead of doing your standard company blog posts, we actually made a Gamma presentation, and we kind of included all these fun elements that made it really interesting to reporters. So firstly, it's a visual platform. So we created... Or actually I don't want to take credit for this. The Gamma team created this great visual.

(00:49:11):
And we kept it very to the point. Every year, half a billion people create presentations in Google Slides and PowerPoint. We're not using marketing language here, we're talking in a very direct way, we're including fund visuals. We talk about Gamma's mission, pretty short, this is not a long essay on why the company exists. And then we include some customer love, so they're early stage, so we didn't really have necessarily growth metrics that we wanted to share. So we tried to make it a little bit more personal, and focus on actual users and what they're saying, while also showing the product capability here. And then instead of doing a long thing on each investor, we just bulleted who the investors are, which is very to the point, easy for a reporter to repurpose.

(00:49:55):
And then the fun part that I really loved, is we did a video from the lead investor talking about why she invested, instead of including an investor quote. So it's a little bit different than what you expect. And their videos are fun, because they have all these interactive elements. And yeah, team photo, make it a little more personal. And that was about it. But anyways, it was a very successful story, and I believe the title of the TechCrunch article that we got as a result was Gamma Brings PowerPoint into the 21st Century. Exactly, that's exactly what we're talking. Maybe they are creating a new category, we weren't talking about it then, we're talking about how it's better than the existing solutions. And so yeah, I guess the piece of advice there, is feel free to get kind of fun and creative with it, and don't just follow the typical issuing press release format.

Lenny (00:50:42):
And is that something we could link to for people to check out? Is that just on their site?

Emilie Gerber (00:50:42):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:50:42):
Okay, amazing.

Emilie Gerber (00:50:46):
Yeah, I actually had to for some reason do some digging to get it. But yeah, I have it now, so I can give it to you.

Lenny (00:50:52):
Okay, great. And the way that you use that is when you sent emails or DMs to reporters, you included this link?

Emilie Gerber (00:50:58):
After they had that they're potentially interested, because again, if I had shared it right off the bat, it would be their prerogative to just publish it essentially or share it publicly. And I guess one important note, is everything you say to a reporter in an email is on the record, and so that's why I make the point on not sharing the entire story right off the bat.

Lenny (00:51:19):
Got it. So many companies won't have... They're not a deck product, so they can't do something like this. But the takeaways for other folks here, is be just very human in the language, the investors are just bullet points, make it fun, add some visuals, don't just have blurbs, and paragraphs, and things like that.

Emilie Gerber (00:51:41):
Yeah. I think reporters are used to getting the same thing all the time, and so this one obviously worked well for the format. But I think we try to always think of, what can we do that's slightly different for this one? Or how can we make this a little more fun? I guess the one exception, if the product is very technical, and you have a very technical audience, and you're probably going to work with a very technical reporter, it's totally fine to talk to your audience in those cases, and you don't need to necessarily dumb it down so everyone can understand. But that doesn't mean... I mean, you can do that while still using clear and concise language.

Lenny (00:52:18):
Okay, so let me share the element of the pitch that you sent me, that convinced me to bring this guest on. So this is going to be the chief product officer at NewBank. I barely know anything about NewBank. And so in your email to me, you basically had just two bullet points, and the way you put is, "Two fun facts about NewBank, growth has been 80 to 90% organic because of the way they try to make customers fanatical about the product." And to me that's like, "Wow, that's very rare, is 80, 90% of your growth being organic." So to me is like, "That's an interesting story." And then the other tidbit is, "NewBank is bigger than Coinbase, Robinhood, Affirm, SoFi, and Lemonade combined. Seriously, so much bigger than people in the US realize." Which I 100% did not realize. So to me both were just like, "Okay, this is an interesting story to tell, I think people would be very curious to hear how a company like this operates." So now I'm going to start getting all these emails from people, all these couple bullet points.

Emilie Gerber (00:53:15):
They're going to combine a bunch of companies, and see which they're bigger than.

Lenny (00:53:19):
Yeah, or use AI to help them figure this out. But I think what you identified here is just what I get excited about. Is there any advice there of just what you did there that other people can learn from?

Emilie Gerber (00:53:32):
Yeah. I mean, I think with pitching you, speaking to the audience, it's not just about having... You don't want the most well-known CEOs all the time, you're not looking just for the biggest companies and the most well-known people. You're looking for the things that they can talk about, and how the things that they can talk about are relevant to your audience. And with the first bullet, it was indexing on that. The second bullet was more so like, "Hey, you might not know about this company." And it's a little bit of a unique one, I wouldn't necessarily always include that. But to me the first bullet was really what mattered, because it wasn't just about the fact that they were a huge company, it's that they grew in a unique way, and I knew that was the kind of thing that you'd be interested in.

Lenny (00:54:13):
And how did you figure that out? Is it from emails we were exchanging ahead of that? Is it listening to some podcasts? How did you get to those conclusions?

Emilie Gerber (00:54:21):
Yeah, listening certainly helps. But I do think just figuring out... If you even just scrolled the names of all the episodes that you've done, it would be pretty easy to spot a trend there. And so you're not talking about product launches, you are not talking about entrepreneurial journeys, you're talking about tactical lessons. And so pitching people based on those sort of things, I don't even think you necessarily need to listen to a whole bunch of episodes most of the time, maybe occasionally you want to gut check something before you reach out. But yeah, you can tell a lot just by doing a little bit of research.

(00:54:53):
And then we did have a little back and forth, because I will take responsibility, I did try pitching you on a CEO at one point, which I know you don't have on as guests.

Lenny (00:55:03):
Once in a while, very rarely.

Emilie Gerber (00:55:08):
Yeah, actually, there's obviously some exceptions. But I had known the subject matter you were looking for, but I did not spot the trend that you've never had CEOs on. So I think my pitch was actually okay, but the spokesperson was not the kind of person that you would want on. So maybe you won't get it right 100% of the time, but you can tell a lot just by doing some searches.

Lenny (00:55:24):
And oftentimes I just reply, "Here's my policy." And then, "Okay, good to know." Kind of along these lines, something I wanted to ask earlier, you mentioned a few publications to go after, and then how to pitch people. Obviously the way that you're describing takes a bunch of time. How many people are you often emailing, DMing per attempt to get a story? Because it sounds like it's not a ton, and so you have time to do these sorts of custom pitches. Or is it a lot higher than it sounds?

Emilie Gerber (00:55:51):
I would say for hard news, funding, the startup launch, those sort of things, less, and I try to really stagger it because we're offering exclusives, and I highly recommend offering exclusives. So the worst thing that can happen is two reporters reply, and are both interested, and you have to go back to one and say, "Nevermind." And sometimes that's okay if they left you, if it's been a week or something, they hadn't gotten back, and they'll understand. So it's fine to move on without getting an answer. So I would say, yeah, with the funding story, it could be anywhere from one to six reporters on average, sometimes more. With stuff like general just outreach, relationship building, trying to get on podcasts, it kind of is a numbers game, and you really have to balance quality and quantity.

(00:56:38):
And that's why I love starting with the first note and not saying much, and just saying, "Hey, you open to guest ideas?" Because it allows you to do more. I'd rather do that than send a bad pitch, and not have it be targeted to the right sort of audience. And so that's kind of a way to play the numbers game while still being respectful. But yeah, I mean, with some clients maybe they get one opportunity for every 20 or 30 things that we send. And so yeah, we try not to do... We don't do blasting media, it's not about sending the same pitch to a single list of people. It's figuring out, which ones do I want to really double down on because they're the perfect target? And you'll keep trying, you'll be really custom, which deserve maybe a slightly higher level note, which deserve a DM, and just figuring out your strategy from that.

Lenny (00:57:27):
Awesome, okay. Do you have examples of pitches, announcements that were not as effective as they could have been, and advice for how they could have been better?

Emilie Gerber (00:57:37):
Yeah, I have some excerpts that I pulled from press releases where I think there's room for improvement. So Lenny, I want to read one to you, and then I want to see if you can tell me what this company does. Okay, "Today X announced their workflow automation product, which combines AI assistance, human in the loop collaboration, and a robust multiplayer experience to help teams save time."

Lenny (00:58:03):
Absolutely no idea what's going on.

Emilie Gerber (00:58:05):
You kind of gained something from workflow automation, and then after that it's like, "Wait, what?"

Lenny (00:58:05):
Just a bunch of things.

Emilie Gerber (00:58:10):
Okay, now let me read to an excerpt from the TechCrunch article, and this is how TechCrunch positioned it, "A new automation startup is setting out to eat Zapier's lunch. It helps people tackle mundane and repetitive tasks, and goes beyond the triggers and actions popularized by similar platforms like Zapier." So to me, yeah, it's a better version of Zapier, where they aren't just doing triggers and actions, and there's a little more substance and depth to it. If you know what Zapier is, you can kind of start to figure out what they do based on that.

Lenny (00:58:41):
Yeah, it comes back to your point about referencing incumbent to help you understand what the heck you're talking about

Emilie Gerber (00:58:47):
And you wouldn't necessarily need to do that in your press release, but I think they could have been a lot clearer, and not use... Because terms like robust multiplayer experience, that makes it sound like a game. Are we talking about just collaborative multiple users? Human in the loop collaboration, isn't all collaboration between humans, and we're all in the loop? AI assistance, that just means they use AI. So yeah, sometimes I push my clients to like, "Okay, let's talk through what each of these phrases actually means. And if you can't articulate it, then let's change it to the way that you just articulated it, and it might be more successful." So yeah, that's a good way to do it. And just read it out loud, read it out loud and see if someone understands it.

Lenny (00:59:34):
Someone hearing this is like, "How could possibly anybody think that was great? How did these come about, these really bad descriptions?" I know it's hard to come up with something really short and pithy, but where do these come from?

Emilie Gerber (00:59:49):
It's just a culture within marketing and comms, of this is how we're supposed to write. And I just think that's a majority of how people do it, and they think it sounds smart, or they think it sounds more professional. I just think it's just how people are trained. And so even when we bring on someone new, part of my job is stripping away at a lot of that, and getting people... Everyone's capable of talking like a human being, we do it every day. But it's stripping away that thing that goes off in your head that you're supposed to be writing in a very marketingy way. Because I would say at least 50% of releases are like that, it's not a small problem.

Lenny (01:00:30):
Right. I love the advice you shared of just trying to say it out loud, hearing yourself, what does it sound like? Do you have any other tips for trying to make it something people get and connect to? I know that, again, it takes a lot of time to really do well and it's very context specific, but is there any other tricks that you find help you communicate what you're actually offering?

Emilie Gerber (01:00:48):
It's talking through the basic questions, what does this product do? Who is it for? Who are your customers? If you can answer each of those in one sentence... What product launch are we talking about here? If you can just answer each of those verbally, chances are you're not going to be far away from what you're looking for. Because when I talk to marketers, and founders, and teams, generally in the conversations I have no trouble understanding what they're talking about. They can articulate it just fine, it's only in the writing that it gets that way. So actually I think it's kind of easier to solve than many might realize. And then also I think there is some skill involved in removing words, not over explaining, you can make things more concise. But at the bare minimum, just strip out all the jargon, that's the first step.

Lenny (01:01:36):
I love it. So one way to think about it is, just think about, what does it do? Who is it for? Who are the customers? Is there something else along those lines that you shared there as a bullet point?

Emilie Gerber (01:01:45):
Well, I mean, if you're talking about what makes this business interesting? Why should people care? And not over indexing on that. I think that's just one part of the overall story, is why people should care about this business. And then what's new? Is it growth metrics? Is it the customer piece? Is it product? What makes this timely and relevant right now?

Lenny (01:02:08):
Okay, awesome. There's actually this awesome Twitter thread from a couple of days ago, where the CEO of Product Hunt did this thread where he asked people, "Share your tagline, and I will give you a much better version of the tagline." And he's really good at this. So I'm going to link to it in the show notes, where he can give you an example of what it looks like from bad to good.

Emilie Gerber (01:02:26):
I love that. That's exactly the kind of thing I would love to do too, because it's so fun and so easy.

Lenny (01:02:33):
It's easy if you're good at it, most people are not great at it. You mentioned press release in this example, you shared thoughts on value of press release, traditional press release versus not.

Emilie Gerber (01:02:44):
Press releases came about because reporters would be checking news wires for ideas of what stories they want to write. No reporters do that anymore, or a very small percentage, I don't know any reporters that do that anymore. So now it's this thing where you go to one of the PR distribution services, you pay them anywhere between 300 to $2,000, that's literally what it costs, and they put it on the wire. And for the more expensive services, it does get syndicated to this press release section of some business websites. No one, in my opinion, goes there for their news. I've personally never read an article, like a Yahoo Finance article, that was a press release syndication. So in that sense, they are not helpful for getting eyeballs. They also require... Going back to that more marketing form of writing, they require that you write like that.

(01:03:39):
The standard press release format, it's so formulaic, and I think it actually encourages that more marketing speak. The benefit is that you're getting all the news details in one place, so it's relevant for a reporter. However, you can do the exact same thing in a blog post. And the blog post can be this first person piece of content that's written by either the founder, or the product lead, or whatever executive, that has a lot more flexibility in the style. You can kind of write it however you want, it can still include all the same news elements. And it's much more shareable on social, you're not going to share a link to a press release on your Twitter or on your LinkedIn, but a blog, for sure. You can add your own graphics, it's great.

(01:04:21):
And you're also encouraging people to go to something that lives on your website versus this black hole of a newsletter. I should be fair, so I think that the reason that people say that they still do them, is that it helps with SEO. However, I've read a few articles that have said that Google no longer does prioritize press releases in SEO, so I don't know how much that holds up. And that it signals to the market that the company is more serious, so that's a perception thing. I personally think that blogs actually signal a more modern, kind of cool company than a press release. But at a certain stage in your growth, public companies, they do press releases for earnings, makes 100% sense. There are certain rules around when companies do need to issue press releases, so there's still a use case for them, I just think your average early to mid-stage startup doesn't need them.

Lenny (01:05:10):
This mention of blogs is where I wanted to go next actually, so it's a good segue. But before we do that, is there any other examples that you wanted to share of less than ideal ways of pitching a product?

Emilie Gerber (01:05:21):
One sentence I found in a press release that a lot of companies want to include that I always try to remove is... Well here, I'll give you the sentence, "Since exiting stealth in May, we've witnessed a 700% increase in organizations using our product." You're saying that since you were in stealth to now you saw a 700% increase, so you could have had one customer, now you have seven. And it's every company wants to do these percentage growth stats when they just launched, and I've never seen reporters include that in their stories.

(01:05:50):
And so there are ways to give signals of how fast you're growing without being that kind of disingenuous. One way that you could put something similar is, "Our revenue hit six figures at the end of last year, and has been growing about 30% each quarter, with 40% of adoption coming from the enterprise sector." So you're giving color to the growth, and you can kind of play with that, it doesn't need to be exactly something like that. But if you can make it a little more specific, I'm not against doing percentages, but I think there's a way to balance that with something that seems a little more realistic.

Lenny (01:06:25):
Or, "We went from zero to six figures in ARR in X months."

Emilie Gerber (01:06:29):
Yeah, no, totally. And it doesn't need to be huge, especially if you're doing your first story, they're not expecting that you're necessarily going to have massive revenue. And so I think founders might sometimes be concerned that it's not going to seem big enough or significant enough, whereas from working with a lot of companies, it's kind of the case across the board.

Lenny (01:06:49):
You mentioned a bunch of amazing companies, you've worked with Ramp, Perplexity, a few others. And people may feel like, of course you're getting pressed, those are amazing. Ramp grew to a 100 million AR in two years, Perplexity is this killer AI product, everyone's talking about AI. Most products are not that, they don't have as interesting of a story to tell. Is there either an example you could share of a company that didn't have an amazing story to tell, that you created an interesting story out of? Or just any advice for, how do you help find something that is a nugget that gets people excited?

Emilie Gerber (01:07:23):
So some of the examples I gave, so Clockwise and Column Tax aren't as big as some of the other brands I mentioned. So that's certainly actually the bulk of our business, I would say 80% of the companies we work with are at a stage where they haven't reached that kind of mass awareness yet.

(01:07:40):
Another really great company that we work with is Entropy. And so essentially they work with transaction data, they're an API. It's a very technical tool, it's not something that necessarily every reporter is going to instantly understand. But for them, we've actually really leaned into the founder story. She's this incredible woman who moved to the US, and actually struggled with getting her first apartment here because of the way that our credit scoring system is set up. And one of the use cases for what she's building actually directly relates to how our credit system could change in the future, and so we've been really leaning into that angle. And her personal story is really powerful. And so maybe sometimes the product isn't going to be something that you can easily pitch, but you can kind of find those other personal angles in or pull on certain threads.

Lenny (01:08:33):
And there it connects back to find the publication that cares about these sorts of personal stories, because TechCrunch probably won't.

Emilie Gerber (01:08:40):
Yeah. But she spoke at Money20/20, so it's useful for speaking abstracts too. Actually it was on a panel with Column Tax, we got them on together at Money20/20.

Lenny (01:08:52):
What a win.

Emilie Gerber (01:08:56):
No, and we love doing that, it's so fun when you do have multiple companies that you can connect. Actually, that's kind of a good macro point as well. It doesn't always need to just be about you, if you have an idea for a conference session, reaching out to colleagues that you've worked with at other companies, peers, people that are building other things that maybe don't compete better in a similar space, and packaging that up as like, "Hey, this could be a really strong panel." It's actually way more successful than just pitching yourself.

Lenny (01:09:24):
Awesome, okay. So you've mentioned a couple of times the rise of newsletters and podcasts. So there's kind of two buckets of questions here. One is going after these kind of non-traditional media platforms, and then the other is building your own following, and building a following on Twitter, for example. I know you worked closely with the CEO of Vox who's really good at this, and basically doesn't need press. Elon is amazing at this, maybe that's why he bought Twitter, he has this huge platform to talk about all the stuff. So maybe in the first bucket, talking about when you're trying to decide, should I go after traditional media, Vox, and VentureBeat, and Axios, and all these guys? Versus I'm going to go for newsletters. As an example, Ramp got a lot of benefit from Not Boring, that newsletter with Packy, who wrote about them constantly and loved it. And they're sponsored posts, and organic posts. So I guess the question there is just, how do you think about going after podcasts, newsletters, Twitter, LinkedIn, influencery platformy people versus traditional press?

Emilie Gerber (01:10:31):
I think of newsletters and podcasts actually in the camp of, if we're pitching traditional press, we're 100% pitching those. Social is its own ball game, but I would not leave out newsletters and podcasts from any core PR strategy. To me, it's now just a part of any PR program that we're going to run, because it's just part of media now. And to me, it's just a very important part of media. In terms of social, I think doing social well is very hard. So you gave Aaron from Vox as an example, that was all 100% him. I think I helped with one tweet once about a Microsoft partnership that we did, and I was so excited.

Lenny (01:11:10):
How did it do?

Emilie Gerber (01:11:11):
Actually really good. A publication ended up writing a story on the tweet about Microsoft and Vox partnership because of it. Yeah, so that was fun. But generally it's not always something that you can just turn on by hiring an agency. And I've seen many companies try doing that, and not necessarily see as much success as they'd hoped for. So if a founder is naturally good at that stuff, lean into it as much as humanly possible, go for it. If they're not, and you're trying to outsource it, it can be done to some success. But I don't necessarily think it's as easy as just posting three times a week on relevant topics, there has to be more going on there. I think that if the spokesperson or the executive that you're trying to build the presence of is willing to... Going back to what I said earlier, kind of push the limit.

Emilie Gerber (01:12:00):
... Presence of is willing to, going back to what I said earlier, push the limit on opinions that they have, be bold, be controversial, then it could be worth potentially investing in. And I have seen it play out where reporters have seen those posts and used and quoted things in their articles as a result, so it can tie to your traditional media strategy a little bit, they're not necessarily fully siloed, but I would say if you're considering investing in social to just do corporate channels and not think about executives, you're really leaving a lot on the table. Corporate channels, it's very hard to build a following.

(01:12:39):
To get someone to follow a brand and care about a brand, you have to be bringing something new to the table, because they don't want to read your latest blog post, they don't want to read a relevant article that your social person just decided to put out there. When you have an executive, you're following a personality, you're following a person, ideally there's more flexibility with tone, all of that sort of stuff. And so I think it's important to think about it from the people perspective and not just the brand perspective.

Lenny (01:13:07):
So just to make it clear, the CEO or some execs should be the people tweeting and LinkedIn, and not the company as a brand?

Emilie Gerber (01:13:17):
Yeah. And I don't know. I think that it can be a little industry specific as well for where it makes sense to be investing in the corporate channels. And you certainly can do that sort of thing. But I also think if you're going to do that, have an exec that you're also trying a social strategy with. Don't just do the plain corporate channels.

Lenny (01:13:36):
When I think of a brand doing this really well, it's Duolingo. They're just so hilarious and so ridiculous in there. And I don't know if the key is just funny is the way to go, and that's how you get any attention, but they're so funny and creative in their videos, especially TikTok.

Emilie Gerber (01:13:50):
It's interesting though, we're getting to the point where even brands having a personality on social is becoming its own meme. People are making fun of how all the fast food brands all are like these Gen Z like TikTok-

Lenny (01:13:59):
And they're all replying to each other on Twitter threads.

Emilie Gerber (01:14:02):
Yeah. And so things change quickly. So, yes, that was a good strategy, but you just have to stay on top of it.

Lenny (01:14:11):
So you talked about how if this comes naturally to you as a founder, obviously do it. I'm guessing for most people it doesn't. Do you find that it can work if you're just like, "I know this is important, I need to tweet often and share things," have you seen that work or is it just like it's just probably not going to be something that works great for you?

Emilie Gerber (01:14:31):
Yeah, I think it can work to some extent. Maybe you're not going to necessarily be going viral or getting hundreds or tens of thousands of followers. But for me personally I push myself to post on LinkedIn at least once a month, because every time I post we get at least one client inbound and maybe a candidate inbound. And so if you test it and you start to see value, push yourself to do it even if it doesn't come naturally. And that's, I guess, the nice thing about social is it's easy to test out. You can try doing it, you can post for a while, even for a month or two, see how it's going, and then adjust your strategy accordingly.

(01:15:06):
But, yes, I think for a lot of execs that we work with, it does feel like it's something that's really hard, there's a lot of overthinking, making sure it's right. You can get really in your head about it, and I totally understand that because I feel the same way. And so if it's taking up so much of your time and bandwidth just thinking about your social strategy, then I guess you can weigh if it makes sense to do that, but I think pushing yourself to try it is a great idea.

Lenny (01:15:31):
And then Aaron specifically is very good at this, is there anything that you learned from his approach to tweeting specifically? I don't know if he uses other platforms. That works really well for him.

Emilie Gerber (01:15:42):
I actually think I just learned so much. So it was my first in-house job, so I had worked in an agency, I hadn't worked internally at a company before, and I think I just learned so much about comms best practices from him in general, just even beyond social. He was so good at figuring out how to comment on things happening in the news, having just the right stance that was both interesting to the reporter but not necessarily threatening to the business, and just capitalizing on all those moments. And I just watched how that worked and I was like, "This is how good PR is." And it's like the space that they're in is not necessarily one that reporters are all writing about, but he was able to insert himself in those conversations really well. And I think also at the time that I was there at least just really valued press and was willing to put the time in and do the briefings.

(01:16:34):
And so just getting to hear how he speaks over and over again was really helpful. And then on Twitter, I think it clearly just comes naturally to him, and so it wasn't necessarily something that needed to... Like I mentioned, how some execs will spend all this time thinking through to the point where it could get in the way of other things. I think that's not the case there. And if anything, it just helped the business. And actually with his Twitter presence, I would say it's a good example too of stuff getting included in articles, like I mentioned in that Microsoft article. So it helps the PR strategy as well.

Lenny (01:17:10):
Amazing. And we'll link to his Twitter account. This is Aaron, CEO of Box, by the way. I think I mentioned at the beginning and then we just started talking about Aaron. Also, I realize, he tweets about this sometimes, he actually makes money from Twitter, and now the Twitter pays you for views and things and they share ads, he makes thousands of dollars also from X now, by the way, not Twitter.

Emilie Gerber (01:17:29):
That's so funny.

Lenny (01:17:30):
Yeah, it's pretty ridiculous. I think I've gone through every question that I had for you. I'm curious if there's anything else that you think might be helpful to share or cover or leave listeners with.

Emilie Gerber (01:17:43):
I can leave with one very tactical media opportunity that I love.

Lenny (01:17:51):
Amazing.

Emilie Gerber (01:17:52):
Okay, so here it is. It's a way to get a morning brew feature pretty somewhat easily. So they have this series called Morning Brew Coworking series, and they have it for Emerging Tech Brew, they have it for HR Brew, all their verticals. I think there's a CFO one, marketing one. And essentially if you go to the series, the coworking series, either at the top or the bottom, there's something where it's like, "If you want to be featured, click on this link and fill out this form," and it's about 10 questions. If you keep your answers interesting and fun and not too self-promotional, we've had, I would say, 50% success rate with getting execs featured that way. And all you have to do is submit through a Google form. And it's just one of my favorite media opportunities right now. It doesn't need to be CEO, actually probably shouldn't be a CEO in a lot of instances, but it's basically intended to help readers understand what the day-to-day looks in certain jobs and just get a little insight into the people that are in these jobs. And so I guess I just wanted to share that as something that you could do today for over 10 minutes and potentially get a story. Although, maybe not after you post this, so we'll see if they get an influx.

Lenny (01:19:03):
We're going to take down Mailbrew. Funny enough, they have an interview with Zuck today that they published on Morning Brew, so it could be you alongside Zuck.

Emilie Gerber (01:19:10):
There you go, yeah.

Lenny (01:19:13):
Maybe before we get to our very exciting lightning round, it might be fun to chat about how to pick a PR agency. Obviously you run one. When people are trying to decide who to work with and also when to decide to pick and work with a PR agency versus doing it themselves, what advice can you share when they're trying to make that big decision?

Emilie Gerber (01:19:33):
I think there's an assumption that bigger, more well-known agencies are going to do a better job. I think a lot of those bigger, well-known agencies are used to working with a lot of household brands. And so their strategies tend to be very reactive, focus in the messaging, maybe have to turn down a bunch of opportunities, control what people say. That is the polar opposite in my opinion of doing startup PR. Startup PR, you got to experiment, you got to try new things, you got to be scrappy, you got to be fast. We actually personally love diving into pitching right away rather than spending several months on messaging just testing and market right away. And so don't assume just because they have the huge logos... To your point, you're like, "Oh, well, you work with [inaudible 01:20:16] Perplexity, does that mean you know how to work with all these tiny companies?"

(01:20:19):
That's not necessarily a good thing, so don't just go buy the big logos. I would say that's my first piece of advice. My second piece of advice is find out what month one looks like with them. If month one is them just doing intake calls and learning about the company, and you're a startup that's still really paying close attention to how much money you're spending, you're not going to necessarily want to partner with an agency that needs a three-month ramp up cycle. And so really tactically understand what those first few months look like. I think that's something that I've noticed is a lot of agencies take a while before they get their hands dirty and start doing things. My third piece of advice would be writing recent writing samples. To the point of all those press release excerpts I shared, is that how they write? If it is, maybe they're not the right agency. So ask them. That's so easy. That's so easy to do.

(01:21:14):
Just ask them for a couple recent blogs or releases, whatever they tend to go for, and read those. And, of course, wins too. You want to see what kind of stories they're getting, but that's a little more obvious. A lot of people have already talked about this, so I'll just mention briefly, it's important to meet with the actual team you're working on, not just the founder of the agency. So asking who's our day-to-day going to be? Can we chat with them really quick? One thing I would say don't do is an extensive RFP process. We actually as an agency don't participate in RFPs. The two times I've done it, I have regretted it just because of the amount of work going in versus the value that's there. And it's you're asking a team to do a lot of free work for you, and generally I think the best players are not going to do that, so you're going to weed out some of the best players if you're asking them to do a lot of free upfront work. So those are a few considerations.

Lenny (01:22:06):
Perfect. And then just two more questions, because I imagine this is what people are thinking about when they're trying to decide should we find somebody is how long ahead of time they should find someone before something big is happening? And then just what's a budget they should have in mind for something like this? What's a minimum or a range, whatever you think would be helpful for people to understand here's how much you're probably going to be investing here?

Emilie Gerber (01:22:27):
Start times can vary from agency to agency. I think we can get started the week that a client needs us to, so maybe I'm not best equipped to answer this, but I would say before an announcement happens, you probably want to kick off six weeks in advance. So when we start with the company, it's like we're working on the blog, we're doing a media training, we're doing the media outreach, we're getting quotes from investors, or coordinating with all the parties, making sure images are being created so it's not just pitching and securing the article. So I would say buffer with time to pitch, make sure that the reporter is actually able to cover it. Six weeks is ideal. I would also note I highly recommend not having a firm date that you think you need to announce something and going instead with when a reporter is able to cover your story.

(01:23:12):
We get so many clients that come to us and they have this set date in their head, but there's not usually a real reason for it. It's like they're planning around it, it's like they have other comms they want to go out that day, but if you can optimize for the reporter over the timing, you're going to see such a better outcome because getting the first choice reporter is going to drive way more for your business than announcing it four days sooner. So leaving a little bit of flexibility for that agency is key. And I've even seen companies like issue a press release for big news with no coverage because they had stuck to a certain day and were very rigid about it, and they didn't get any stories for that reason. And so I think a good agency would counsel to offer that flexibility.

(01:23:54):
So six weeks I think is the ideal amount of time. And then budget, I would say the lowest end would probably be about 10K a month for an agency. You can find consultants, I think the best ones would be at least 8K a month, but for a small boutique agency starts at 10. I'll just be transparent, I'm very open about our pricing, our rates start at 15K a month for our retainers, and actually that's for a series A companies generally what they're at. And then I would say unless you are a global business that needs basically different teams for different product lines, which happens when you're a Microsoft of the world, that's another story. But if you're just a series C startup that's getting a lot of attention, I wouldn't go beyond 30K probably. There are plenty of agencies that go into the 50s and 60s a month, but that's just a whole nother world, and I'm not an expert on that part.

Lenny (01:24:56):
Amazing. Thank you for sharing all that. What if you're going for just a one-off, just help me get one story, what's a range there for budget you should expect?

Emilie Gerber (01:25:04):
I would say between 10 and 20. And you might be able to find a consultant that'll do it for eight.

Lenny (01:25:12):
Amazing. So helpful. Emilie, is there anything else you want to share before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Emilie Gerber (01:25:19):
No. I'm ready.

Lenny (01:25:20):
Well, welcome to our very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions. Are you ready?

Emilie Gerber (01:25:25):
I am.

Lenny (01:25:26):
First question, what are two or three books you've recommended most to other people?

Emilie Gerber (01:25:32):
I have one that's very top of mind right now, so it's How to Change Your Mind by Michael Pollan. Actually, I leave tonight for a week long psilocybin retreat.

Lenny (01:25:46):
We should have done this... N [inaudible 01:25:48]

Emilie Gerber (01:25:52):
I know. I would be getting much more philosophical maybe.

Lenny (01:25:53):
Wow.

Emilie Gerber (01:25:56):
So very excited, I'm going to Jamaica.

Lenny (01:25:58):
Amazing.

Emilie Gerber (01:26:00):
And ever since researching that field, there's the whole concept of changing your neural pathways is just very fascinating to me. And just opening up and shifting perspectives is something that I think will actually help me a lot just even in running a company, being a better leader, I think we're at a stage in our growth right now where we're hiring a lot and there's a lot of pressure and I just want to make sure I'm bringing my best self forward every day. And so I'm really excited about it.

Lenny (01:26:27):
What an amazing answer. This is going to be part of your set and setting this interview, but hopefully you can get it out of your mind.

Emilie Gerber (01:26:34):
No, totally. I was nervous. I'm like, "It's actually really great that this is happening and then I can completely unplug after it. And so I think it's actually good timing.

Lenny (01:26:34):
I'm excited to hear how it goes.

Emilie Gerber (01:26:45):
I'm not a big book recommender. I have ADHD and reading full books is very hard for me, and so I'm just going to leave you with that one. I can do the occasional beach read I'll really focus, but it's not my main format of content consumption.

Lenny (01:27:01):
Amazing. All right, great answer. One's plenty. Do you have a favorite movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Emilie Gerber (01:27:08):
My favorite genre is post-apocalyptic, end of the world survival. I need to mention my all time favorite show, because it would be bad not to. So Walking Dead is my comfort TV show, I can watch it when I'm going to sleep at night, but my most recent favorite was Yellowjackets. Are you familiar?

Lenny (01:27:30):
I've seen the poster on my TV, but I've not watched it.

Emilie Gerber (01:27:35):
Nice. I discovered it a little late. I think the second season finished and they're working on the third. But it has plane crash, and it has just shocking moment after shocking moment like cannibalism, very weird stuff. And it's one of those shows that sticks in your mind, which I like where you're thinking about it afterwards. It's kind of creepy.

Lenny (01:27:59):
Wow. I thought you were going for Last of Us, but I now have to watch this show.

Emilie Gerber (01:28:05):
No, I watched Last of Us and I didn't feel like it had enough survival elements to it. It was like storytelling in that environment, but it wasn't actually a survival post-apocalyptic show in the way that I was looking for.

Lenny (01:28:17):
Hardcore. Do you have a favorite interview question you like to ask? And you could take this in any direction you want.

Emilie Gerber (01:28:25):
Yeah. I have a new one. We actually just revamped our interview process, so I wanted to make it harder. So my new favorite question is if a client comes to you and they're convinced they have something that's press worthy, like an announcement that they think should be, I don't know, in the Wall Street Journal or something, and you know for a fact that it isn't, what steps do you take? What do you do next? And I like that question because they can handle it, one, from the client relations standpoint, how do you communicate with the client when they say something like that, but it's also a critical thinking and creativity question of how do you take a no and turn it into a yes? How do you take what they're giving you and make it into something interesting? And so I like to dig into that, and they can use a real example if they want, but I also think a lot of our job is pushing back in a way. And so that also shows if they're able and willing to push back.

Lenny (01:29:17):
I'm so curious to hear people's answer to that. Do you have a favorite product that you recently discovered that you love?

Emilie Gerber (01:29:24):
I was very skeptical of Apple Vision Pro and I was making fun of it at the beginning, and the first time I tried it, I completely changed my tune, I'm so into it, I'm ordering one, and I'm very excited for actually using it for work. I think it could be a really good use case for just my day-to-day at work. After I had tried it, the next day I messaged a bunch of clients that I thought could have relevant applications for it. I'm like, "Do we have an Apple Vision Pro strategy? Are we billing to talk about it publicly yet?" Because sometimes it's tying back to the PR conversation, I love if you're willing to push the envelope on stuff that you are building or are going to do and getting ahead of those conversations, so that's a lot of conversations I'm having right now is trying to convince clients to talk about that.

Lenny (01:30:10):
So you have an Apple Vision Pro strategy, amazing.

Emilie Gerber (01:30:13):
And then my other one, which is very self-serving, because they are a client, but I do use them every day, is Perplexity. I find it so helpful even just for like I'm working on an award submission, I forgot how much funding a client has raised, asking them that instead of opening five different Google links and trying to find the answer, it's just huge for quick information. Or writing a bio for an executive, getting just the TLDR of what they've done in their past, it's so good for PR use cases, and I actually think marketing and PR is going to be one of the core work applications for them.

Lenny (01:30:52):
I've also already shared how much I love Perplexity, I have the Chrome extension installed. I probably use it at least once a day for podcast interview prep along with a bunch of other stuff. So good find for customer. I think they're going to do great. Wish I was an investor.

Emilie Gerber (01:31:07):
I'm the happy investor. I rarely angel invest and I was...

Lenny (01:31:12):
Drinks on Emilie someday.

Emilie Gerber (01:31:15):
There we go.

Lenny (01:31:16):
That's awesome. Good job.

Emilie Gerber (01:31:18):
Thank you.

Lenny (01:31:18):
Okay, two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to, share with friends or family, either in work or in life?

Emilie Gerber (01:31:26):
Strong opinions loosely held, I'm a very opinionated trust my gut kind of person, but that doesn't mean I'm not willing to change my mind on things and be wrong. I first heard it from an influencer [inaudible 01:31:38] and then I Googled it, and apparently... What was it? Jeff Bezos also said it at one point, so I have no idea the origin of the quote, but I think that's a good one. You can still be really opinionated in life, but that doesn't mean you always are going to be right.

Lenny (01:31:52):
Emilie, this was everything I hoped it would be. I feel like this is going to help so many people get awesome press. Thank you again so much for being here. Two final questions. Where can folks find you and reach out if they want to learn more or work with you? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Emilie Gerber (01:32:06):
Our website is sixeastern.com and our email is hello@sixeastern.com, so you can find us there. And actually I have a newsletter called On Background. It's on Substack. And really what it's intended to be is a place for people to find these tactical opportunities, so it has media moves, it has reporters that are working on stories, it has awards that are open, all of this stuff that basically an intern in an agency would spend their days researching we put into a newsletter. And so its main audience is PR people, but I actually think it could be a great resource for people within companies that don't have PR teams to stay on top of stuff. So I guess to be helpful, feel free to subscribe. And then other than that, we're hiring, so if you happen to be a PR person that got this far in the episode, always looking for great people to bring on.

Lenny (01:32:57):
Amazing. Is there anything specific you're looking for in people you're hiring for people that may want to reach out other than they've been in PR?

Emilie Gerber (01:33:02):
Ideally some B2B experience. I think doing B2B PR is very different from doing consumer PR. If you work with startups, that's a huge plus, you know how to be kind of scrappy and fast. And also people that just love to be really hands-on and doing the actual work. We're very flat, so we're not a place where there's much managing of teams. So it's really much more like a consultancy than anything else.

Lenny (01:33:24):
Amazing. Emilie, thank you so much for being here.

Emilie Gerber (01:33:27):
Yeah, it was so fun. Thank you so much.

Lenny (01:33:29):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Emily Kramer (00:00:00):
Forget the product marketing content partner, demand and growth, forget all of it, and just think of marketing as you need a fuel and you need an engine. And goal is like all the things that you're creating. I mean this should be obvious, but it's the content, it's the word, it's the design in some regard. All the things that you're making, all the things that are going to add value. An engine is how you get it out to the right people. And all of the tracking of that and sort of the ops work I put under engine, everyone needs an engine.

Emily Kramer (00:00:28):
And the question is, where do you have the biggest challenge right now? Or where do you think if you did more, you would grow faster? Is it on fuel side or is on the engine side?

Lenny (00:00:37):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast. I'm Lenny, and my goal here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. I interview world class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard one experience building and scaling today's most successful products. Today my guest is Emily Kramer. Emily led and built the marketing teams at Asana, Carta, Ticketfly and Astro, which was a startup acquired by Slack. She's one of the first marketers to be hired at all four companies, and has been instrumental in helping these companies build their marketing function, grow their products, and build their brands.

Lenny (00:01:11):
She also writes my favorite newsletter on marketing, MKT1. And the best compliment that I can give her is that she's a marketer that thinks like a product manager. In our chat, Emily shares a ton of concrete advice on what to look for in your first marketing hire, what the different archetypes of marketers are, and who you should look for based on your business model. How to work with marketing effectively as a product team, and also what red flags to look for that tell you that your marketing team is not doing a great job.

Lenny (00:01:39):
Emily is super specific and incredibly concrete with her advice, including sharing a ton of templates that you can immediately use that we link to in the share rooms. I always learn a ton talking to Emily and I can't wait for you to hear this episode. And so with that, I bring you Emily Kramer. I'm excited to chat with my friend John Cutler, from Podcast Sponsor Amplitude. Hey John.

John Cutler (00:02:01):
Hey Lenny. Excited to be here.

Lenny (00:02:03):
John, give us a behind the scenes at Amplitude. When most people think of Amplitude they think of product analytics, but now you're getting into experimentation and even just launch a CDP. What's the thought process there?

John Cutler (00:02:14):
Well, we've always thought of Amplitude as being about supporting the full product loop. Think collect data, inform that, ship experiments and learn. That's the heart of growth to us. So the big aha was seeing how many customers were using Amplitude to analyze experiments, use segments for outreach and send data to other destinations. Experiment in CDP came out of listening to and observing our customers.

Lenny (00:02:35):
And supporting growth and learning has always been amplitude's core focus, right?

John Cutler (00:02:39):
Yeah. So Amplitude tries to meet customers where they are. We just launched starter templates and have a great scholarship program for startups. There's never been a more important time for growth.

Lenny (00:02:48):
Absolutely agree. Thanks for joining us, John, and head to amplitude.com to get started. Are you hiring or on the flip side, are you looking for a new opportunity? Well, either way check out lenny'sjob.com/talent. If you're a hiring manager, you can sign up and get access to hundreds of hand curated people who are open to new opportunities. Thousands of people apply to join this collective and I personally review and accept just about 10% of them. You won't find a better place to hire product managers and growth leaders. Join almost 100 other companies who are actively hiring through this collective.

Lenny (00:03:25):
And if you're looking around for a newer opportunity, actively or passively, join the collective. It's free, you can be anonymous and you can even hide yourself from specific companies. You can also leave anytime and you'll only hear from companies that you want to hear from. Check out lenny'sjobs.com/talent. Emily, welcome to this podcast. I'm really excited to be chatting with you.

Emily Kramer (00:03:50):
Yeah. Thanks for having me. Looking forward to chatting with you in depth here.

Lenny (00:03:53):
So if I remember correctly, we first met in the first round Angel Track program maybe two years ago, and then since then we've invested in a bunch of different companies together. I'm also just a big fan of your newsletter that we're going to chat about. So just to settle little context for folks, can you just give us a quick high level overview of your illustrious career and then also just plug your newsletter so folks can find it.

Emily Kramer (00:04:16):
For sure. And theme of my career has been building out marketing teams at B2B startups. So early in my career I was in advertising, went to business school. But after that I started doing the startup thing and I was at Ticketfly, I was like the second marketer. And then I went to Asana where I was the first marketer when they were about 30, 35 people and built up that team and led the team for just under four years. And then I went to a small seed funded company, help them raise rates and eventually went to Carta, which was about 300 people when I joined-ish give or take, but didn't have a marketing function at the time.

Emily Kramer (00:04:49):
So built that function up from scratch. Much like Asana but at a very different stage in the company's life cycle. And then since then I've been advising and investing full time and now have a small fund where we invest in early stage B2B and help them build out marketing. So building marketing, that's what I do.

Lenny (00:05:07):
I love it. Okay, so plug your fund and your newsletter real quick just so we can cover that.

Emily Kramer (00:05:11):
Oh yeah, sorry about that. My newsletter is the letters mkt1.substack.com and my fund is Market 1 Capital. You can pretty much find most of these things on mkt1.co. Links to all the different various things that I'm doing so I can remember, because there's lots of iron in the fire. So got to keep the website up to date so I don't lose track of all the things that are going on. I also have a job board and a bunch of other things. You have more things going on but I have a number of set of things.

Lenny (00:05:42):
Awesome. And we'll link to that in the show notes and everything. I don't think I've told you this but many founders have mentioned you as one of their most helpful angel investors that they've had on their cap table. It just comes up often when we co-invest. And the things that you help them most with as far as I understand is marketing advice, go to market advice, hiring marketing people. And so, I'd love to spend most of our time chatting through, basically the advice that you give founders around marketing.

Lenny (00:06:09):
And the first area I wanted to dig into is hiring marketing people. To non-marketing people it's such a mystery of just like, what is a marketing person? What do I expect from them? How do I hire them? How do I find them? How do I interview them? What should I avoid? So my first question is just like what mistakes have you seen founders and teams make when they're thinking about marketing and hiring marketing people?

Emily Kramer (00:06:33):
And just to add to that, it's even hard for marketers to hire other marketers. It's even confusing for marketers to know where they fit in. And if they haven't been hired yet exactly what world they should be looking at or exactly who else they should be hired on the team. While it's very confusing for founders and people who haven't kind of been in a larger marketing team to understand all the different function, like also confusing for marketers. And I think that's just because there's so many different sub functions of marketing and there's so many different things that marketers could do.

Emily Kramer (00:07:01):
And there's such a range of being a deep specialist. You have people that are just deep SEO specialists or deep paid search specialists or writers and they love to write and they write long form content and that's definitely a part of what marketing does, but it's a specialty for sure. And then you have people that are just very much generalists and can handle all areas of marketing. So a couple of mistakes that I see is just hiring people that don't cover the area that you need most as a startup. And that kind of comes for two reasons.

Emily Kramer (00:07:33):
One, is like you don't know as a founder or someone else doing a marketing hiring for the first person, you don't know what you're going to be doing in marketing. You don't know what your big levers are going to be, you don't know what's going to work. And so you hire a marketer thinking they're like smart, they've done this before. But really they haven't done the thing that you need to do before. So I see that especially with business model where I think having the right business model experience is almost more important than having industry experience or experience with that audience.

Emily Kramer (00:08:05):
And I think often people are like, I need someone who is marketed to HR or marketed to construction or that specific. And my response is you, you're going to really narrow your set up people with that, and also it doesn't matter as much because great marketers learn the audience and learn the product quickly. And sometimes that fresh set of eyes is helpful and you have other experts in house on the audience. But the business model really dictates what marketing does in a big way. And by business model I mean more like, are you doing top down sales? Are you selling the enterprise?

Emily Kramer (00:08:39):
Are you doing bottom up product led growth or have a free version? Or whatever it is. Those types of things matter a lot. Because the set of marketing activities is just wildly different which I'm sure we'll go into. So to kind of summarize here, what I'd tell founders is I usually start when I talk to founders about who you need to hire in marketing. Because usually the question is, I think I need a marketer, who do I hire? And my critic question, let's try to nail this down because there isn't one answer. It very much depends.

Emily Kramer (00:09:10):
There's usually some common archetypes. But the first thing I say is forget all the sub-functions that you've heard about in marketing. Forget the product marketing content marketing partner, demand and growth, forget all of it and just think of marketing as you need fuel and you need an engine. And the goal is all the things that you're creating. I mean this should be obvious, but it's the content, it's the word that's the design and some regard, it's all the things you're making, all the things that are going to add value.

Emily Kramer (00:09:37):
An engine is how you get it out to the right people. And all of the tracking of that And of the ops work I put under engine. So you still need an engine. And the question is, where do you have the biggest challenge right now or where do you think if you did more, you would grow faster? Is it on fuel side or is on the engine side? Typically, if you just think about it logically, you kind of need the fuel first. And sometimes what I see is people just build an engine first and they're like why isn't this working we're sending so many outbound emails? And it's like, well you don't have anything valuable to put in those, you have no fuel so this isn't working.

Emily Kramer (00:10:07):
Or you see the flip side where they're making a whole bunch of things, they're writing a bunch of blog quotes or making a bunch of content and they're like, this content doesn't work. It's like, we'll, have you tried distributing it? Because if you're not distributing that and getting mileage out of it's a waste of time. So this is a big problem in marketing overall, getting the balance of fuel and engine rate. But I like to start from what do you think is going to help most and what skillset does your team not have? And typically, if a team is sales driven top down, they might have an SDR or at least two at this time.

Emily Kramer (00:10:37):
Usually that comes first in top down. And so the SDRs are kind of an engine. They're an imperfect engine, outbound shouldn't be the only thing you're doing. And if they're just reaching out and asking people to schedule meetings, it might not be that effective but you have a little engine going on. So maybe now you need some fuel first. On the other side of it, if you're a product growth or bottom up, you might have a situation where just nothing is optimized. Your website's conversion rates are terrible, people are dropping out of the funnel all over the place.

Emily Kramer (00:11:06):
And you really need someone who can build up these lifecycle email touches, work in product instead of work with a product or a person as well. And you really just need more engine because people are already finding out about your product or it has someone made virality and you're just not capturing enough of that. So I kind of like decode, what's going to help the most right now? And then ideally you get someone, so move back to an engine first.

Lenny (00:11:27):
Can I actually jump in real quick because that's a really cool framework that I haven't heard before, this idea of fuel and engine from a marketing perspective. To make it a little more concrete, what are a examples of, it doesn't have to be exhaustive, but when you think about all the things that could be fueled, and all the types of engines, what are those lists?

Emily Kramer (00:11:47):
For sure. Yeah, I have a diagram of this stuff in my newsletter.

Lenny (00:11:50):
Awesome. We'll link to that.

Emily Kramer (00:11:51):
So when I think about fuel and engine and what goes on either side, it's important to recognize that some things are fuel or engine and that some things are both fuel and engine. Let me start with an example of something that's fuel and engine. If done well, your community, let's just take for instance, let's keep it simple because community needs 75 things. If you have a Slack community that should be tool and engine. If you have people creating content in there that maybe you can then use in other areas. Like you do this well, you take what's going on in your community and you do your community wisdom parts of your newsletter.

Emily Kramer (00:12:24):
So you're using that as fuel but it's also an engine because you have people in your audience that you can distribute out content too. So there's some examples like that. But to go back to the question of what fuel and what's an engine. Fuel is like the copy on your website, it's the blog posts that you had, it's the templates that you've created. It's the video recordings of the webinars or the podcast. It's basically content, but also to include some of the copy.

Emily Kramer (00:12:50):
And I think people have this limited view of contents where they think blog posts and blog posts are still one part of content. Content should be tools, resource, assembled like calculators, those kind of things do better in all the cases.

Lenny (00:13:04):
And positioning I imagine is a fuel.

Emily Kramer (00:13:08):
Yeah. That's some of the product marketing steps. So product marketing is this weird thing and we'll talk about it that's kind of in the middle. But yes, product marketing, doing any positioning. Again, like the web copy which is of the first manifestation of your positioning and messaging, or it should be the source of truth for all of that. But you're positioning, you are messaging the words, the words are the things you're creating, that's the fuel, things that add value in that way. The engine side is what people tend to call marketing growth or demand jam or things of that nature.

Emily Kramer (00:13:37):
That's really the distribution channels. The email copy itself is fuel, but how you've set up the email and the segmentation you've used and the rules for that drip email, that's the engine. The SEO content is fuel, but your SEO sort of keyword list as a technical FTO and that kind of stuff is sort of engine. Social media, you got to have good fuel but you also have to nail it exactly what channels you're using and all that stuff. So a lot of things have both sides of it. So most projects or activities or initiative have some fuel and some engine.

Emily Kramer (00:14:08):
I also consider marketing ops work, the setup of HubSpot or whatever it is you might be using. That's engine. It's really instructing the engine, but I kind of put it in that bucket. Because people who are usually good at executing on email or executing on ads or things like that, usually have some working knowledge of the ops work and the reporting work because you have to be optimizing. I guess admin paid is also engine.

Lenny (00:14:34):
Awesome. Okay. And so coming back to your original piece of advice here is before hiring a marketing person, you want to figure out which of these buckets is the biggest constraint to your growth, right?

Emily Kramer (00:14:44):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:14:45):
You talked about this briefly, but is there any simple heuristics to give you a sense of it's probably fuel, I need more great content, maybe some website updates versus I need to figure out how to get this out. How do you think about that high level?

Emily Kramer (00:14:58):
Yeah, I mean, it's kind of simple. You can just ask what are your top performing pieces of content or what's the top performing page on your website or things of that feature. Who is your product for? Why is it better? What are the benefits? How does it compare to competitors? If you don't have an answer for those questions, you don't have top performing content and you don't know your positioning and all that stuff, you got a fuel problem here. Oh, you wrote this really great piece of content and I saw it on your website, how are you distributing that? What are you doing?

Emily Kramer (00:15:24):
And they're like, I shared it on social, they didn't really go anywhere, you got an engine problem. Or if I say, do you know what your final stages are? You have two sales people now, how does the marketing sales handoff go? They're like, they share a list and block off everyone they should reach out to. I'm like, well, you have an adventure problem if this isn't going to scale. So it's just these basic things. Are you doing these things or not? And sometimes founders are really great at making the original sort of content and writing the early positioning.

Emily Kramer (00:15:52):
And they're the best suited to that and they just need someone to help them get that stuff out and that's when they need an engine person. So that's basically how you figure it out. And normally when you ask vendors that question, they get it pretty quickly. They're like, "Okay, I think this is my problem, I can kind of identify it." And then it's like, okay, from here, well, what exactly do you need and what exact type of marketer do you need? And that's where everyone's answer is always, I think I heard from investors or I've been hearing from other founders that I really need a product marketer.

Emily Kramer (00:16:20):
And the question is, well what do you think a product marketer is? And you get a different answer every time. In fact, when I was at Asana our COO, his question that he liked to ask all the marketers or all the product marketers that we were interviewing was just, "What's product marketing?" And that's the scariest question you can ask a product marketer. It's like no scarier question for a product marketer then hey, what's a product marketer? They're like, "Oh, shit, I have no idea. Just my job, it's me. I'm a product marketer."

Emily Kramer (00:16:48):
But really a product marketer, they understand the product, they understand the audience and they understand the market in which you're operating. And from there they can figure out how to communicate with your audience about the right things at the right time. So they're kind of laying groundwork. And then they're also doing some work too. They're also doing a lot of the copywriting and the actual messaging and handling sort of launches and sometimes writing copy for things like emails and helping set the content strategy and things like that.

Emily Kramer (00:17:16):
And people think they need product marketers. One because it's like a fake people say, but two, because product marketers tend to shadow this line between fuel and engine. They're more on the fuel side, but particularly they've done a lot of launches in the past. They have a general understanding of channel strategy and what channels do at what time and that sort of end and stuff. But product marketers aren't really specialists in writing and producing content. They're not specialists in building out marketing ops or doing FDO.

Emily Kramer (00:17:44):
They're definitely more of the generalist function. And so sometimes that's a great answer. You need a product marketer, but sometimes you need someone that's scrappier in different areas. Another one of my frameworks is we start with doing these seal engine, what are the biggest problems? What are the biggest things that if you did, you would drive growth? And then we talk about the three typical subfunction that you would hire, which would be content, community type person, a growth demands and type person and a product marketer. And we kind of talk about what those three things mean.

Emily Kramer (00:18:16):
And kind of align based on what you're saying, based on the fuel engine thing, probably in this type of person. And then from there, what I tell people when you're hiring your first marketer and probably even your first several marketers, you're more want to hire generalist than specialists. This is probably true for anywhere at the early stage startup, but specialists are great to hire. It's great to hire contractors that are specialists. Like the FDO contractor, even the contractor who can write the marketing ops contractor. But you want someone who is pretty much a generalist.

Emily Kramer (00:18:49):
And the way I describe that within marketing, usually you you are like hire a T shape person that bites in one area and has working knowledge and try to crop all of them. But I use this thing that I made up which is you one up higher pie shaped marketers, not pie like dessert, but pie like 3.14 where the pie symbol has two vertical lines. So like a T but it has an extra line. And it's because you want the first marketer to be an expert in one of those three areas that I mentioned, product marketing, content marketing, growth marketing.

Emily Kramer (00:19:21):
And you want them to be proficient in another one, the second T. But you want them to be able to set strategy and know how to hire contractors across all of them. And so the promise land of hiring a first marketer, they are a pie shape marketer. And so then you could hire a content and product marketing pie shape marketer, product marketing growth pie shape marketer. But it's like what are those two spikes and what's the one that you're going to worry less about that they need to work knowledge of?

Emily Kramer (00:19:45):
The last thing I'll say on the pie piece is that it's really hard to find someone that's a content marketer that's also really good at growth. Like that pie shape marketer exists a lot less frequently. Maybe it's someone who is really amazing at content distribution or really amazing at FDO, but they don't really exist. Because the content side is like one side of the brain and the growth data stuff is a whole other side of the brain. You don't find those people very often. So you are usually looking for that product marketing, growth marketing pie shaped person or the product marketing content marketing pie shaped person.

Lenny (00:20:21):
Wow, okay. This is great. So I was going to ask you about-

Emily Kramer (00:20:22):
Sorry this is dense, this is a lot of marketing window, so hopefully we're breaking it down.

Lenny (00:20:29):
Yeah, we're getting there. So let me try to summarize and see where we go. So I was going to ask you about the archetypes of marketing people and it sounds like there's these three is the way you think about it. There's basically a content community person, there's a growth person and then there's product marketing which is kind of like in the middle. And I guess, one question I wanted to ask is there's also just the growth function, product growth, growth PMs, things like that. Do you see that as the same thing as this growth marketing person or is that a different type of person and a different role?

Emily Kramer (00:21:01):
In top down sales businesses it is 100% different. A growth person typically probably called a demand gen person. There's a whole other rabbit hole we can go down on what's the difference between growth marketing and demand gen. And demand gen is probably more top of funnel and growth marketing is probably more full funnel at its simplest form. But it's definitely different there. In a product led growth business, the growth marketer and the product grows sort of role or the hybrid growth role, sometimes it can be the same person depending on the skill.

Emily Kramer (00:21:31):
But typically the difference would be that the growth marketer is doing more of the top of funnel sort of inbound side and the product growth person is doing more once they actually get into the product, but can be collaborated with that growth marketer. So it can be the same person in extremely data driven sort of person that kind of has the working knowledge of both marketing and product stuff. It can be one person in early stage PLG companies.

Emily Kramer (00:21:56):
But I think typically, and I'm sure you've seen that at larger companies as you get bigger, you're going to have some people that come from more of that marketing perspective and you're going to have a little bit come from more of that product perspective. But the question is, is there ever one person that does that?

Lenny (00:22:09):
Okay, so to make this a little more concrete even for startups, thinking from a startup perspective, when you're just thinking about hiring your first say marketing person. When you think about this set of buckets that you talked about, there's content marketing, growth marketing, product marketing, plus to your point there's at larger companies or maybe later stages separate from a growth PM type person. What do you generally think is the right role to hire/architect to focus on? Or is it really dependent like you said on fuel versus engine versus something else?

Emily Kramer (00:22:45):
I mean it's highly dependent on, again the business model, what you need more of, what you already have in place, what's going on. But the most common archetype that I say you want to hire is a product marketer. Even though I joke that everyone says you need a product marketer. But it's actually understanding what that is first, that understands growth marketing as well. So they probably work somewhere early on where they've had to have some exposure to that. So they understand all the channels they're working with, understand what they can do with those channels and maybe they need to work with contractors on some of those things.

Emily Kramer (00:23:17):
Also product marketer needs to know how to write. All marketers should some working knowledge in writing, but they need to know how to write. They are the copywriter for a long time. Tests that they can write, make sure they can write well, short form and long form. They're not going to be necessarily as good in writing as say a content person, but they need to be able to write. And product marketers just tend to have that ability to write and that ability to understand what channels they can use to reach their audience so they're in the middle. So often that's the case.

Emily Kramer (00:23:44):
But I mean, sometimes I find that I'm recommending hiring that growth person first because they maybe already have a couple of really great contractors and they have a couple of really great pieces of content that can just be gifts that keep on giving if they keep distributing them and repurposing them.

Lenny (00:23:58):
What do you look for in this product marketing person? You mentioned ability to write is really important? What else? When someone's scanning LinkedIn or just later talking to them, what do you find is important to focus on and look for?

Emily Kramer (00:24:10):
This can be hard to find, but I think I want to see that they've worked on a team that's early enough where they are not siloed into their specific role. Because what happens at leader stage companies or at public companies is when you're a product marketer, you don't see what's going on in the rest of marketing at all. You have a very siloed view of it, maybe you're only working on product launches as a product marketer, which the positioning is already set, the audience research already done, they haven't done any of those things, or the channels are all built out.

Emily Kramer (00:24:38):
It's just different. I think that's the case in a lot of roles at startups. But building it from scratch is different. So that doesn't mean that if you're a series A company hiring your first marketer that you need to hire someone that's worked at a Series A company. But it usually means you're hiring someone that's worked at least at a growth stage company where they have exposure to a bunch of various marketing. Also looking for, have they seen what great looks like? So whether they joined us startup up early and it did really well, or whether that's they had a stint at a later stage company and then earliest in their career, they're a big company then they went to some big smaller.

Emily Kramer (00:25:17):
Do they know what high quality sort of great looks like? It doesn't always have to be, you don't have to have been at a startup that everyone thinks of as like, they're really great at marketing, but it is helpful. And there are some people that just have a really high quality bar and really understand what great marketing looks like even if they haven't worked in those companies. But I like to say has worked somewhere early enough that they could set strategy across all of marketing. And do they know what great looked like? That's something I'm scanning for. I'm also scanning for your first marketer, you don't want to go out, I see this mistake all the time.

Emily Kramer (00:25:47):
You don't want to go out and hire someone super senior who's only worked at a public company. That's the wrong person. And often VCs or sort lead investors that aren't in a certain niche. when they refer candidates to startups, usually the fail I see is they're like, here's someone great from Google. And I'm like, I'm sure they're great but they're not great for this role and that's the mistake I see all the time. Oh, we just fired our first marketer. I'm like, "where did they work?" They're like, "They only worked at Salesforce." I'm like, well, yeah.

Lenny (00:26:15):
Why is that not a good fit?

Emily Kramer (00:26:16):
Just because they don't understand how all the marketing works together and they don't understand how they built the foundation. It's much different marketing something that already everybody knows what it is or everybody knows the brand even if they don't know the product and they have a built in customer base, than building something up for scratch from scratch is just a very different marketing motion, and you need to do a lot of things. You need to do a lot of things yourself, you need to be a doer.

Emily Kramer (00:26:38):
So you're really looking for most roles or most lead of function roles at startups, they need to be both strategic and of scrappy enough to get the work done. You're going to be doing it all. And in marketing you're often going to be the first marketer for a little while and you're going to be doing everything. And so there has to be some sign that you're going to be comfortable with that.

Lenny (00:26:59):
Awesome. When do you find that it's usually best to hire your first marketing person?

Emily Kramer (00:27:05):
I mean stage wise you're looking at some nice people hire at seed depending on their business, but usually it's in Series A or you hire one sort of more junior person at seed when you're coming into raising or Series A and then you know have two people right after your Series A. But really, I think it's helpful to have some sort of semblance of product market fit. Maybe you're not 100% sure, but maybe you have definitely some successful customers. It's not like we're working with a design partner to build this out and we have a couple pilots. Marketing is really good at accelerating growth and doing that scale one to many.

Emily Kramer (00:27:46):
So if you're still in the very well spoke founder led sales, founder led marketing, like I'm doing discovery with each of these potential customers and have to modify my product for them, that kind of thing. You don't need one yet. Founders can do a fair amount of stuff and they can use some contractors. I think you need them earlier in product growth models because you're not going to hire a salesperson then. So it's more thinking about go to market holistically and saying, do I need one or two people here and why is that? And so if you're a top down model sort of enterprise sale, you're probably going to have a couple sales people before you hire marketing, but that might not be the case.

Emily Kramer (00:28:26):
And these are more self or product led growth models, you just don't need the sales person. So having the marketer is helpful. So again, the business model affects this a lot, but usually the general rule of thumb is, if you had a marketer what would they do? And I often help people try to figure that out. What would they do and if they stepped on the gas and did all this stuff really well, would you be able to handle all those people that came in? Is it even a good time to bring all those people in to your product?

Emily Kramer (00:28:52):
So are they going to be held back by where your product is or where some of the discovery on exact business model is or things like that. And that's the case. It's just not a good use money when they're kind of just sitting on their hands. I can't spend any money on paid and we don't even have any idea what to say on the website because we're selling four different things. It's just kind of hard to hire someone in that case.

Lenny (00:29:19):
This episode is brought to you by Athletic Greens. I've been hearing about AG1 on basically every podcast that I listened to, like Tim Ferris and Mark Friedman. And so I finally gave it a shot earlier this year, and it has quickly become a core part of my morning routine. Especially on days that I need to go deep on writing or record a podcast like this. Here's three things that I love about AG1. One, with a small scoop that dissolves in water, you are absorbing 75 vitamins, minerals, probiotics, and adaptogens. I kind of like to think of it as little safety net for my nutrition in case I miss something in my diet.

Lenny (00:29:56):
Two, they treat AG1 like a software product. Apparently they are on their 52nd iteration and they're constantly evolving it based on the latest science, research studies and internal testing that they do. And three, it's just one easy thing that I can do every single day to take care of myself. Right now it's time to reclaim your health and arm your immune system with convenient daily nutrition. It's just one scoop and a cup of water every day and that's it. There's no need for a million different pills and supplements to look out for your health. To make it easy, Athletic Greens is going to give you a free one year supply of immune supporting vitamin D and five free travel packs with your first purchase.

Lenny (00:30:35):
All you have to do is visit athleticgreens.com/lenny. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/lenny. Take ownership over your health and pick up the ultimate daily nutritional insurance. Just to set context, most of your experience is B2B, so I guess we should just let people know this is probably mostly B2B advice.

Emily Kramer (00:30:53):
Sorry. Yes, mostly B2B advice. I think a lot of this holds, I think the fuel engine stuff holds for B2C. I think the roles pretty much hold, but you might hear the word brand marketing thrown out a lot more in B2C and that's what we're going to be talking about, the fuel stuff and maybe that's going to be what they hire before they hire say like a product marketer. But it's kind of the same set of functions. But most of my experience are B2B and most of the startups I work with are B2B, but some of it holds.

Lenny (00:31:19):
Yeah, I was going to ask about brand marketing, that's like another bucket, right? We haven't talked about that as a type of skill or does that fall into one of these that you've talked about?

Emily Kramer (00:31:27):
To me, brand marketing is a combination or has some of the work that happens by a product marketer and by a content and community marketer. But maybe they also are more influential on the design side of things. And so brand marketing is another one that needs 75 different things. Sometimes it means you literally manage designers or you're a trade up producer, and sometimes it means you are more doing work on what are the stories that we're trying to tell and you're doing more of the content stuff. And sometimes it means I'm doing the positioning work, sometimes it means I'm working on the website or branded paid stuff and consumer.

Emily Kramer (00:32:10):
So it means a lot of things too. But usually in B2B, the person that kind of owns the brand is the positioning story side of brand is owned by product marketing. And the design side of brand is either just owned by the product designer on first or working with a brand designer or if the marketer has skillset set there could be owned by them as well. So it's a little murky at first, but eventually on B2B teams when I've grown teams plus 10 to 15 people, I'll have a brand person that is working really closely with the designers and kind of making sure that everything that we're producing on the content side of things is up to... They're acting as sort an editor there.

Emily Kramer (00:32:58):
They're making sure everything ladders up to the overall story. So they're helping tell the story, they're helping make sure the design is right. And in some instances I'll have a brand person that's kind of working on these larger brand initiatives. We did a huge data study when I was at Carta and the person that kind of ran that whole initiative and the events and it was sort of a separate initiative that had a lot of different parts was my brand marketer. They were kind of working on these larger sort of big data project that's made across all of marketing.

Lenny (00:33:25):
Awesome. Well you talked about the growth PM role kind of adjacent to all this. For the typical say PLG startup, in your experience, do you find folks should hire more of a marketing person than a growth person that focuses on say, conversion or optimizing the funnel or SEO or paid or anything like that? What's your experience there?

Emily Kramer (00:33:47):
For PLG I think you want to have a marketer that is responsible for getting people into the product, that's a marketing profile. That's using all of these channels that's driving inbound, that's focused on web conversion, making sure your website converts, that's a marketing skillset. Because it's really likely you have to work with to get this done is really how I think about it. And you have to work with the people that own the website which is marketing for all of these sort of inbound stuff you are going to work with a lot of people on the marketing team. So that piece is really a marketing piece.

Emily Kramer (00:34:16):
The product experiments and the product test, that's a person with a product skill set because they know how to work with other PMs, they know how to work with engineers and marketers don't. And then there's these gray areas like the onboarding experience or when you first get into the product. And that is an area where there needs to be a ton of collaboration. So my view is that if you're going to have a growth PM, it's probably helpful for them to have EM experience or product experience, but they should be paired as soon as they can be with someone that also understands that top of model piece.

Emily Kramer (00:34:50):
Or maybe that person isn't in a full-time growth role, but know who on the marketing team is going to work with them on these areas of crossover like onboarding or that first use experience. And making sure that the signup flow from filling out something on the website to getting in the product is really consistent. Because that area of I'll fill out a handoff, we talk about the marketing to sales handoff all the time on the go to market side, but there's a marketing to product handoff. And that's the handoff that's really important in PLG. And that feels weird to a user, it's two different teams inside of a company.

Emily Kramer (00:35:24):
But if that that feels weird to a user, you're going to notice that all of a sudden feels extremely disjoined. Or if I'm getting a bunch of product transactional emails while I'm getting a bunch of marketing drip emails. So that handoff or that experience needs to be ironed out or consistent or there needs to be tons of collaboration there. So however that is done, I don't really care what the teams look like. Lots of different companies have different versions of how they do this. But the idea is that experience needs to feel consistent and you need to have collaboration across people that have those skill sets and you need to have a clear process for how that looks.

Emily Kramer (00:36:00):
And so it's just getting that marketing sales handoff in my opinion. It's like how do you get the marketing to product handoff right? And if it means you have someone that owns onboarding, it's in a hybrid role, then great. If it means there's a committee sort of situation with one person at the DRI, that's great too. So I think my answer is, I don't think there's one way to structure it, it's just highly dependent on the company overall. And I think you need both skill sets.

Lenny (00:36:22):
You touched on an area of tension that often comes up between marketing and product. I imagine many listeners hear you saying, marketing should own the website and conversion and net flow. And thinking about the idea of product led growth. The idea that is product will grow our business and oftentimes PMs do that work and oftentimes they're really good at it. And so I guess the question is, in your experience, do you find that it should be marketing more than product or product people?

Lenny (00:36:58):
Is it depending on the person, maybe they're called the product person, but they actually are really good at marketing. Any insights there? And then we're going to talk about just collaboration between the two functions.

Emily Kramer (00:37:08):
So I think that product led growth is a misnomer. I think people will do anything they can possibly do not call marketing marketing. I think we always see this. And so I think that product led growth really means not as much sales, which means product plus marketing. And so that's probably a hot take. But product led growth is just another name for what we like. I mean, product led growth is a little different than premium or sales server, these things. But you are being handheld by the product, you aren't being handheld by the sales team.

Emily Kramer (00:37:37):
So really to me, and you can have a sales assist with product led grow as well. But typically what's more at odds in my mind is product led growth means you are going to have a huge sales team early on. It doesn't mean you're not going to have a huge marketing team early on. In fact, to me it means you are going to have a bigger marketing team early on because you're not going to have those sales. Sales is not communicating with customers. So I think it comes back to what are these teams typically good at? And marketing is typically good at the communication piece of one to many. That's what they're good at.

Emily Kramer (00:38:07):
And so they're usually good. They should be good at figuring out all the channels to have a funnel to communicate with people. And product is really using product as a channel by which to communicate with customers prospects, et cetera. So that's one way of thinking about the difference. On conversion, conversion also means lots of different things. There's top of funnel conversion, getting on the website and filling out some other form. There's conversion once you're in the product becoming an active user or inviting people. So it's like, well, which part of conversion? Web conversion, I typically think of something that's owned by marketing because usually product doesn't want to own the website.

Emily Kramer (00:38:46):
Early on products will sometimes own the website because marketing wasn't there. But the website is something that's going to need to be updated like 5,000 times and it needs to be on Webflow preferably at this point or DMS that's easy update. And if it's built into the code base that's like it, or it's on a headless CMS or it's not touchable by marketing, that's a huge problem. When it comes to once they click the signup button, who should be mostly involved in that process? I think again, there needs to be, I think there's lots of ways to handle that.

Emily Kramer (00:39:15):
And I think if it's product it kind of has that skillset and the testing skillset and there's enough volume that you can be doing a bunch of tests, maybe that's the person that owns that. But I think there's still going to be a lot of collaboration on the exact words that are used and things like that. So I think it's just whatever it is, make it clear where the handoff is. And so maybe it's not marketing on the entire website because maybe they don't own those flows, but there's this gray area. And I think the other big thing is sometimes the forms, the literal forms that are used are built in your website and sometimes they're built in the product.

Emily Kramer (00:39:47):
And I think that also drives a lot of it because it's who do you need to help you build these things? And if they're built into the product, then the product team needs to own that. But it shouldn't to me like this, let's not argue about it, we're trying to move this and here's the things that marketing is going to do and here's the things that product is going to do, and here are the areas of overlap. But I don't think products should be in the business of owning the whole website and all the top of funnel messaging and all of that stuff. That's not the best use of anyone's time really.

Lenny (00:40:18):
I know you had a lot of success with marketing and product working together at Asana, and kind of double clicking on the same thread. What have you seen to be an important part of this collaboration and making one plus one equal three, when product and marketing and working together at a B2B company?

Emily Kramer (00:40:36):
And look like there were definitely ups and down marketing working with product at Asana as well. But I think overall we did a good job because of some of the systems that Asana had in place. Which is and we talked about this before but something that Asana did well is they had this list in Asana of course, everything at Asana was in Asana through Asana by Asana. But we had a list of areas of responsibility which is just who owns what, it's not your job title. It's what are the things that you are the DRI for? It doesn't mean you're not going to collaborate with people on those things. So what are you the directly responsible individual for?

Emily Kramer (00:41:11):
And this made it really easy to know who to go to. I'm just going to use DRI because I can't keep saying directly responsible individuals. So the DRI on tests on the onboarding experience is Jennifer the PM. But the copywriter for that is, I don't know, I'm sure who think of exactly who the person was, is Devin on marketing. So we broke it down that's simply so you knew who to go to. Because often what happens with product is they're like, I'm doing a launch, I don't know, especially when there's 15 marketers, I don't know if I'm supposed to go for this product launch or to figure out if this is a launchable feature, so I'm just going to skip it.

Emily Kramer (00:41:49):
So it's really helpful to say the product marketer owner for this part of the product is this and to just have this list. So just having clear ownership is what this comes down to. But it's one thing to have clear ownership but it's quite another to for other teams to know who that clear owner is. So I think having a clear list beyond titles and just like who owns what is really helpful. And then as you hire new people, you can break down those, the list kind of gets longer because you're going to break things down more. It goes from Emily owning all of marketing to me breaking that down and not owning all of it.

Emily Kramer (00:42:22):
So I found that really helpful. I also found at Asana we did something called Roadmap Week, which was before every quarter. Where we had of open meetings, sometimes they were open and sometimes they weren't. But we had cross-functional meetings to help plan for what you were going to do that quarter on your team. So I could sit in on the product road mapping for X as the head of marketing. And that was really helpful to just get a sense for what was going on. And sometimes there'd be people in those that were silent participators, and then adopting that would be made so you could see this.

Emily Kramer (00:42:56):
And maybe it doesn't scale forever, but it worked really well early on for people being able to be looped on things, to have these sort of out loud landing meetings where you were talking through here are our biggest decisions. Here's what we're wrestling between and getting input, kind of knowing what was going on. I think another thing that we did well was also having clear review processes. And all of this sounds like a lot of process, but once you actually make an AORs list, it kind of runs itself. Someone new gets hired, they're excited to put in their AORs or someone gets the new responsibility and they're stoked to take it over from the head of marketing or whatever it is.

Emily Kramer (00:43:32):
I finally have handed you the master managing editor AOR and it becomes a big deal. The other thing that I think we did well from a marketing perspective is another newsletter that I have is this framework that I use called the GACCS or the GACCS. Which GACCS sounds more fun to say than the GACCS. But this is just a marketing brief that I recommend you do before you make anything big in marketing or do any big projects. And it's just what are the goals? What's the audience? What's the creative or unique end goal? What's this thing? I guess what's going to make it different and stand out from other companies?

Emily Kramer (00:44:17):
The second C is the channels or how this is going to be distributed. How are you going to get the word out about this? Deep thinking there. And then the last few are the stakeholders. Who's the DRI and who needs to weigh in and who's going to be the helper? Who are the contributors? And that's where you can include some product people and you can share this before you start doing any work. So for instance, if you're doing a product launch, product manager communicates with the marketing team. Maybe you have a meeting, maybe you share some brief from the product guide or you share sort of what's being built.

Emily Kramer (00:44:43):
And then marketing comes back to you with the GACCS. And you can kind weigh in on, here are the channels that are going to be using. The creative C has maybe the highest level messaging. And you get buy in early on and then you can go much faster. And then you're not just sharing with product, here's a blog post that I wrote for the launch. And you're like, what? This is the wrong audience, the wrong thing. You just save so much time sharing these types of things up front. So I find there's a handful of different practices that need to be in place, but it's sharing the right information at the right level of information at the right times and having a culture of doing that.

Emily Kramer (00:45:21):
And it needs to go both ways. Product needs to loop marketing and they are like, here's what we're working on this quarter here are going to be some of the things that we're launching or any of these interesting that you want to double down on and do what public launch for or whatever it is. Or we really think onboarding needs to be approved. Let's put together a group that's going to work on this quarter and let's kind of have a spring plan that's cross-functional. It's a lot of that. So a lot of this happens in a planning process. So if you as a company don't have a good planning process, you're not going to have good cross-functional collaboration, especially between product and marketing.

Emily Kramer (00:45:54):
And I think the last thing is just a respect for the skillset. Recognizing you are good at this or you have access to engineers, you know how to get them to do things. I don't want to do that as a marketer. I'm good at storytelling and I know how to get people in the door in the funnel. And let's respect what each person is good at and let them go do their thing. So those are just some of the tactical practices and things that we did in Asana that I thought worked well. But it's hard.

Emily Kramer (00:46:24):
I mean, everyone wants the other team to be doing something a little bit differently and that's always going to be the case. And those tensions in some cases are good because that's why you have the benefit of having different teams and different perspectives. But it gets out of hand when people are just working in silos and aren't communicating with each other, aren't looping people in on things that they're experts on.

Lenny (00:46:43):
Awesome. All the templates and frameworks that you mentioned we're going to link to in the show notes. One of the things I love about is you're like a PM minded marketer where you make everything super concrete and templated and assigned.

Emily Kramer (00:46:56):
I like a framework, I like a framework and I like a template. And I am pretty PM minded because I'm pretty well rounded when it comes to the marketing skillset. I don't really consider myself a growth marketer or a product marketer or a content marketer. I just consider myself a marketer who builds teams and that's a different mindset. And I also love goals and planning. No, I don't love annual planning processes that companies do and overdone OKR exercise. It's where you're making this crazy cascade that then nobody can follow.

Emily Kramer (00:47:31):
But basic sort of simple planning so that you kind of go a little slower up front so then you can just fly out getting things out the door. That's the kind of teams I like to lead.

Lenny (00:47:44):
Awesome.

Emily Kramer (00:47:44):
It's like upfront buy in and then move back, do what you need to do.

Lenny (00:47:48):
I love the sound of that. We're also working on a guest post that may come out before this comes out or after around a lot of this templates. So I'm excited to get that out the door. Coming back to this kind of tension that often happens between PMs and marketing people. Tell me if you agree, but I find that product teams are always often very skeptical of marketing and find that there's just all this time, energy, resources put into marketing efforts. And it's hard to measure who knows what's happening there.

Lenny (00:48:19):
While the product continues to evolve, you can tell what it's doing. It's often driving most of the growth. And so my main question here is, as a product person, what tells you that the marketing person and team is good and awesome and you should trust them and they know what they're doing, versus maybe they're not amazing and we should try to push back? Any advice there?

Emily Kramer (00:48:45):
Yeah, I recently did a talk with my friend Jenny, who was the head of content at Asana and now is the head of content in Palms at Clear Lake. And she was sort of joking. We were coming up for the name of the talk and she was like, "I want to call it content splatergy versus content strategy." And I was like, "We'll work that in, but maybe that won't be the title, splatergy is really weird word." But it's true. But I think it's funny because a lot of what marketing is that splatergy not strategy, meaning it's just like you just throw a bunch of stuff out there.

Emily Kramer (00:49:17):
And if you're doing a bunch of work and it's like a lot of busy work and you want to look busy, but it's not impact focus. The best marketing teams are impact focus. They can tell you of all the things they're doing, what are the core things that are of driving that linear growth or just keeping the lights on. They can tell you what their big bets are. What are the things that we are doing right now that we believe can cause step change, top of the funnel growth? Or step change growth on signups or whatever it might be? What are those things? What are the big bets that you're taking? And then what are the foundational pieces of marketing that aren't done yet that might be taking up time?

Emily Kramer (00:49:54):
We would love to be able to move faster here, but we're like, we don't have a good lead scoring system or we're working on this. We need to redo our website and here's why we need to get it into Webflow and then we'll be able to move faster. So they should be able to break down. Here are the core things we have to do. We're measuring that the core work is working by these TBIs and it's sort of a full funnel view. And we are working on these big bets and here's the foundational things that are broken. So if you ask a marketing lead and you're like, What are their big bets? And they're like, I don't know.

Emily Kramer (00:50:26):
You can't grow at the rate of venture back startups, you grow by just continuing to do incremental things. That's the same as product I would imagine as well. So they need to have this sort of framework going on. And the other thing that I think is a sign that you're not being impact focused or you're not being effective as a marketing team is this is my favorite thing to pick on And I see it all the time. And I understand why it happens, but don't do it. If our goal is to write 10 blog posts this month. And I'm like, no, that's not a goal, that's maybe a tactic. But the goal should be traffic and the conversion rate from that traffic or the signups that come from that.

Emily Kramer (00:51:02):
So you shouldn't have activity goals, you should have impact goals. And so the best marketing teams are focused on these funnel metrics. They're not just focused on a certain number signups or qualified leads. They're focused on that number plus maintaining or improving the conversion rate that comes after it. So they're focused on signups with a conversion rate to activated user of the same or better than it is now. Because I can get a lot more people to sign up for a product, but they might be really shitty quality. So you need to have sort of that other threshold. So these are some of the things that I look at to say, is marketing team impact focused?

Emily Kramer (00:51:40):
And when I talk to companies or work with marketers and look at what are they doing and what are their projects, these are the things I usually point out. You need to be more impact focused and here's what you need to do. So that's the big thing that's like are they doing a bunch of busy work or are they doing a bunch of things that can actually lead to tangible growth and what metrics are they using to track that? The other thing is if they're not tracking to my point about not just looking at the raw numbers at each stage of the funnel, but looking at the conversion rates.

Emily Kramer (00:52:12):
If they're not looking at conversion anywhere at all, there's a huge problem. Because again, I can throw a bunch of people into a funnel stage but they don't convert to the next one, it might not be helping anything. So their focus on conversion not just at the stage of the funnel that they own, but throughout the entire funnel, I think also is a good indicator on if they're being successful as marketers or not.

Lenny (00:52:33):
Yeah, these are great. I feel like everything you're saying is music to every PM's ears. That great marketing people should be impact focused, have clear goals in KPIs. You also talked about how it's important to DRIs, like who is responsible for what, being really clear about that, communicating really clearly and often. And then there's this piece about just setting the foundations, like a strong foundation that helps make all these other things successful. This is great.

Lenny (00:52:57):
I imagine every PM would be like, This is exactly what I want from my marketing team. And your point here is, if your marketing team and lead is not doing these things well, maybe there's an issue and maybe it's not the right marketing person.

Emily Kramer (00:53:09):
Yeah. And look, if it's not the team lead, because sometimes you do have, especially at a larger company, you have a team lead that's either on the, you could have someone that's extremely sort of creative and on the brand side of things. But they need to have someone that's working with them that is really good at all of this stuff. It's almost like we need marketing PMs then those tend to be the product marketers or the lead. Because there's so many different projects going on and lots of different things happening. And it's hard to put it all together and say, what are we doing as a marketing team that's moving the needle.

Emily Kramer (00:53:40):
But I think the other thing about communicating often, it's also communicating at the right level. I find that marketers, even though they're often good at communicating with the audience, they're not good at communicating internally. And I think I've struggled here too as they move to leading larger teams and being on executive teams which is like, what level of information do you need to communicate? And you need to educate people about what marketing does. Because one, marketing often has a bad reputation and so you need to be like, here's what we're actually doing and moving.

Emily Kramer (00:54:06):
And two, there's a lot of jargon in marketing and you got to separate that out and communicate the right level of information at the right time. So I think that's hard too. And so that's why I like things like the DAXs framework and other things like that. And what exactly am I communicating about and at what level. It's hard to get right there too.

Lenny (00:54:25):
Amazing. One last question before we get to our very exciting lightning round.

Emily Kramer (00:54:30):
I can't wait.

Lenny (00:54:30):
You've been waiting all week. So you mentioned that you're a full-time investor basically at this point and the newsletter is a part of that. You've become a really active angel investor and it's really cool to have seen the way you've turned your experience in this really smart way of getting into great deals and supporting founders. And so I'm curious if you have any advice for folks that are thinking about becoming angel investors in the future, just how to leverage their expertise to become successful in investing.

Emily Kramer (00:55:03):
I think there's a big need for investors that have functional expertise. In traditional VCs. They don't necessarily, maybe they founded companies, maybe they've always been investors or sometimes VC and they really come from sales roles or PM roles. But for me and for marketing and maybe for some of the roles of other people are in, there's not a lot of investors or even advisors from that function and they need help there. And so I think more and more founders are seeing, instead of having advisors or even hiring someone at a function early, it's like, let me lean on angel investors for that.

Emily Kramer (00:55:37):
And so I make it very clear when I talk to founders, this is how I'm going to help. I'm going to help you build your marketing function. I'm definitely going to help you hire, or I'm going to help you shape the job description of the process. I'm probably going to refer you some candidates. I might even refer the candidate that you hire which has happened a bunch of times. And then I'm going to work with that person to make sure that they're setting the right strategy and doing the right things. And so being that clear on here's my exact value add is incredibly helpful.

Emily Kramer (00:56:04):
And I mean, we get into every deal that we want to. We being I have a business partner named Kathleen, that I do all this with and we can get into any deal. Which I think as an early angel investor, I'm like, why are people saying it's hard to get into a deal? I don't have this problem. And that's not me tapping myself on the shoulder. It's just showing there's huge shortage here. So your skillset might be really valuable to founders and even if you feel like, I don't understand how everything works at a company or things like that, your skillset could be really valuable and they might not see it.

Emily Kramer (00:56:32):
It's also when you have a unique skill set and a unique way that you help well articulated. We're going to help you build marketing, it's easy to understand. It makes me easier for other people to bring you into deals. Versus here's another generalist investor that's just going to help. So it's almost like you got to product market yourself. What's the product that you're offering? And then it's so easy, you know Lenny to bring me into deals where they might need some marketing help and there's tons of investors that do that which gets us to deal flow that we need.

Emily Kramer (00:57:00):
So I just think if you have a niche or you have an area where you're particularly skilled, you can really leverage that into being a sought after angle. Now, if that makes you a good investor, I'm not sure, there's lots of other things you need to get up to speed on to actually be a good investor. But from the standpoint of helping founders and getting into deals, that can be really helpful.

Lenny (00:57:19):
Awesome. And the other part is you actually have to deliver because then people share more deals with you. And as I said earlier, I've heard so often how helpfully you've been to founders and so that's an important element.

Emily Kramer (00:57:30):
Yeah, you definitely have to deliver. And again, I think that's where it's really helpful to say where you're going to deliver. So they're not necessarily expecting you to deliver on every little thing. They're expecting me to help them hire their marketer, hire contractors in marketing, fill in gaps until they have the marketing team that they need. And so they know when to come to you and then you respond. I think that's also like when people have full-time jobs, I think it's hard to be able to do that full-time jobs that aren't this, it's hard to be able to just tap in and do this kind of stuff.

Emily Kramer (00:58:01):
So it's like don't go overboard because your reputation really, really matters and that's how we've always seen it. We want to be the most helpful angel investors or now we have a small client, but the helpful sort of most helpful investors that you have in your cap table regardless, not just within marketing but within everything. And we do that because we can go really deep on an area and we're always responsible on those areas. And it's good to hear it's working because that's what we're trying to do is be really, really helpful.

Emily Kramer (00:58:27):
And the other thing too, the last thing I'll say on that is each founder probably thinks, maybe they don't, that it takes us a lot more time than it actually does to be helpful in that area. I had the same conversations over and over again about how to hire a marketer. I can do it in my sleep. So me having that conversation with you and dropping knowledge that you haven't heard, this is what I do all day. But it feels really new because they don't have a lot of people talking to them about marketing. We just have a bunch of candidates that we talk to and our newsletter generates candidates that we talk to.

Emily Kramer (00:58:57):
So anyone can go on our website and get on our list of candidates that we're referring. I talk to one or two candidates a week from that to just meet more marketers. So I have a list of marketers I can refer and say, it's really easy when clients ask me for referrals. So it starts to scale pretty well if you have that niche where you help.

Lenny (00:59:16):
Yeah, I was actually going to add that it may sound scary to feel like you commit to all these startups as an investor, you have to help founders all day. I can say I've invested over 150 companies at this point, which on the surface could feel overwhelming. Like holy shit, all these founders are probably asking you for advice all the time. But I find it's not that, most founders just leave me alone, I'm good.

Lenny (00:59:39):
Or maybe once a quarter, here's something I could really use help with. But it's not as much time as you think and when it is it's really powerful, but it's not an overwhelming amount of time commitment.

Emily Kramer (00:59:53):
The other thing there too is if you refer someone that a company hires, they're going to lobby you forever. You remember that because you sit there and you look at that, I mean, you're maybe not anymore looking at them in an office, but you see and are aware of them every day. And you remember, they came from this person. So one of the most valuable things you could do is refer candidates. And so that's where I think you can add a ton of leverage. You're just referring the right people. So if you have a network and a bunch of people that you know in a certain area like that scenario where you can really do a lot of good for a startup.

Lenny (01:00:25):
Absolutely. Speaking of doing good, we've reached our exciting lightning round.

Emily Kramer (01:00:31):
Oh, great.

Lenny (01:00:32):
So I'm just going to ask you five questions real quick. Whatever comes to mind, let me know. First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to people?

Emily Kramer (01:00:41):
I like the classic marketing book, maybe because I think if they're not a classic and they're recency based, marketing changes so fast, like most things in startups and technology. It changes so fast that I like the things that have stood the test of time. And those are things like The Tipping Point and Crossing The Chasm. And I like Seth Godin's Purple Cow, which is just having something that makes you stand out. So those are the classic marketing books and I think every marketer or some of them should have read at some point. I think April Dunford's Obviously Awesome is sort of becoming one of those books that every marketer should have read on positioning.

Emily Kramer (01:01:16):
It's really helpful even if you're not a product marketer doing positioning, I think it's really helpful. And then the book I read most recently is not related to marketing at all. I read is my partner's favorite book and she was always like, I don't think you're going to like this book, I don't think you'll like it, but it's her favorite book. And it's All The Light We Cannot See about World War II which is of a depressing topic giving all of the tumultuousness in the world. But I thought it was just a very beautifully written book.

Emily Kramer (01:01:42):
And when you read a lot of business writing a lot, it's kind of nice to step back and just read really beautiful pros on a really heavy topic that isn't just startup marketing. So it was kind of fun to go back and read sort of a older book that was really beautifully written. Next one, Lenny.

Lenny (01:01:58):
Next question, okay. What's a favorite podcast for you?

Emily Kramer (01:02:02):
Besides yours, obviously. No, I mean, you're doing a great job for someone who's just started off doing podcast. You go deep with people which I think is good, it's not just the service level stuff. Look like the podcast I listen to most is like every night when I go to sleep, I listen to The Daily, the New York Times Daily just gets me to know what's going on. I also like some true crime podcasts but I won't talk about that because maybe that's a little embarrassing and basic. And I think for just getting understanding founders and startups over the years, I found How I Built This to be really helpful.

Emily Kramer (01:02:33):
And I think the main thing I learned from How I Built This is that most startups are really happy. And so if you feel at the beginning if you feel like, we're are just a mess, we're doing everything wrong, that's kind of common. So it's helpful in that regard too. It's like, it's not just me. But I think there's really interesting founder story and hearing how things are built is always helpful. So those are some that I like.

Lenny (01:02:55):
Favorite recent movie or TV show?

Emily Kramer (01:02:57):
My favorite TV show from this year was Yellowjackets on Showtime, which is kind of Lord of the Flies, which had a bunch of women. Lord of the Flies meets lost. It's really good. So it has Christina Ricci in it, the person who was in Casper and now in [inaudible 01:03:14] if you were a girl that grew up in the late 80s and 90s, you will know who Christina Ricci is, or a guy, any gender. I really liked Yellowjackets. I think it's great.

Emily Kramer (01:03:24):
And it was the first show in a while that I've been watching it where I like for the first couple of episodes, I wasn't on my phone half the time. So that's like my measure for, is it good? And then the best movie I've seen recently was we watched CODA, which I think it won some Oscars or something.

Lenny (01:03:39):
I think it won best picture.

Emily Kramer (01:03:41):
Oh, okay. So it wasn't the Oscar. So I'm really original in my picks here. I'm like, I just watched the Oscar Best Picture, I thought it was great. No, but CODA was like, I think I cried, or at least I almost cried.

Lenny (01:03:54):
No, I actually cried. Yes.

Emily Kramer (01:03:55):
Yeah, it's about a family who can't hear and then their daughter can hear and they become really interested in music. And there's the story of a family and they're a family of fisherman in Massachusetts, which my brother is a clamor in Massachusetts that's his job. Not his only job, but one of his job that he clams. So he doesn't quite have that fisherman vibe, but somewhat relevant. Yeah, really, really good movie.

Lenny (01:04:25):
And that last scene, powerful. Too much, I'm going to start crying.

Emily Kramer (01:04:30):
It's a good one, it's a good family story. Lenny is crying right now. He's just in tears remembering the movie CODA. Lenny is going to spend the rest of the day weeping. You won't get a newsletter next week. It's just because he is rewatching CODA.

Lenny (01:04:42):
It's going to be an emotional newsletter. Speaking of that, what's a favorite interview question that you like to ask?

Emily Kramer (01:04:49):
Oh, there's so many interview questions that I like to ask. I mean, one of the basic interview questions in marketing that I like to ask is just the company that you're working on, what's the product? Why is it better? Who is it for? It's the most basic positioning question you can ask, but a lot of people can't answer it. So that's a good one. And also if you're writing positioning at your company or if you're on marketing your company and you can't tell me what the product is, why it's better, who it's for, go figure that out if that's what the home page of your website should cover. In fact, the hero of your website and so many don't.

Emily Kramer (01:05:23):
A fun question that I like to ask. It's a mix of getting to know you but also seeing how you communicate is describe something, and I didn't come up with this question, but I really like it. Describe something complicated that you know well that others don't and describe it as simply as you can. And it's just interesting to hear what people pick. Most people pick things related to cooking which is really strange. I ask that question every interview for a long time just as the final question because you learn something about people. And so many people pick cooking.

Emily Kramer (01:05:57):
And I'm like, that's a good choice because I find cooking really complicated and I have no idea how to do it. So describe these various aspects of cooking to me. But that's always a fun one. There's other questions that I always ask like walk me through a project you've done recently from start to finish and I'm listening for things can you tell me the goal? And can you tell the audience? But those are more boring, so I'll stop there.

Lenny (01:06:17):
Awesome.

Emily Kramer (01:06:18):
What's your favorite interview question Lenny?

Lenny (01:06:19):
Oh no, I'm asking you questions here.

Emily Kramer (01:06:22):
I know I wanted to flip the lightning round back on you. Have you ever done your own lightning round?

Lenny (01:06:27):
I haven't but I'll answer the question I met away. I'm finding the most popular answer to this question is that second one you just gave which is teach me something I don't know. That comes up a lot in these answers.

Emily Kramer (01:06:38):
Yeah. Teach me something I don't know. This is a variation on teach me something I don't know. Because it's really about how simply can you communicate it. Teach me something you don't know comes across as a little, I don't want to say pretentious, but it's like it's overwhelming.

Lenny (01:06:53):
Well, I'll add a little flavor to it as they often say, you have a minute to explain something I don't know, something interesting to you. And so it kind of forces you to be simple about it. But I like the framing.

Emily Kramer (01:07:05):
Yeah. It's a complicated framing. And then sometimes what I'll do, especially if they're going to be someone that's going to be writing is I'll be like, okay, make it simpler. And then I'll have them describe it to me again simpler. And I've probably done that in one interview, I've probably done it four times. Which that part isn't super fun but it depends on the person. If I think they can handle kind of joking around, make it simpler. And if I think the topic's interesting, of course, and I'll like want to hear about something so over and over again.

Lenny (01:07:32):
Awesome.

Emily Kramer (01:07:33):
Yeah, I mean it's good to have interview questions that maybe teach you something about how they're going to do at the job, but also learn something about the person. And in a way that's not just tell me about yourself.

Lenny (01:07:47):
Final question, who else in the industry do you most respect as a thought leader?

Emily Kramer (01:07:51):
The word thought leader here is getting me down but I'll answer the first part of your question. As marketers, we love to paint the phrase thought leader. Some of the other marketer that I think are doing interesting things beyond just marketing is Ashley Meyer is someone who is a marketer who also has a fund now. She was comms at Glossier as well as she used to be at Box and things like that. And is big on Twitter, but she's just someone else who is a marketer in return fund manager. So it's always nice to have other people like that to kind of compare notes with.

Emily Kramer (01:08:22):
I think that Arielle Jackson from First Round is an amazing support system to founders and marketers at startup. So if you're a first round company, she's a great resource and I think she's just a great resource in general. I also think Kevin Lee, the head of Marketing and Oyster, he's an LPN in our fund, he puts out a newsletter and has a full-time job growing a rapidly growing marketing team. So I have a lot of respect. He's coming to speak to the people in a course that I'm running next week. So he's top of mind. But those are some people that come to mind.

Emily Kramer (01:08:51):
But I mean, I have a lot of marketers that I admire. I'm lucky that in our fund we have over 50 marketers so I have a pretty big arsenal of people I can go to just from that as well. So I lean on the people there for a lot of different things.

Lenny (01:09:06):
And you're probably going to be raising another fund, and I know you try to raise from marketers and so is that true? Anything you want to add there?

Emily Kramer (01:09:13):
If you're a marketer, we have a fund and we allow for lower minimums for marketers. One of my goals is I don't think there are enough marketers who are investors or know how to get into investing. And I know how much founders need marketing help, so love to encourage more people to get involved in investing and can be the on-ramp for that through our fund. So if you're interested in that at all, or a marketer who's interested in angel investing, I'm always happy to have that conversation with you.

Lenny (01:09:39):
Emily, this was everything I was hoping it would be and more. I feel like we've helped a lot of founders understand the fog of marketing and I think we are probably going to help a lot of PMs and marketing people work together a lot more effectively.

Emily Kramer (01:09:55):
Hopefully. The fog of marketing, marketing is the San Francisco of functions in a company.

Lenny (01:10:00):
Karl the marketing fog.

Emily Kramer (01:10:02):
Karl the marketing fog.

Lenny (01:10:03):
Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, learn more? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Emily Kramer (01:10:08):
Yeah, I am on Twitter and LinkedIn just Emily Kramer, my name, pretty simple. You can find links to the courses that I run, to the newsletter, to our job board, to talking to me about angel investing as a marketer on our website mkt1.co. And that should set you off in the right direction. And we have lots of things going on to help marketers build out their teams and help founders build out their marketing teams. So if that's you and you're in a situation where you're mostly at a B2B company trying to build out marketing, get in touch with me through my website or through Twitter.

Lenny (01:10:44):
Amazing. Emily, thank you for being here.

Emily Kramer (01:10:46):
Thanks for having me. This was really fun and I'm looking forward to also having that guest newsletter come out with you and just getting Lenny Lennyaised. It's a weird phrase, I won't use that again.

Lenny (01:10:58):
Let's move on.

Emily Kramer (01:10:59):
We're going to move on. All right. Thanks Lenny.

Lenny (01:11:01):
Okay, thanks Emily. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lenny'spodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Georgiana Laudi (00:00:00):
The problem with funnels and pirate metrics and the favorites that I love to pick on are MQLs and SQLs is that nobody knows what those mean. It puts every customer in the same sort of buckets. It assumes that all customers and all products are the same. It puts businesses, or they, I should say, puts businesses at the center of the business versus putting customers at the center. Right? It's about the values of the business, not the value to the customer that's being measured. Also, it just kind of feels gross for people, this idea of pushing people through a funnel. And then probably a particularly relevant for SaaS companies is that recurring revenue businesses, you cannot think about marketing and growth and the business overall as ending an acquisition, otherwise you're not in business anymore. And the vast, vast majority of these models don't take post-acquisition, retention, expansion, all of that into account. So yeah, in a nutshell, funnels are bad.

Lenny (00:01:04):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast. I'm Lenny, and my goal here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard-won experiences building and scaling today's most successful companies. Today, my guest is Georgiana Laudi. Georgiana, aka Gia, runs a consultancy called Forget The Funnel, where she works hands on with SaaS companies to help them unlock and accelerate growth.

Lenny (00:01:30):
As you'll hear, she often finds huge unlocks and opportunities often doubling or tripling conversion in various points in their product flows. In our conversation, she shares the exact process that she goes through to help companies figure out where their biggest growth opportunities lie, and also how to execute on them. We chat about how to identify your most important customers, how to very practically map their journey through your flows and set goals, and then execute on your ideas. There's a lot of wisdom and some fun stories packed into this episode. So with that, I bring you Gia.

Lenny (00:02:05):
I'm excited to chat with my friend John Cutler from podcast sponsor Amplitude. Hey, John.

John Cutler (00:02:10):
Hey, Lenny. Excited to be here.

Lenny (00:02:11):
John, give us a behind the scenes at Amplitude. When most people think of Amplitude, they think of product analytics, but now you're getting into experimentation and even just launch a CDP. What's the thought process there?

John Cutler (00:02:23):
What we've always thought of Amplitude is being about supporting the full product loop, think collect data, inform bets, ship experiments, and learn. That's the heart of growth to us. So the big aha was seen how many customers were using Amplitude to analyze experiments, use segments for outreach, and send data to other destinations. Experimenting CDP came out of listening to and observing our customers.

Lenny (00:02:44):
Supporting growth and learning has always been Amplitude's core focus, right?

John Cutler (00:02:48):
Yeah. So Amplitude tries to meet customers where they are. We just launched Starter Templates and have a great scholarship program for startups. There's never been a more important time for growth.

Lenny (00:02:57):
Absolutely agree. Thanks for joining us, John. Head to amplitude.com to get started.

Lenny (00:03:03):
This episode is brought to you by Athletic Greens. I've been hearing about AG1 on basically every podcast that I listened to, like Tim Ferriss and Lex Fridman. So I finally gave it a shot earlier this year, and it has quickly become a core part of my morning routine, especially on days that I need to go deep on writing or record a podcast like this. Here's three things that I love about AG1: One, with a small scoop that dissolves in water, you are absorbing 75 vitamins, minerals, probiotics, and adaptogens. I kind of like to think of it as a safety net for my nutrition in case I've missed something in my diet. Two, they treat AG1 like a software product. Apparently, they're on their 52nd iteration and they're constantly evolving it based on the latest science, research studies, and internal testing that they do. And three, it's just one easy thing that I can do every single day to take care of myself.

Lenny (00:03:58):
Right now it's time to reclaim your health and arm your immune system with convenient daily nutrition. It's just one scoop and a cup of water every day, and that's it. There's no need for a million different pills and supplements to look out for your health. To make it easy, Athletic Greens is going to give you a free one year supply of immune supporting vitamin D and five free travel packs with your first purchase. All you have to do is visit athleticgreens.com/lenny. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/lenny. Take ownership over your health and pick up the ultimate daily nutritional insurance.

Lenny (00:04:33):
Gia, welcome to the podcast.

Georgiana Laudi (00:04:36):
Thanks so much for having me, Lenny.

Lenny (00:04:38):
It's my pleasure. So we actually met over a decade ago, I think, maybe just around a decade in Montreal. I was working on my startup. You were helping companies with their websites, optimize their websites. Then you went on to lead marketing at Unbounce and a bunch of other great stuff. So just to set a little bit of foundation for listeners, can you talk about what you've done in your career in 55 seconds? That's your time box.

Georgiana Laudi (00:05:03):
55 seconds. Okay. So marketing for probably about 20 or so years, which sounds completely ridiculous when I say it, but I started working for my father's retail business in the early 2000s, probably 2000 actually. Worked there for a number of years, and then eventually left and started freelancing, worked at an agency. Terrible. And then actually probably around the time I met you, I had this little catalyst moment where I joined Twitter in late 2008, and I discovered the tech scene and startups. And that was, again, probably around the time that you and I met, maybe 2010 ish. And that was-

Lenny (00:05:43):
2011.

Georgiana Laudi (00:05:43):
And then I... What's that?

Lenny (00:05:45):
2011.

Georgiana Laudi (00:05:46):
2011. See, there you go.

Lenny (00:05:47):
Mm-hmm.

Georgiana Laudi (00:05:48):
So it was right around that time, and then late 2011, I decided supporting five, six companies at a time in their marketing and stuff like that. I was starting to get burnout, I was doing a lot, and I was like, "What would it feel like to sink my teeth into one brand?" So I decided to go in-house and I moved out west, and joined the team at Unbounce. I was there for five years. And then in late 2016, early 2017, I decided it was time to move on, and so I decided to go back independent and just started working with companies and supporting them through marketing and growth and product marketing. And that's what I've been doing ever since.

Georgiana Laudi (00:06:27):
But in mid 2017, I actually paired up with Claire Suellentrop who led marketing at Calendly, and her and I have been working together since about mid 2017. That's when we launched Forget The Funnel, and we started pairing up on working with companies and sort of married her customer research background in my strategy, marketing background. And we developed this framework that we now use when we work with predominantly B2B SaaS companies, is who we work with right now.

Lenny (00:06:57):
Awesome. So we're going to spend a lot of time on what you've learned working with companies through Forget The Funnel. Why did you call it Forget The funnel?

Georgiana Laudi (00:07:04):
Because funnels are gross. I mean, it's a really antiquated idea. It's not just funnels that we sort of take issue with, it's buyers' journeys or even... I remember actually at Startup Fest 2012, I want to say, Dave McClure was talking about pirate metrics and I was like, "Huzzah, marketing has a role post acquisition. Everybody understands now." It was a real moment for me. But the problem with funnels and pirate metrics and the favorites that I love to pick on are MQLs and SQLs is that nobody knows what those mean. It puts every customer in the same sort of buckets. It assumes that all customers and all products are the same. It puts businesses, or they, I should say, puts businesses at the center of the business versus putting customers at the center. It's about the values of the business, not the value to the customer that's being measured.

Georgiana Laudi (00:08:01):
Also, it just kind of feels gross for people, this idea of pushing people through a funnel. And then probably a particularly relevant for SaaS companies is that recurring revenue businesses, you cannot think about marketing and growth and the business overall as ending at acquisition. Otherwise, you're not in business anymore. The vast, vast majority of these models don't take post-acquisition retention, expansion, all of that into account. They also leave the problem stage out. So the world that customers are living in prior to discovering you, which is a really critical, that context is unbelievably valuable, especially for marketing. So to delete that out of the equation is a big problem. So yeah, in a nutshell, funnels are bad.

Lenny (00:08:52):
Okay. So I'm excited to dig into a lot of stuff you've learned, but I have a couple other things I just wanted to talk about to set the foundation.

Georgiana Laudi (00:08:58):
Mm-hmm.

Lenny (00:08:58):
One is, can you talk about some of the impact that you've seen working with companies through the process that you've come up with? What kind of impact have you seen? What kind of numbers have you seen?

Georgiana Laudi (00:09:07):
I would say, far in a way the biggest, most immediate impact of the type of work that we do is realigning with that ideal customer. Generally, the lowest hanging fruit outcome is realigning around better positioning and messaging. And identifying more resonant positioning and messaging that speaks to that context that I was talking about before, before people discover that you even exist, have that moment where they're like, "Oh my god, this has to change. This sucks," ties that in, ties in what they care about and what is valuable about your product and then also that desired outcome. I mean, for those in the know, jobs to be done is a big sort of influence here, but if you can identify that type of information about your customers and get to know them at that level, then you are in a way better position to be able to not only position your product but also use much more powerful messaging.

Georgiana Laudi (00:10:06):
So typically, what we do is, we'll identify those gaps of almost, I mean I shouldn't even say nine times out of 10, 99 times out of a hundred, a company's website is not doing as much as it could do. It's not being as effective from a messaging and positioning standpoint as it could. So websites tend to get update. We will do a lot of overhauls on messaging on a website and improve performance there. One of my favorite examples of that is a social media tool that we worked with where we did really very simple research for them, honestly, identified two different jobs to be done, zeroed in on one of them, and then updated the messaging on the website.

Georgiana Laudi (00:10:46):
We shortened the trial from 30 days to seven. The conversion on the website went up with this new messaging by 89%. But the thing that I love the most about that particular story is that we didn't even touch anything after the signup experience. We hadn't even gotten there and the trial-to-paid conversion rate increased 40%, and we didn't touch it. It was just because a more qualified, better fit customer was coming through the door. So there was more of them and there were better qualified. So that's a really specific example that is very typical of this type of work.

Georgiana Laudi (00:11:19):
There's other examples, though, of product adoption and using that messaging and positioning past the website, even in the product onboarding itself, email and app, whatever, and just making sure that they're getting to and have the calms to get to the parts of the product that they care about the most, which can increase trial-to-paid or product activation. With Autobooks, the product usage of the North Star product usage jumped by 300% or something within quite a short period of time after rolling out email onboarding to support that product experience. I know SparkToro as well, which I think we might end up talking about again when we talk about the process, they doubled their trial-to-paid conversion rate when we worked with them because of post acquisition optimization to their messaging.

Lenny (00:12:01):
I imagine people are listening to this and they're like, "This is what I'm waiting for, some kind of huge win, some huge conversion, a success." I'm curious, how often do you find companies have something like this, like a latent opportunity to double, triple conversion? Everyone's hoping a conversion like this.

Georgiana Laudi (00:12:18):
Oh, boy.

Lenny (00:12:19):
Yeah. What's the general hit rate?

Georgiana Laudi (00:12:22):
So many. I mean I would say, pretty well every company we've ever worked with has... Not pretty well. Every company we've ever worked with has learned something new about their customers that they can apply at some juncture of their customer's experience, whether or not it is in campaigns to reach the right people out in the world, whether or not it's doing a better job with their messaging and positioning on their website, or their go-to market or acquisition strategy on their website using a sandbox account or getting a faux freemium account to let people kick the tires of their product prior to getting on a sales call. That's something that could potentially happen.

Georgiana Laudi (00:13:06):
The post-acquisition experience I'm talking about, it is so often an afterthought somehow where that additional of layer... I think part of the reason why it's an afterthought is because product onboarding in particular, and you've probably heard this too, it tends to be kind of like no man's land. Who owns that? Is it marketing? If it's freemium, in my opinion it should be marketing because freemium is a marketing tool, but not everybody subscribes to that. Not every company would necessarily agree that that's the case. A lot of companies might say, "No, it's product." So we end up seeing a messy middle there because there's no natural handoff. So pretty well, every company that we've worked with has had an opportunity to improve, especially product onboarding and product activation.

Lenny (00:13:53):
Awesome. So basically everybody will benefit from what we're about to talk about.

Georgiana Laudi (00:13:56):
A hundred percent.

Lenny (00:13:56):
Amazing. Great.

Georgiana Laudi (00:13:56):
Yes.

Lenny (00:14:00):
All right. We've got wrap detention as a way to maybe transition into your process. So you're visiting a site once, and I invited you to the Airbnb office we were having a happy hour, and I gave you a tour. You told me later that something you saw while you're walking around the office transformed the way you think about growth and inform the way you think about approaching this problem. Can you talk about that?

Georgiana Laudi (00:14:24):
Yes. This is one of my favorite... It was 2013, so you and I might have met in 2011, and then a couple years later I was in town for a conference and we toured the office, HQ and everything. Of course, it was all stars in my eyes because what a beautiful office too. So it was quite like, I would've remembered it regardless. But we went downstairs, very different from the very polished upstairs. We went downstairs to where your working area was, where the product team was, and there were sheets of paper taped to the wall, a bunch in a row. And it would've been easy to miss because it's kind of chaotic down there, but it was the customer journey of an Airbnb customer through two posts.

Georgiana Laudi (00:15:12):
What struck me, I was like, "Oh that's interesting. I'm in the middle of building one out for us." Leading marketing at Unbounce at the time. And I was interestingly with the customer success, he was also with me. So Ryan Engley was there with me, and it was the perfect sort of that him and I saw it together. It was a customer journey that was focused on the customer. So versus that pirate metrics problem or that the typical buyer's journey problem that I was talking about earlier, it was the complete reverse of that. It was illustrated. The emotional journey was part of it. The role that Airbnb played as a direct touchpoint and also indirect, what was going on in the person's life that had nothing to do outside of Airbnb, which I thought was really interesting.

Georgiana Laudi (00:16:01):
It was like, the beautiful little milestones really encapsulated in a sort of snapshot way, such that anybody walking by it or anybody being reminded that it existed could understand in a glance what the goal was at each of those milestones. I was like, "Well, shit, this is completely through the lens of the customer versus the business and the grossness of the funnel." It's just so far removed from that experience that I was like, "Ryan, look at this. We need this." He was like, "Oh yeah, this is good." I took a picture. Can't find it for the life of me.

Georgiana Laudi (00:16:39):
But we returned back to the office the following week, and co-founder and head of product, head of CS, so Ryan, Carter Gilchrist, who's head of product and co-founder, Ryan, and I, head of marketing, the three of us locked ourselves in the room for two days and made our own. It was a circle. I mean looking back, it's hysterical, but it was sort of democratized to the rest of the team in a way because it had that buy-in. Everybody was like, "Oh yeah. Okay, this makes sense and I understand." It made everybody feel a lot better about what they were doing because it was about value, delivering value at each of the points.

Georgiana Laudi (00:17:13):
So that grossness sort of goes away and we're like, "Oh cool." I don't want to be too kumbaya about it, but it was a bit of a moment. And also, it made communicating with especially the product team and the engineering team a lot easier for me. So we were using a shared language. The rest of the company who aren't necessarily customer facing really understood, I think, at a different level what we were all doing together in KPIs, yada yada yada. So it was amazing. Honestly, I mean I can't credit only that obviously to our growth, but it was a pretty impressive couple years that followed that. I think the alignment that that brought us was huge. Yeah. Anyway, that's the story. Sorry, that wasn't super short, but it was big.

Lenny (00:18:02):
That's great.

Georgiana Laudi (00:18:03):
It was a big thing. Yeah.

Lenny (00:18:05):
We're going to link pictures of this on the show notes. Internally, it was called Project Snow White because it was inspired by-

Georgiana Laudi (00:18:13):
Oh yeah, that's right.

Lenny (00:18:13):
Yeah. It was inspired by Brian reading the biography of Walt Disney, and they needed to create the storyboard basically to create Snow White because it was so complicated to make that movie. It might have been the first animated film with storyboards.

Georgiana Laudi (00:18:24):
Okay.

Lenny (00:18:25):
So it was basically a storyboard of a trip on Airbnb of a host and a guest.

Georgiana Laudi (00:18:30):
That's right.

Lenny (00:18:30):
And in detail, I forget if I told you this, but Airbnb hired a full-time storyboard artist from Pixar to draw these key frames.

Georgiana Laudi (00:18:38):
I think I did know that. I was very grateful to have seen it. I didn't realize at the time, but it changed the way, like you said at the beginning, it changed the way that I thought about marketing because it really made it obvious to not only me, of course, and to everybody, that customer experience layer, that marketers are so good at, has such an incredibly important role in driving revenue. Not just in building awareness, but in playing a major role in helping customers get value and catching them when they fall off and all that kind of stuff. So it changed a lot for us.

Lenny (00:19:19):
And it informed the way that you approach your consultancy with Forget The funnel. So as a transition to talk about that, the way I'm thinking we approach this is, imagine a customer, what is the process you go through? What are the steps? How do you go about helping a company figure out where they should invest, what they're doing right and wrong? I should also mention you're writing a book about this that's going to explain this whole process, that's coming out later in the year.

Georgiana Laudi (00:19:40):
Right. Yeah.

Lenny (00:19:41):
So we'll talk about that at the end as well. I'll turn over to you.

Georgiana Laudi (00:19:46):
Cool. I mean if I go down a rabbit hole and you want to pull me out and have me unpack something, let me know. Well, the process is pretty straightforward. At the highest level, the idea is, understand your best customers, map their experience, like we were just talking about, map their experience through the lens of delivering value to them, make it measurable, and then evaluate what you're doing today that is out of alignment with that. Pretty straightforward. I mean that doesn't sound too hard of a job, of course. But research is an really important part of that. So the story that I was going to use to illustrate this is, there's a company that we work with from time to time. We worked with them at least twice, arguably three times.

Georgiana Laudi (00:20:34):
So Rand Fishkin who was the founder of Moz, he's got a new product. It's an audience research tool called SparkToro. And when they first launched, actually even pre-launched, Rand and Casey came to Claire and I to help with their positioning and messaging as they were going forward to launch. I mean Rand and Casey, they're both very, very thoughtful and they take their time with stuff. So they were just looking for that extra layer of like, "Is this good enough to launch kind of thing?" So we help them with their positioning and messaging. And off they went.

Georgiana Laudi (00:21:08):
About a year later, they came back because though they were doing a decent job generating traffic and interest in SparkToro, I mean Rand is no small fish so he's got a good audience built in, which is fantastic, but those that were getting to the website... Those that were signing up for the product, those weren't issues. But the people that were signing up for their free product weren't converting to paid in the way that they believed they could. So we decided to work with them and basically go to the source and find out, from SparkToro's best customers, what can we learn from them that we can then reflect back in the product experience and the customer experience for them?

Georgiana Laudi (00:21:54):
So I mentioned it before, but we are heavy believers in the jobs-to-be-done theory, which is basically this idea that people don't buy your product, they buy the better version of themselves, yada yada. I don't need to explain any of that. But we use that to guide our research. And with SparkToro, we were in a position, and the purists will hate me saying this, but we were in a position to be able to run surveys. So yes, interviews are ideal always, but we did think that we could learn a ton from surveys to then, if needed, double down with interviews. We didn't end up actually needing to run the interviews because the surface that we ran were pretty decisive and clear in terms of what we learned. So what we did was, we identified SparkToro's best customers. Now, what I mean by best customers is those that get a ton of value from your product as of exist today, pay obviously. They're happy. They're low maintenance. And very importantly, they signed up for your product recently enough that they remember what life was like before.

Georgiana Laudi (00:22:57):
So generally, we say that's in the three to six-month range. Because if you go to somebody that's been your customer for two years, they're just going to fill answers with what they think might have been going on in their life. But if you ask customers who remember what life was like before, you're going to get a lot more interesting responses, a lot more accurate depiction of what was going on. So that's the criteria we went forward. Surveyed their customers. We're trying to uncover from them what was going on in their life when they were seeking out a solution, what happened, what was that trigger moment when they did start seeking a solution, what did they go to, who did they talk with, what were their influences? Which PS, that's what SparkToro does, it helps you identify those.

Georgiana Laudi (00:23:42):
But also, what were they looking for in a solution? What were the must-haves for them versus what were some of the anxieties that they had, some deal breakers, things like that? So basically unpacking what is it that was critical for them in their solution. And then of course, what is it they're able to do now that they weren't able to do before. So that desired outcome. So out of that, we identified a couple of different options, a couple of different jobs, customer jobs, and we have to prioritize one, of course, because if you start right off the bat with like, "Okay, we're going to solve for all of these different customers jobs," then you end up not being as resonant. You can't be as effective. So we focused in on one.

Georgiana Laudi (00:24:23):
And the way that you make a decision on which one you focus on is similar to best customers. So high willingness to pay. There's no question whether or not they would pay for a product like yours. The handholding that they would need would be minor or less so. And I say that understanding full well the difference between product-led and sales-led. I'm not saying that sales-led is not good, but sometimes there's a decision to be made. If you're not set up today to support a sales-led or high touch, then you may want to opt for the more product-led approach. And the reverse is also true if you've got a robust sales team, well then, you might actually be better off leveraging sales more in that scenario and might want to attend towards that. But there's that criteria that you would think through.

Georgiana Laudi (00:25:10):
So willingness to pay, it's really obvious. Maybe the most important one is that they have an urgent problem. So the whole pain killer versus vitamin thing, you always want to be selling a pain killer. So who has an urgent problem that needs solving, not something that they might have a problem with six months down the line? Who has a high retention or even expansion potential is also really advantageous for very obvious reasons. So customers who would have a long-term need for this type of product and even potentially have that need expand or change over time and evolve in ways that you envision the product can help them.

Georgiana Laudi (00:25:47):
And then there's other criteria too. So sometimes you might want to prioritize one customer job over another, if those customers congregate in a way that make them really easy to market to. That's an advantage. Or another advantage, and this was the case for SparkToro, is you have an unfair advantage with this market in some way. So there were two different customer jobs that were coming out of SparkToro. One was more focused on service providers and marketing and the other one was more focused on data. And those data purists and those that really wanted verifiable data, well, SparkToro has an advantage on the marketer side more so than on the data analyst side. So that was another thing too. So with that, we made the call to focus on one of those customer jobs.

Lenny (00:26:35):
Can I ask a question here?

Georgiana Laudi (00:26:37):
Yeah, go.

Lenny (00:26:37):
So there's two parts of this. There's figuring out who you're going to go after and then what problem you're solving for them. Which do you think is more important at this point? Because step one in this process, just to zoom out a little bit, is figure out your customer and what their problems are so that you can actually solve them well. Do you start with here's who we're going to go after and then here's the biggest problem? How do you think about that?

Georgiana Laudi (00:27:01):
They're sort of one in the same. So because we learned from SparkToro's ideal customers, we already know that they're a fit for the product. They're happy, happily paying, prime them out of their golden hands customers. They're the customers that we want more of. So we've already validated that there's a demand from that customer base. Now, what I'm describing about choosing between two different customer jobs is really just, of those ideal customers, which customer job do you want to lean into? It's not that you wouldn't necessarily still be able to solve for that other customer job, it's just not the one that you would lead with. And I always cautious around this too because sometimes with founders, what'll happen is, there's a level set that just because we were prioritizing one customer job in the short term, doesn't mean you can't serve that other customer job down the line.

Georgiana Laudi (00:27:57):
A classic example of that is products that serve both brands and agencies for example. So the customer job for brands will be slightly different than agencies. And if you've got an advantage with one, you would just start with one and then you would go back after it. That's a bit of a level up after the fact. It's not part of the core processes, it's what you would do after. But it doesn't mean you can't solve for the other customer jobs, it just means put one foot in front of the other, do a really good job of one thing first, and then we'll add that on later. I don't know if that a hundred percent answered your question though.

Lenny (00:28:32):
Yeah. Yeah.

Georgiana Laudi (00:28:33):
Okay.

Lenny (00:28:34):
The reason that you start here is... Basically what you're trying to do is help SparkToro, in this example, grow faster.

Georgiana Laudi (00:28:40):
I mean we're trying to help them figure out why they're free-to-paid conversion rate was lower than what they wanted. Right? That was the challenge they came to us with. Our traffic numbers are good. Even our signups on our website, our positioning and messaging on our website is clearly doing a good job. But once people get into the product, there's not enough of them getting to value quickly enough. I mean they still had healthy customer base, but they knew that that number could be increased. So we knew what we were solving for.

Lenny (00:29:11):
Got it. Okay. That helps.

Georgiana Laudi (00:29:13):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:29:14):
So step one here is figure out who do you want to focus on, not just... Because a lot of people would go at this problem like, "Okay, conversion is whatever, 10%, how do we increase? Let's look at this data. Let's look at it. They're bouncing. Let's look at why people are confused." And your approach is, "No, let's focus on the people we really want to get into this product and focus on making them convert, and not focus as much on the general case of conversion."

Georgiana Laudi (00:29:39):
Right. We would get to that though. That's a really important part of the process, but it comes after figuring out who you're even solving for. But it's definitely important to look at those numbers. I mean, I'm not saying don't look at the data. Obviously you have to. They wouldn't have identified a problem had they not been looking at the data. So the challenge that happened so, so often, and I mean this happens with a lot of teams, particularly marketers fall victim to this tactical way of approaching things and piecemealing things, piecemealing campaigns or programs to prove that we're doing something and we're driving up numbers, and they don't take big enough sort of swings. So this is like, zoom out for a second, figure out who is it that you even want coming through the front door. I mean, the social media platform tool that I mentioned, the trial-to-pay conversion rate bumped up 40% because a higher qualified person comes through the front door. So it matters.

Georgiana Laudi (00:30:40):
So if you can zoom out and keep in your mind's eye that ideal customer job, that thing that you're solving for. We're not at personas. We don't care about personas at all. They're important when you start talking about advertising and targeting and that demographic data that you have to know when you're doing advertising and things like that. That is not what I'm describing here at all. I find that jobs be done too helps tie and bond marketing and product and customer success together a lot more because all three of those teams, or arguably four with sales, should all be focused on this theme customer that's not revolutionary. So this is just a sort of helpful way to do that.

Georgiana Laudi (00:31:24):
Product teams know and subscribe for the most part to the jobs-to-be-done theory. So marketers should follow suit, and there's a lot to be gained anyway on the marketing side. So anyway, the short of it basically is that because we knew we were focused on increasing that free-to-pay conversion rate, the next step after the job is the mapping. So it's identifying, okay, for this ideal customer, what are those key milestones in their relationship with our product? What are those big of leaps of faith is how I describe it. I mean I don't need to explain. The Airbnb customer journey tells that story. Where's a value moment in this relationship? Where are they reaching value?

Lenny (00:32:06):
Make some examples of that for folks that are trying to do this for themselves potentially. And then also, how many of these moments would you suggest people have?

Georgiana Laudi (00:32:13):
Yeah. So it completely depends on the product and the customer for that matter. I shouldn't leave that part over it. Obviously that's important. In general though, what we would do is, we'd break it down into a struggle phase and evaluation phase and a growth phase. Struggle phase is, they're experiencing the problem, life sucks, they're using the old way, something's got to happen, they've got to solve this thing. In general, the struggle phase would break down between out in the world experiencing the problem for the first time. So we call that a problem. And generally there would be another one called interest, where it's like, "Okay, now they're starting to shop around. They're getting into solution seeking mode." They might be on your website. They might be on your competitor's websites. They're reading product reviews, things like that. That's interest stage.

Georgiana Laudi (00:33:00):
And then there's the evaluation phase, which generally breaks down, I will say two or three milestones within the evaluation phase. I say two or three because if you have a more complex product, more complex customer is the more likely scenario. There may be more leaps of faith or more milestones, heavier lift for you to take. So we have worked with companies where the evaluation phase has been three or four milestones, I would always default to as few as possible. So if I'm cutting it down to lowest common denominator, I would say a first value would be the first milestone within evaluation. So you want to get them to that product activation really, really quickly. And then value realization is the milestone where you're solving that customer job. So they reach a point with your product where they're like, "Hell yes, this is it." And for the first time, they reach this critical threshold of product engagement. Now, what that product engagement is with your unique product for that specific customer is up for debate, but there still needs to be that moment.

Georgiana Laudi (00:34:08):
And then there's the growth phase, which is about the continued value. So getting to frequency of usage and a healthy building of that habit, getting into a cadence that makes sense. What type of feature usage and end product usage should you want to see there and then on what frequency becomes really important. And then there's another milestone generally after that where you're like, "Okay cool, they're in. They're pro. Now, what else do they need?" What else do they need from a product? And also, how else can we amplify them or work with them to either start teaching our tool to other people? I mean there's all kinds of things that can happen about growth. That's where the promise that exponential growth assess sort of comes into play.

Lenny (00:34:54):
And as people listen to this, just to maybe help if it's not super obvious, what people shouldn't imagine is like a little key frame, a storyboard frame of like, "Here's something your customer is doing." Right?

Georgiana Laudi (00:35:04):
Yeah. We often talk about it and describe it as the story of how I met and fell in love with your product. It's like this documentary of being out in the world, finding it, realizing that like, "Hell yeah, this might actually solve a problem for us. This might be it." Getting that enough value to convince them to keep going to full value realization, to continue value-to-value growth.

Lenny (00:35:28):
This episode is brought to you by Maven. I've been an investor, an advisor, and a customer of Maven from day one. I even taught my product management course through Maven. Maven is a cohort-based learning platform where you learn alongside peers with a direct connection to your instructor. Maven got a ton of courses for product managers, founders, and executives to help them level up in all kinds of ways. Over 10,000 people from Airbnb to Coinbase to Google to Tesla have taken courses from real experts and operators that have spent decades honing their craft.

Lenny (00:36:01):
As part of their fall season, which Maven just launched, there are over 100 new courses starting in the next few weeks. Many of the people I've had on this podcast are teaching courses like Jackie Bavaro on product strategy, Arielle Jackson on startup branding, Emily Kramer on B2B marketing, plus Annie Duke on decision making, Nir Eyal on behavioral design, and how to break into product management with Marily Nika. Check out all of my favorite courses and learn more at maven.com/lenny.

Georgiana Laudi (00:36:31):
Now, again, I'm saying that as if it applies to all customers and products, and that's not actually the case. Sometimes it's more complicated than that, but in general, that is what we have found. So that's what we did for SparkToro customers based on the research that we did. The research that we do, we basically take all the responses, we identify the critical patterns, and that's how we identify the customer job. From those critical patterns, if we segment down just that customer job, we can look at responses and say, "Okay, here's what they're likely doing when they're out in the world experiencing this problem. This is how they described the pain of their current solution. And then here's what they say about how their search for a solution started. Here's what they told us about how they started to do that research or find a solution."

Georgiana Laudi (00:37:17):
And then there's questions that are asked in the research like, "What was the moment that convinced you that our product was going to solve this problem for you?" And the answers to that question are going to tell you what your first value should look like, which of that first product activation experience, whatever language you like to use, what should that look like for them? What parts of the product do you need to push right up to the front of that experience so they can get to it really, really quickly after they sign up?

Georgiana Laudi (00:37:40):
And then value realization obviously would be close to, if not, the desired outcome of that customer job where you're solving that customer job. And then you've got all kinds of... Generally, what happens when I'm going through this process with teams is, all kinds of ideas start to come up about what more they could be doing, even post solving that customer job, especially the product team gets really exciting because they've got all kinds of ideas about where the product can go. So that really helps tie everybody together too.

Georgiana Laudi (00:38:10):
A critical part of that process obviously is identifying we have to measure success along the way. There should be a KPI for each of those stages in that customer journey. And for the most part, they won't be a big surprise on the struggle side of things. People out in the world experience the problem, how are we going to know we're doing a good job reaching them? We bring in new unique website visitors. In general, that would be the measure of success for the problem milestone. And then next piece of the puzzle is like, okay, once they discover that we exist, even if they are visiting, reading product reviews and visiting competitor sites or whatever, we'll know we've done a good job of convincing them that we can help solve their problem and deterring the people that we don't want.

Georgiana Laudi (00:38:53):
We know we've done a good job when the conversion rate on whatever our primary CTA is on our website, whether or not it's start a trial or request a demo, something like that. Generally, the struggle phase is very straightforward in terms of measurement. That's like marketers' bread and butter, that's where they live and breathe all day long. Where things start to change though generally when we're working with companies is helping them figure out how should they be measuring first value or product activation and how should they be measuring actual product engagement. Generally, what we do there is, we can associate basically what they told us brings them the most amount of value with the product attribute or parts of the product that deliver that value. We try to tie the KPI obviously to some sort of meaningful product usage of that key part of the product or product attribute.

Lenny (00:39:49):
Can you share some examples of that? Because that's a really important piece.

Georgiana Laudi (00:39:52):
Yeah. I'll use SparkToro as an example just because it's the one that we started with. So for SparkToro, I don't remember the exact customer job statement necessarily, but for them, what they said were, the parts of the product that gave them a ton of value was two specific features: lists. So being able to organize their findings in a way that made it not only easy for them to organize within their own files but also share because a lot of them were with clients or stakeholders that they want to be able to share with. So lists were a specific feature that honestly, it was in there, but they weren't front loading the product experience with that. I'm not going to say it was hidden, but it wasn't front and center enough. So that was one feature that we could associate with being able to organize the data, being able to continue to build on it and make it usable over time and also share.

Georgiana Laudi (00:40:55):
And then there was another feature as well, which was an exporting feature. Again, it's not that it was hidden, but it wasn't front and center enough. So we tied KPIs to them making use of those features, coupled with obviously the core feature, which is searchability. It was like pairing the search functionality with the list functionality, and then pairing the search functionality with the list functionality, with the export functionality. It's a bit abstract to me just saying the words. It's easier with a visual. But the story is basically, help them use the search functionality first. Right after that, make sure that they're using lists. And if they don't use lists, let's help them get back to using it so that they get to that important critical value moment. And then the same applies for the exporting features that we were talking about.

Lenny (00:41:43):
Got it. And to be clear, you basically said a metric for each of these moments.

Georgiana Laudi (00:41:48):
Yeah, milestones.

Lenny (00:41:50):
Milestones. Yeah.

Georgiana Laudi (00:41:50):
Or just whatever. I mean you have to. I mean it always surprises me when a team is like, "Oh yeah. Yeah, you're right, we don't do that." I'm like, "What? What do you mean?" So at a given milestone, unless they've reached that value moment, you can't keep them on the train to something else. If they haven't even discovered that really, to them, most valued part of their product, you would need to focus on getting them to that value. Otherwise, you can't just keep firing off emails and hoping they're going to jump back into the product as if they're going to care. So a lot of what we'd do is actually proactive customer experiences, whether or not in app or email or whatever tool, to help them get to that moment within the product.

Georgiana Laudi (00:42:32):
And if they don't get to that moment, which is measurable, again, that's why it's a KPI, then we can be reactive in helping them get back in. So identifying, "Okay," not that you would say this like, "it fell off the train," but just helping them nurture them back into, the product didn't really discover that feature if they missed it the first time around. So it's proactive and pushing them forward, but then also catching them if they fall. And the only way to catch them if they fall is if you're measuring something meaningful along the way.

Georgiana Laudi (00:43:02):
We have that storyboard that we were talking about. We also have a map where it's the experience to get them to a certain value moment, but then that win back experience to get them back in should they fall out for any reason. I mean, people get hungry and get distracted, and there's a ton of reasons why. I mean there's a lot of stats on the percentage. I think it's like 70% of people log into an app, log into a product once and never come back. It's wild. So the fact that so many companies don't have some sort of win back or re-engagement always blows my mind.

Lenny (00:43:41):
So just to recap and then we'll keep going with the process. Step one, understand what your customers are going through, figure out the most important customer and their biggest problem, then map out the journey that they go through, the struggle they go through before they discover your product, the steps they go through to evaluate, decide to use your product. And then once they use your product, then continuing to use your product and using it more and more. And then once you figured out these steps... And is a rough number like 10, 12 steps? What's a good number just to put-

Georgiana Laudi (00:44:13):
Oh no, I would hope it's more like six.

Lenny (00:44:16):
Six, okay.

Georgiana Laudi (00:44:17):
I'm always trying to bring it down lowest, only as long as it absolutely needs to be. I mean that goes for all pages, landing pages.

Lenny (00:44:25):
Okay, all right.

Georgiana Laudi (00:44:25):
Same thing for customer journey mask.

Lenny (00:44:27):
Okay. Airbnb had 12, I think. So you're involved in-

Georgiana Laudi (00:44:29):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:44:29):
I liked that. Okay. And then you've come up with a metric to tell you if that step is performing well.

Georgiana Laudi (00:44:36):
If they'd gotten there, did they get to that value?

Lenny (00:44:37):
If they've gotten there. Cool. One last question before we move on to the next step. Can you give two maybe examples of an actual movement, say in SparkToro's case, and then the metric that they use to measure, if they've gotten to that point?

Georgiana Laudi (00:44:52):
Yes. So the measure for success at that tip somebody over into evaluation is performing their first search. So when you're on their website, you perform a search, it's not signing up for a trial or signing up for free, although it does tip you into signing up for free when you perform your first search. So signing up for getting your first search and seeing your first search results is that first measure. And then following that for first value, it is using search again. I mean this is very product specific like I said, but generally, a first search is a kind of an experiment where you're sort of trying the tool on for the first time. Generally, searches start to get better when you do your second and third. So we try to encourage at least five plus.

Georgiana Laudi (00:45:38):
So that first value KPI, I think it was five plus searches, plus at least one list. So it's the combination of those two things that have to happen before somebody's going to really see what this thing does. It's not that they won't get value if they don't use lists, but because we know that SparkToro's ideal customers really get a ton of value out of lists, people can hang out in that stage all day long if they want to. We're not going to worry about them. We're going to worry about the people that really want the actual functionality of the real fully featured tool. So that was the first value, that's how we would know that they got to product activation.

Georgiana Laudi (00:46:21):
And then the next one, as I mentioned before, is a combination of actually three things. So it is conducting a minimum amount of searches within a span of time, creating at least a certain number of lists, I can't remember exactly what it is, and then discovering exporting at least once. And then that is, they've reached a meaningful enough threshold of product engagement. And then value growth was that they do all of that on a regular enough basis so that we know they're not a flight risk basically. So that we know that they're getting continued value from the product. And if they ever fall out of that ongoing engagement measured success, then we can trigger either one-on-one outreach, an email, whatever. I mean obviously it can't be an app because if they're not logging into the app, then you can't reach them. But to help them back in and to say, "Hey, what's up? Can we help? Is there anything that we can do?" And basically be proactive in getting them back in. And then value growth, I believe I think it was expansion or upgrade in their case. I can't remember exactly.

Lenny (00:47:27):
Cool. So you end up with these say, six KPIs.

Georgiana Laudi (00:47:29):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:47:30):
I imagine this becomes goals you track, and then you probably pick one of these to focus on say, per year, per quarter. Awesome.

Georgiana Laudi (00:47:37):
Yeah, hopefully not per year.

Lenny (00:47:38):
Okay, per week.

Georgiana Laudi (00:47:40):
Hopefully short, because I mean I will say that with some of the KPIs, it's very straightforward with new unique website visitors or the website conversion rate. I mean depending on who owns the website, that's not something that should take you a year. You should never be focused on only your website's conversion rate for a year hopefully. But these other KPIs and these other milestones, I mean I have no disillusions about if it impacts the product, obviously there's a lot of implications there. So yes, generally, once you tip over into that sort of in-app and more product experience, timelines vary widely, to say the least.

Lenny (00:48:18):
Okay, cool. Let's move on to the next step.

Georgiana Laudi (00:48:21):
Okay. So after that point, we had a rich voice of customer document that came out of that research. We had a messaging guide for them to use not only in their marketing materials but also through the entire product experience, and also identifying the parts of the product that were so meaningful. Actually, their VP of marketing, the new VP of marketing, Amanda Natividad, actually rolled out checklist. They built a checklist, a product onboarding checklist and also product onboarding emails. And their trial-to-paid doubled. We were like, "Okay, cool, let us know if you need any help or whatever." And they're like, "Oh, we're good. We got this." Checked in two months later and their trial-to-paid had doubled.

Lenny (00:49:03):
I feel like you skipped the important staff of, "Hey, we got KPIs." And then you're like, "Oh, we gave them all this information." So I'd love to spend a little more time on there. You came up with messaging for them, positioning stuff. what happens there?

Georgiana Laudi (00:49:16):
Well, this is the thing. They have a team in place. They've got very highly skilled, a huge team but highly skilled marketer there at the helm. I mean not the list of which is Rand Fishkin, their CEO. So basically, what we did was we gave them, it's like a framework. So it's like, "Here are the bones of this. So got a messaging and positioning guide for you." Generally, I mean when we do them, they're five to seven pages long. They hit on the value prop. They hit on the major competitive advantages. They hit on the major value themes that you want to focus on. Those value themes can be broken down by the emotional benefits and the functional benefits tied to the product attributes that drive that value. So that document, and there's more that goes into it, but that messaging guide basically can be used as the baseline for all kinds of marketing collateral and material, but also email onboarding.

Georgiana Laudi (00:50:16):
So when they're writing their email sequences for whatever it is they're trying to solve for, whatever milestone they're solving for, they can use that as their baseline like, "This is what we're going for. This is the goal here." And that messaging guide rules up to the job to be done. So the job to be done is sort of like the top line. And then we've got that messaging that serves that job to be done. And then we've got the sort of operationalized customer experience with those milestones and KPIs. And then you sort of zoom in on like, where is the experience most broken right now? We already knew that for SparkToro. We knew that we wanted to influence that first early product experience. So that's where we zoomed in and decided on what programs they should roll out. And email onboarding was a natural, as was the checklist.

Lenny (00:51:03):
For folks that want to work on messaging, say kind of just like, "Hey, here's a bunch of messaging advice," any tips for how to message well, how to think about messaging once you have a sense of your journey, maybe some goals, any just pro tips here you could share?

Georgiana Laudi (00:51:21):
Oh, boy. I mean that research and the voice of customer, I mean I'm always going to go back to that. You can guess and you can do use your best judgment. You can use internal stakeholders and the internal team knowledge. And I'm not saying that that is not valuable and that you shouldn't use that at all. You can, but it should never come before learning from and listening to your best ideal customers and using the language that they use. You want to reflect them back to them. That is what is going to show them that you understand the problem that they have and that your product has exactly what it is that they need.

Georgiana Laudi (00:52:06):
The hierarchy of messaging is really important as well. So I mean, there's the classic, sometimes it's hard to see the label from inside the jar, so it's really helpful to get out and be like, "Okay, how do customers see us?" Generally, you can identify the hierarchy of what is important to them, what is the thing that they say is most valuable about their product? What was that aha moment or what was that first value moment? Or what is the thing that makes you stand out over everybody else? And it can literally be a numbers game. If you take a hundred or so survey responses, you can break that down like, "Here's the thing they said they cared about most. Here's the thing they said they cared about second most and third most," not to be so paint by numbers about it, but there's art in the science. But in general, you want to reflect back what they said they care about, not what you think is the coolest thing about your product. That's obviously not the best way to go.

Georgiana Laudi (00:53:05):
That's something that we all inherently know, but it becomes really hard when there's a lot going on and things are changing and the product is evolving and there's a lot of teens and people are coming and going. It's easy to lose sight of that, especially when you're just trying to get shit out the door. So that messaging guide is mentally like, "Okay, here we are. This is my baseline, these are my guardrails for everything that we produce." It's also really handy to hand off to copywriters when you bring in... I mean not just copywriters, lots of people, but particularly when you're producing copy, providing that messaging guide is solar platter for them.

Lenny (00:53:46):
Is this available anywhere, the template that you end up sharing with a customer? Just like, here's a guide, the layout, messaging, recommendations.

Georgiana Laudi (00:53:53):
Oh, we have so many.

Lenny (00:53:55):
Maybe a little-

Georgiana Laudi (00:53:55):
We have so many templates and stuff. Yeah, I'll include a couple links.

Lenny (00:54:01):
Great. I'll put it in the show notes.

Georgiana Laudi (00:54:02):
We got lots of stuff like that. Yeah.

Lenny (00:54:04):
Okay, great. A few final questions around jobs to be done.

Georgiana Laudi (00:54:09):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:54:10):
So you said that they doubled their conversion from free to paid.

Georgiana Laudi (00:54:13):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:54:13):
Amazing. What was their job to be done in the end? And then I just have a few questions about the jobs to be-

Georgiana Laudi (00:54:19):
I think it was when they're struggling to identify opportunities that aren't as obvious. So generally, when you're doing marketing research, you'll end up signing the same things over and over again. And if you are a service provider or if you're in-house for that matter and you're tasked with always coming up with novel and new and more and more and more, you tap that pretty quickly. So what customers were coming to them for was like, "Give me more. I need to impress here. I need more to work with. I need to identify opportunities that I wouldn't otherwise be aware of." Actually that was exactly what it was. I helped me identify opportunities as I wouldn't otherwise be aware of. So the customer job statement is, "When I am in a certain situation, help me," which is filled in by what those things that they're looking, for those motivations, "so I can," which is the desired outcome.

Georgiana Laudi (00:55:18):
The help me was about, I believe it was in a way that is organized and that is shareable and usable over time that I can build on and really rely on over time. And the desired outcome was about, I mean this isn't going to be surprising, but it was about getting stakeholder by hand and getting people on board with, and sharing and looking good, looking like a pro, and doing their job more effectively and driving better results for either their own team or for their clients.

Lenny (00:55:48):
Awesome. We got there. We gloss a little bit over jobs to be done. I imagine many people listening have no idea what this is. So maybe as our final question, can you just explain what this framework is and how folks can learn to use it, or any resources you recommend that comes to mind?

Georgiana Laudi (00:56:07):
Yeah. I mean a heavy influence for us definitely is Bob Moesta, who's one of the original architects of jobs to be done. There are lots of materials online for jobs. I am not the foremost authority in jobs at all. I think jtbd.info is a good website. There's a bunch. Also, Bob Moesta wrote a book called Demand-Side Sales that goes into it. There's also a lot of books written about jobs to be done. When Coffee and Kale is one that a lot of people love. I digress. Point being that what matters is identifying what it is that customers are trying to accomplish. So demographic data doesn't matter. The classic example is, if you look at... Oh, King Charles, now the example has changed. If you look at Ozzy Osbourne, and it was Prince Charles the original, but now it's King Charles, if you look at those two men, they're the exact same age and live in the same area. They both have a dog. They both love cars.

Georgiana Laudi (00:57:04):
From a demographic standpoint, they are identical, but they obviously lead very different lives. What motivates them is very different. So that is where typically personas sort of fall down. So what jobs to be done, to us, is help you figure out what is that desired outcome, what does that better life that customers are seeking out. You were just the vehicle to get them there. That's all it is. I mean there's so many tired analogies so I don't even want to use them but-

Lenny (00:57:34):
Milkshakes maybe.

Georgiana Laudi (00:57:36):
What's that?

Lenny (00:57:37):
The milkshake analogy.

Georgiana Laudi (00:57:38):
The milkshake one, it's not even the analogy. I think that was one of the original job stories that is the milkshake one.

Lenny (00:57:45):
Any other things you want to share about the process that you go through with the companies, things you've learned, before we get to a very exciting lightning round?

Georgiana Laudi (00:57:54):
Yeah. One of the objections that we often get to this type of work is that research takes a long time and that research can often lead to more questions and can slow everything down. You can end up in analysis paralysis, but it doesn't have to be that way. It can be very straightforward, honestly, in a survey scenario. With SparkToro, in just that scenario, I have lots of examples of companies where we ran surveys, it can be a couple of weeks. Two or three weeks, you can actually come out with something solid to move forward with, and you don't get stuck in the bickering or all those stakeholders, the too many cooks in the kitchen. You can come to something decisive. You can get value out of that.

Georgiana Laudi (00:58:47):
The other thing too, the other objection that we get a lot from founders in particular is because they build products to solve a problem that they had, which is cool and it definitely makes you one of the most knowledgeable people about your solution. But products change, markets change, customers change, teams change in a ball. Not everything can live inside of your head, and there's a ton of value in learning and getting inside the heads of your best customers that you may have been really close to the inception of the product. But if any span of time has changed, you'll always learn something new. I've never been in a scenario like this where a founder has not learned something new from their research and been able to leverage it in a way that makes their product experience better.

Lenny (00:59:35):
Awesome. We'll come back to how folks can reach out to you if they want to experience this process, could work with you, learn more. But before we get there, we've gotten into a very exciting lightning round. I've got five quick questions for you. We'll go through them quick, whatever comes to mind. That's what we're doing. Okay, sounds good?

Georgiana Laudi (00:59:50):
Okay.

Lenny (00:59:51):
Okay. What are two or three books that you recommend most to people looking to get better at marketing?

Georgiana Laudi (00:59:58):
I very, very, very rarely read marketing books, but there's two that I think are pretty foundational and recent. So Obviously Awesome by April Dunford. I'm sure you've heard that one a ton. It's kind of required reading, I would say, especially for founders. I told April when she first wrote, I'm like, "I'm going to require every single founder I work with to read your book before we work with them," because it's foundational, you have to know that.

Georgiana Laudi (01:00:23):
And then the other one that I really enjoyed flip side was Hooked by Nir Eyal. That one was great too. But like I said, I don't read many marketing books. The other one that I would be remiss not to mention is ours that we're writing about the process, which is really about the step by step how to do this thing. So as much as we love going through this process with companies, I sort of took a page from April here too, in that telling the process and having people be able to rule this out and do this internally themselves has been wildly gratifying. We do it with a training program and this is our next step in getting out into the world even more. So you absolutely can do this stuff yourself. So that process is later in that book. And then another book that I read recently, which has nothing to do with marketing at all, but was really nice was 4000 Weeks. I don't think-

Lenny (01:01:15):
I'm reading that right now.

Georgiana Laudi (01:01:15):
Oh yeah, I enjoyed it. It was a nice sort of coming back to base a bit. I don't know when I read it. I just finished it a couple of weeks ago. It was just the timing was perfect. I feel like what's going on in the world right now and how everybody's probably feeling right now, it's a good solid read for now.

Lenny (01:01:38):
I'm enjoying it. I just started. I'm glad to-

Georgiana Laudi (01:01:40):
Okay.

Lenny (01:01:41):
Well, you encouraged me to keep reading it.

Georgiana Laudi (01:01:43):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:01:43):
Okay. Favorite recent movie or TV show?

Georgiana Laudi (01:01:46):
I have young kids. I just bought a second property. We're renovating three houses right now. I do not watch movies almost ever. The only thing that I'm currently binging is YouTubers that do DIY interior design and renos. Reason being my partner and I bought a property with four very, very old cottages lakefront, almost like tiny houses, little cottages. We are slowly renovating each of them. So my sort of fill is learning about interior design and DIY home rentals. Yeah.

Lenny (01:02:31):
Who's had the most impact on you in your career?

Georgiana Laudi (01:02:31):
This is the worst question. I hate saying this, but it's probably my dad. I have to say my dad because he's an entrepreneur through and through. And I remember very vividly, I worked for him for I think eight years early in my career. One of the things that he always said was like, "It was the joy of the business." He didn't care what, he's like, "It doesn't matter what you're selling." He could be selling anything, but it was the joy of entrepreneurship. And that really stuck with me. So even when I was in house, I always knew that I needed to do something on my own and be in charge of that journey. His joy in it has impacted me a lot. He was the reason why I knew I was always going to do this.

Georgiana Laudi (01:03:26):
Other than that, I would say I have an incredible network of women that I have been very lucky. We're part of a group that we call Shine Crew. I think I'm supposed to copyright that or something to somebody because I think the term Shine Theory is what it's based on basically. But I'm very, very lucky to be heavily influenced by April Dunford, Tara Robertson, Joanna Wiebe, Talia Wolf. And then obviously my business partner, Claire, obviously changed everything for me. Having that partnership in business, I don't think I would've lasted this long. So yeah, definitely a huge influence for sure.

Lenny (01:04:10):
What's one thing that helps you stay focused and productive during the day?

Georgiana Laudi (01:04:15):
Definitely carving up time, like time blocking. I do a lot of time blocking in advance with a little brain emoji of safeguarding my time. Because we're a small team and we use Slack obviously, something else that we do to protect each other's time is not time stamp, but we put a little code in all of our messages that's either like, "You don't have to listen to this before the end of the day," or, "It's timely," or, "It's no rush," so that we know when we need to mentally process messages in Slack, so we can drop in there just periodically. And then the only other thing that I would say that I do maybe once a month or once a quarter is, we're pretty buttoned up about our time tracking, so we go back and it sort of keeps us honest about how our time is actually spent. And then we can sort of adjust and time block accordingly to make up for the shortcomings of our previous quarter.

Lenny (01:05:10):
That was really clever. I haven't heard of that trick. What's the emoji for "You can do this later"?

Georgiana Laudi (01:05:15):
We actually just use no rush or EOD for end of day, or timely. We do have the alarm emoji, is the "Now. This is going to be dealt with ASAP."

Lenny (01:05:29):
Amazing. Gia, thank you for making time. For this final question, where can folks find you online? How do they pre-order your book? How can they learn more? And then also, just how can listeners be useful to you?

Georgiana Laudi (01:05:39):
Thank you for asking. Twitter is probably the best way. My Twitter handle is atrocious, @ggiiaa is me on Twitter. I'm on LinkedIn every once in a while obviously. My email address is gia@forgetthefunnel.com. So if anybody has any questions, whatever, feel free to email me. If you want any templates or whatever that don't get included in the show notes, just ping me. I've no problem with that. And then forgetthefunnel.com, we've got a book page where there is a wait list for the... Well, we're going to do presale, and then the published physical book will be early in 2023. But we are going to do presale because... Get it in those hands. Why not?

Lenny (01:06:18):
Love it. Gia, thank you for being here.

Georgiana Laudi (01:06:21):
Thank you so much for having me.

Lenny (01:06:24):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Julian Shapiro (00:00):
Why do good ideas arrive after the bad ideas are empty? It's because when you've gone through a bunch of bad ideas, your brain, your mind starts reflexively identifying what elements are causing the badness. Then it becomes way better at avoiding those bad elements and you become way better at pattern matching the novel ideas with way greater intuition. Most creators are resisting their bad ideas. If you sat down, scribbled a few thoughts in a blank document and just walked away because you weren't struck with gold, then you never actually finished the creative process. There's no way you would've come up with gold.

Lenny (00:37):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast. I'm Lenny, and my goal here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. I interview world class product leaders, and growth experts to learn from their hard-won experiences building and scaling today's most successful companies today. My guest is Julian Shapiro. I actually spend a bunch of time introducing the wondrous Julian at the beginning of the episode. Instead, let me just share some of the things that we talk about. We get into a framework he calls product-led acquisition, which is work that has come out of his working with thousands of companies, helping to figure out their growth strategies.

Lenny (01:10):
We get into ways to increase your product's retention. Then we talk a lot about writing, the importance of novelty in your writing, how to choose a topic when you plan to write, and then a framework that Julian calls the Creativity Faucet. Julian is such a fascinating human, and I'm really excited to bring you this episode. With that, I bring you Julian Shapiro. I'm excited to chat with my friend John Cutler from podcast sponsor Amplitude. Hey, John.

John Cutler (01:37):
Hey, Lenny. Excited to be here.

Lenny (01:39):
John, give us a behind the scenes at Amplitude. When most people think of Amplitude, they think of product analytics. But now you're getting into experimentation and even just launched a CDP. What's the thought process there?

John Cutler (01:50):
Well, we've always thought of Amplitude as being about supporting the full product loop. Think collect data, inform that, ship experiments, and learn. That's the heart of growth to us. The big aha was seeing how many customers we're using Amplitude to analyze experiments, use segments for outreach, and send data to other destinations. Experiment in CDP came out of listening to and observing our customers.

Lenny (02:11):
Supporting growth and learning has always been Amplitude's core focus, right?

John Cutler (02:15):
Yeah. Amplitude tries to meet customers where they are. We just launched starter templates and have a great scholarship program for startups. There's never been a more important time for growth.

Lenny (02:24):
Absolutely agree. Thanks for joining us, John, and head to Amplitude.com to get started. Hey, Ashley, head of marketing and Flatfile. How many B2B SaaS companies would you estimate need to import CSV files from their customers?

Ashley (02:38):
At least 40%.

Lenny (02:40):
How many of them screw that up and what happens when they do?

Ashley (02:42):
Well? Based on our data, about a third of people will consider switching to another company after just one bad experience during onboarding. If your CSV importer doesn't work right, which is super common, considering customer files are chock- full of unexpected data and formatting, they'll leave.

Lenny (03:03):
I am 0% surprised to hear that. I've consistently seen that improving onboarding is one of the highest leverage opportunities for both signup conversion and increasing long-term retention. Getting people to your aha moment more quickly and reliably is so incredibly important.

Ashley (03:17):
Totally. It's incredible to see how our customers like Square, Spotify, and Zuora are able to grow their businesses on top of Flatfile. It's because flawless data onboarding acts like a catalyst to get them and their customers where they need to go faster.

Lenny (03:34):
If you'd like to learn more or get started, check out flat file at flatfile.com/lenny. Julian Shapiro is what I'd call a polymath of the internet. He's an amazing writer, marketer and growth mind, investor, community builder, podcaster, tweeter. He's also an expert on building muscle. He's maybe most known for being the founder of Demand Curve, a YC startup that trains people on growth and marketing. Prior to that, he was a part-time columnist at TechCrunch. He was also VP of marketing at Webflow, which I had no idea about.

Lenny (04:09):
He also created a JavaScript web animation engine that is used by Uber and WhatsApp and Samsung and thousands of companies. Currently he is a full-time investor with his own fund and as a partner at Hyper. He's also one of the most hilarious and generous humans that I know. With that, Julian, welcome to the podcast.

Julian Shapiro (04:28):
This is the greatest honor of my life. Thank you.

Lenny (04:31):
Wow!

Julian Shapiro (04:32):
I'm crying from that intro. Very nice of you.

Lenny (04:35):
That's the idea. This is the greatest honor of my life. We match.

Julian Shapiro (04:40):
Excellent. We'll cancel each other out and we'll see how interesting this is.

Lenny (04:43):
That's right. There's a lot of hype. I know you have something like 250,000 Twitter followers. You're very good at Twitter, but I've noticed that you've only tweeted three times this past year. What is going on there?

Julian Shapiro (04:58):
There's a few things in parallel. One is a lot of people are writing threads and I found this to be very cringe. They're like these fortune cookie threads like here's 21 ways to rework your startup or something. I found them all cringe. What they actually do when you write that stuff is they attract people who think that's valuable information, and then they cause people who you actually want to follow you to unfollow you. I remember just seeing people unfollow me early days of threads when no one was doing them and I was experimenting. They were pissing off people that I actually cared to have dialogue with.

Julian Shapiro (05:36):
I kind of lost the momentum and enthusiasm for writing that sort of stuff. And now I'm only writing anything when it's basically a reflection or a condensed version of a blog post that I happen to be writing from my website. I know it's high quality. I know it's original. I know it's thoughtful. It's not for the click bait. That was part of it. The other thing is that it's kind of like too... Here's a mental model for thinking about the quality of your followers. You have people who follow you for the quality of your brain, and you have people who follow you for sort of you being a glorified curator. If they're following you for being a curator, they're sort of what I call labor followers.

Julian Shapiro (06:16):
They're following you for the work that you're doing, where you're finding cool, funny memes. You're posting cool, funny jokes. You're doing these fortune cookie threads. In contrast, if they're following you for your mind, which is category one, it means they're following you for the original thoughts and insights and takes that you have on the world. Someone like Paul Graham, the founder of Y Combinator, is doing original takes. He's not trying to write threads for the sake of gaining followers. He's trying to write interesting novel ideas. When he does that, he strengthens the affinity that his followers have for him and his mind, because like, "Wow! That was an original interesting take."

Julian Shapiro (06:49):
They're following you for your mind, not for the labor you're doing, putting together a virtual Buzzfeed to count on Twitter. When people follow you for your mind, when they're mind followers, not labor followers, higher affinity means more loyalty, means they pay closer attention to what you're saying. And if you actually try to get them to do something with you, you have an event offline, there's something you're selling, there's a cause you care about, they're way more likely to indulge.

Julian Shapiro (07:12):
Whereas if they're following you for your labor, you're interchangeable with all these other meme accounts and there's no real affinity for you as the individual. I just care more about the quality of the follower than I do the volume.

Lenny (07:23):
I love that. That's such a good reminder, not to just focus on follower, follower, follower. I'm curious if someone... You have a lot of followers at this point and it's just so valuable to have Twitter followers. I've learned for me, anytime I have a question about anything, I just ask and I get so many amazing answers from people. There's this power to having a large following. I'm curious while we're on this topic, if you're just starting out on Twitter, do you have any advice for someone that's just thinking about building their following?

Julian Shapiro (07:50):
I mean, generally speaking, threads, despite everything I've said, are the primary way to get followers. There's a reason why people do threads as opposed to single tweets is because when people get exposure to a thread, they're basically getting exposure to the length of thoughts equivalent to you having sent a newsletter edition or a blog post in many cases. The more exposure, the more surface area you have, the more you give people of your brain in a single tweet, the more they're able to confirm that what you're sharing is actually a consistency from you.

Julian Shapiro (08:21):
Whereas if you just tweet one clever thing, they're like, "Oh, that's probably just a drop in the bucket. Who knows if that person can consistently generate clever stuff?" But in a long thread where it's 30 tweets and they're all good, they're like, "Whoa! This person is a machine. If I follow them reliably, I'll get more great stuff." It reaffirms to readers they should follow you, which is why threads trigger more follows. Basically you do want to do threads, frankly, and that's the backbone of it. Threads with very clickbaity opening tweets kind of how it works.

Julian Shapiro (08:52):
You can also port followers over from other places like your website and newsletter, just to start giving yourself an initial sample audience through which the threads can actually take fire pretty much.

Lenny (09:02):
Awesome. I wasn't expecting to go into Twitter as strategy, but this is interesting because you're really good at it. As you've said, your stuff is actually very thoughtful. It's not just a thirsty Twitter thread trying to find followers and retweets. Thanks for sharing that.

Julian Shapiro (09:18):
Well, it sort of started that way, because me and a few other friends of mine, I felt like we were the first people doing threads at scale. And then when we realized what it turned into, that's when we just stopped.

Lenny (09:28):
I love that. I know what you mean about these cringy Twitter threads. Anyway, what I want to do is instead of asking a bunch of random questions is to focus on five big topics and kind of go deep on these topics. These are topics that are maybe most popular of the stuff that you've put out across your handbooks and writing and courses and things like that and also things that I've found to be most interesting. Does that sound good?

Julian Shapiro (09:51):
Yeah, I would love to.

Lenny (09:53):
Cool. First, a little context, you write these super in depth handbooks on a bunch of different topics on growth and writing and muscle building and things like that. First of all, could you just explain what these handbooks are and why you create them?

Julian Shapiro (10:05):
They're forcing functions for me to hold myself accountable and to be thorough when learning something for my own benefit. That's all they are. Basically if I want to go learn growth or writing well or some other topic, I will go ahead and do a ton of research, read everything I can get my hands on, do a ton of experimentation to try to build a set of novel insights that you couldn't find from other people's research hopefully, and then the next stage is try to make it as concise and actionable as possible so that I can reference it for my own selfish benefit. Here's my guidebook for myself on writing better blog posts, for example.

Julian Shapiro (10:40):
And then by the time I've done that work, what usually happens is its only like, I'm going to make up a number here, an extra 30 hours of work to make it palatable and digestible for the public. If I've done all this work privately, why not make it accessible publicly? At that point, it winds up being acquisition fodder for essentially building an audience and distributing my thoughts further. That's why I do that. But the thing that I pride myself on with them is by no means are they thoroughly unique, but in every one there's a lot of original stuff folks on average have never heard of before.

Julian Shapiro (11:14):
And that's what I'm proud of, is coming up with those insights between the lines that make that thing, whatever the topic is, much more approachable. I've succeeded, in my view, if I've made something that people often mistakenly think of as overwhelmingly complex very simple for them to follow. I think that's where the dopamine hit comes from for them.

Lenny (11:34):
Well, my experience, you definitely hit the nail in my head with the handbooks you put out. It's an interesting middle ground between a newsletter and a book. It's cool to just have a digital way of doing that, of just kind of consolidating a bunch of ideas and going really in depth, but not having to write a book. Well, speaking of the contract there.

Julian Shapiro (11:51):
You have a very large newsletter that goes very in depth. That arguably is a more valuable asset than my handbooks for someone building an audience, because the newsletter has this built-in form of retention recurrence, where they get pinged in their inbox when you have new content, and then it becomes a referable thing and people refer each other and then they sign up for the newsletter. I do love the emphasis on longform via newsletter, but the reason I do it on the web is, and we'll talk about the trade-offs in a second, is it's much more digestible and referencable.

Julian Shapiro (12:24):
No one's going to go refer to the epic guide in their email inbox that's very hard to navigate for building muscle or something. One, it's a UX decision. Two, I get the SEO traffic, which you don't. And then three, it's basically a living asset that I can keep updating over time. It's not stuck in someone's inbox and getting printed out. One of the things that might separate me from other writers, at least many other writers online, is I'm spending as many hours going back and rewriting old blog posts and handbooks as I am writing ones.

Julian Shapiro (12:55):
If you come back to anything I've written over the course of a year or year and a half, it'll be updated, because I consider everything I write to be evergreen. I avoid writing things that I feel like are a drop in the pan, just like talking about a trend or something, something very newsy. I avoid that altogether and I'm just interested in writing stuff that'll be relevant for a long time.

Lenny (13:13):
I didn't know that. That is very cool. I love that you do that. You should make that clear. That's so interesting that this is not stale. Last updated, last week. I don't know if you already do that.

Julian Shapiro (13:21):
Yeah, no, I actually don't and I probably should. People have complained to me that I haven't, so maybe I will one day.

Lenny (13:25):
All right. We got a good idea out of this, if nothing else.

Julian Shapiro (13:28):
There you go.

Lenny (13:28):
Okay. The first idea that I want to chat about is something that you call product-led acquisition. I believe it's the most popular page in any of your handbooks. It comes from you working with thousands of companies to help them figure out their growth strategies through Demand Curve. I'm curious to hear what this concept is and how people can use it to help their products grow.

Julian Shapiro (13:51):
Product-led acquisition to your audience will be more commonly known as product-led growth, but I think product-led growth is a bit of a misnomer. It's often used, as you know, to basically refer to SaaS companies who are using self-serve sales funnels where a salesperson isn't required, right? Bypassing sales and allowing the product to grow itself. That's fine. But I think the term we really care about as growth marketers is product-led acquisition, meaning the use of the product grows the product. For example, if I'm using PayPal and I'm sending $1,000 to somebody else, there is no way they will not create a PayPal account to accept the $1,000.

Julian Shapiro (14:31):
By me trying to use PayPal in its everyday intention and me getting value out of it to settle a debt, I'm automatically enticing someone else, very strongly so, to also become a PayPal customer. That's product-led acquisition. There's a few different categories I've identified, and I think the reason why people like this part of this article I wrote is because it's, in my opinion, the absolute best way to grow any startup. If your startup can grow via product-led acquisition, not all can, maybe some are enterprise-base and all they're going to make work is sales, then it is by far the best way to grow because zero marginal cost to have users invite other users.

Julian Shapiro (15:12):
It's scalable. It creates network graphs typically and has compounding effects there in terms of both moats and the ability to acquire more customers quickly. Basically to the point I just mentioned is basically viral. The other interesting thing here is there are far fewer dependencies. Let's say your company primarily grows via content and SEO, where you're at the mercy of Google releasing an algorithmic update let's say twice a year, which occasionally will absolutely tank your traffic and most people know what I mean by that if they've experienced that. It's awful.

Julian Shapiro (15:41):
Or ff you're a paid acquisition-led company, as opposed to a content-led acquisition company, meaning you're running Facebook Ads, let's just stick a Facebook for now, Facebook and Instagram, you're also at the mercy of the volatility of CPMs and whatever weird updates Facebook introduces or whatever targeting options they suddenly remove. Your entire acquisition strategy is anchored on something that is completely out of your hands and very volatile. Product-led acquisition is like the better you craft your product and the incentive structures for existing users inviting other users, that's entirely in your control and the better you grow.

Julian Shapiro (16:19):
That's the quick context. Now, I'll go into some examples. We started with the example of... Actually one thing that came to mind that I love is Paul Graham, who we mentioned earlier, Paul Graham from YC, has this quote which is "don't start a startup where you need to go through someone else to get users." That always really resonated with me. Here are the categories of product-led acquisition that I've identified. Number one, like I mentioned, is users inviting other users to settle debts.

Julian Shapiro (16:51):
If I'm going to pay you money I owe you for splitting dinner on Venmo, or a business expense that I'm paying you, you're my vendor on PayPal, or anything that's allowing me to just pay you money I owe you and I have to use a product to do so, whoever is collecting the money from me is going to make an account on that product if necessary to claim their hard earned money. Almost guaranteed way for you to have user-led growth, product-led growth. Now, it doesn't have to be money. It can be settling a debt of like an NFT, for example.

Julian Shapiro (17:19):
Someone buys an NFT from you on OpenSea and the only way for them to receive their NFT, I'm just making this up right now, is to also have an OpenSea account or a wallet that's specific to that collection. Again, making this up. The point is if you're settling the debt of something you owe someone and they must make an account to capture the thing owed, they're going to sign up. That's category one. Category two is when you're inviting someone to join the product you're using to partake in a conversation that the otherwise cannot access. Why does Telegram, WhatsApp, iMessage, all these chat apps, Discord, grow so quickly?

Julian Shapiro (17:58):
Pretty obviously because if you and your little clique of friends are having your conversation in that app, then the person who's also in your real life friend group, but who hasn't yet installed the app has to install the app in order to have the conversation with you. Inviting people to critical, social, or business conversations in an app is the other way that you can nearly guarantee you'll grow very quickly from product-led acquisition. The business version of this is Slack. You sign up for Slack. You invite all your friends or all your coworkers. Then you even invite all your vendors via Slack Connect.

Julian Shapiro (18:34):
Slack Connect was a brilliant Slack feature where they're saying, "Hey, we're now going to encourage you to invite people who aren't using Slack who are outside of your work." I don't know how that's done for them as a feature, but in theory, it's a brilliant way to expand the surface area for inviting people via product-led acquisition. Just to recap where we are real quick, one of the ways of acquiring customers is to encourage existing users, to pay other people or to encourage them to come into your app to have conversation that's only happening on the app.

Julian Shapiro (19:04):
If I'm a product person and I'm road mapping my product, I will think, is there anything in my product conducive to either one of those two functionalities, settling debts, or can I introduce chat within my product? And if so, you might be cracking open an amazing channel. When I tell people about product-led acquisition, I'm usually doing it in the context of let's rethink your product feature roadmap to prioritize features that facilitate these things that can lead to explosive growth. I'll pause if there's anything you want to dive in there, but I have three more categories we could chat about if you want to, three more ways of doing PLA.

Lenny (19:44):
Yeah, absolutely. I just want to lob a question over there as you're going through these to maybe touch on this. Most founders would love to find a way to grow through virality and invites and all the things you're talking about. I find that it's often hard to lop onto something they're doing, if it's not a natural fit. As you're going through this, I'd love to know how often have you seen startups succeed adding something like this when their app is not a money exchange app or a chat app? I'm curious how often it works to add something like this when your app's kind of something else, if that makes sense?

Julian Shapiro (20:17):
Well, the real lesson is don't start a company if you have no idea how it's going to grow. Now, that's not categorically true for all startups. It's irrelevant for deep tech and biotech and climate tech and all that stuff, but for a lot of these people starting SaaS companies where they intend to grow very quickly among B2B customers or B2C. The real point of what I'm saying is if you have three ideas before you as a founder and one of them lends itself to product-led acquisition really beautifully, then lean in that direction perhaps if you think that growth is the key differentiator between them for what's going to lead to success.

Julian Shapiro (20:51):
It's like make life easier on yourself. Because if we're relying so heavily on SEO and content, which is extremely saturated, or paid acquisition, meaning ad channels which are extremely saturated, especially if you have low LTVs where we can't really tolerate the volatility of paid CAC or just the cost in general of those CACs, then we have to be thinking more strategically at the product level. It's less about tacking it on later, but sometimes this will work brilliantly if it's very organic. When we cover my next category, we'll actually see some examples of how you can pack it on more seamlessly.

Julian Shapiro (21:24):
But the other response to your question, which is a great question, is people mistake product-led acquisition for referral programs, which it is not. Because the referral programs are a tact on incentive trying to give people something to encourage them to invite because they otherwise are not inviting. Whereas PLA, as I've currently defined it, is through the natural use of the product, you get more value when you invite others. You settle your debt with the payment recipient. You get have a better conversation because now your friend Jack is part of the conversation. You don't have to incentivize them with anything artificial, with any rewards.

Julian Shapiro (22:00):
Referral programs generally are not exciting to me because you're usually trying to... Again, you're like self-selecting for folks who just want the reward very often. And then the people they invite might also just want the dual ended reward and they're not even here for the app really. And then they can bounce. And then they don't invite other people typicall.y. It doesn't have the same compounding sticky retentive nature of PLA. I'm not a fan of it. If you can make a work though, fantastic. Anyway, third category is what I call billboarding. Billboarding is this idea that the use of the product is inherently visible to people around you.

Julian Shapiro (22:40):
The product advertises itself. A few examples. Actually, where I got the term from is I was looking at these billboards above the highway in San Francisco, where I was seeing the company that actually hosts the billboards advertise their own logo on the billboard while also showing you whatever ad they were being paid to show. They were using their own surface area to advertise themselves. Another example is when you're seeing an ad network across the web, like Google banner ads perhaps, and it says they're brought to you by Google Ads, they're using their own surface area to advertise themselves.

Julian Shapiro (23:14):
That's billboarding. It's a brilliant free way to get a ton more exposure. There's a few ways to do billboarding. One is the classic example of Hotmail and iPhone. When you send an email via Hotmail, at the end, it pens a signature saying sent via Hotmail. Same thing, sent from my iPhone. Every single email sent from an iPhone device, unless you remove that signature, is a free billboard for Apple itself, which further furthers the brand awareness and gets more people buying.

Julian Shapiro (23:45):
For example, if you have a feature in your application where people are sending emails or communications to other users outside of the org, like it's an app for sending SMS messages or it's like a way to send invoices to your vendors, when you're facilitating that generated messaging, say brought to you by the name of your startup in the signature of it, really use your own surface area to increase your own awareness. That's billboarding in two different ways. The third way is the very obvious way of having something unmistakably recognizable out in the world.

Julian Shapiro (24:21):
If I drive a Tesla, if I wear Nike shoes, if I have Apple AirPods, all of these are immediately visible to everyone around me, which is why sometimes physical products can really explode because they're just free walking billboards all over the world. And then the sort of most topical hot example right now on Twitter is when you switch your Twitter profile to an NFT in a particular collection, you're billboarding for that NFT collection, right? Same phenomenon that occurred with the Bitcoin laser eyes.

Lenny (24:50):
And also for Twitter Blue, to be able to even do that.

Julian Shapiro (24:53):
Yes, exactly. Exactly right. Like Telegram right now, they released something like Twitter Blue. I forget, I don't know what it's called. But now when you're a Telegram premium paying user, it has a little star thing next to your name that everyone else sees. "Wait, what is that? Oh, that's Telegram Pro. Let me take a look at that." Last example, which is one of my favorites, is billboarding via the nature of your product being something people are compelled to share in order to use. If I have a Calendly account, I have to share my Calendly link with the world in order to create an event on my calendar.

Julian Shapiro (25:28):
If you're like me, you get a million Calendly links every week. That's the phenomenal form of billboarding, people are sharing it willingly. No wonder they've exploded. Same thing with Dropbox sharing file links and you're seeing the Dropbox URL, or GoFundMe, when people share the GoFundMe page. You get the gist. Billboarding costs you nothing, scales infinitely, can have compounding effects. And if your product lends itself to billboarding, it's just a phenomenal way to grow if possible. That's category three, I guess. We'll cover one last one, if you'd like me too, which is basically UGC, so user generated content.

Julian Shapiro (26:05):
Same sort of thing. Basically I hop on YouTube or TikTok or Insta or whatever. I make content. I share it with the world. In so sharing that content, the platforms brand themselves on the content. At the end of every TikTok video on Twitter that you've ever seen or Insta, at the end it'll say, "Here's the TikTok user's account." They're billboarding themselves into the content that users themselves are generating, and the users are incentivized to share that content off platform, which brings users to the platform, because users want to get customers wherever they can. They're going to cross-sell to their YouTube channel and so on.

Julian Shapiro (26:41):
If you have a marketplace like eBay or some marketplace for selling collectible shoes or something where you're encouraging users to create beautiful content of the items being sold, like these cool landing pages that show off the products, and they share it elsewhere, then that's an example of users making content they're sharing off platform that is useful for their own followers. Another example of UGC that people often overlook is Quora or Reddit or Stack Overflow or TripAdvisor, where you're encouraging users to create content in the form of conversation that then surface itself on Google and SEO.

Julian Shapiro (27:23):
Basically if you just encourage users to have conversations that are publicly indexed, that increases your surface area on Google for hitting more keywords and you get way more search traffic. Basically the question that this boils down to is to leverage UGC in your product, you ask yourself, do users use my product to make content in any way, shape, or form? If so, what type of content that they make should we encourage them to then share? And then how can we make the page that they use to share the content as appealing and as easily to consume as possible? And that's basically UGC. We'll pause there, but basically that's PLA in a nutshell.

Julian Shapiro (28:03):
The thing that all of these have in common is you're not spending a dollar. They scale super quickly. You're not reliant on, well, maybe to some extent with SEO, but you're not relying on third party volatility. It's a much healthier narrative for how you're going to grow and scale.

Lenny (28:17):
Awesome. This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like Netlify, Contentful, and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern growth team stack. This leads to waste of time building internal tools or trying to run your experiments through a clunky marketing tool. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved about our experimentation platform was being able to easily slice results by device, by country, and by user stage.

Lenny (28:57):
Eppo does all that and more, delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytics cycles, and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic clickthrough metrics, and instead use your north star metrics like activation, retention, subscriptions, and payments. Eppo supports test on the front end, the backend, email marketing, and even machine learning clients. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com, getE-P-P-O.com, and 10X your experiment velocity. I have many questions I'd love to ask, but I also want to make sure we get to the other topics.

Lenny (29:34):
We talked about acquisition, which we'll link to in the show notes, by the way, this whole post. The flip side you could say is retention. If you're a reader of my newsletter, you know how much time I spend thinking about retention and how important that is. I know that's a second topic that we wanted to chat about, because you've also helped a lot of companies think through their retention strategies and to help them retain more users. I'm curious to hear what you've found to be the best strategies for retaining users and increasing retention.

Julian Shapiro (30:01):
Yeah, sure. The way I think about retention, my favorite strategy is what I call building state. It's a concept I stole from video games, where basically the more you play any given game, the more state you're accruing. That might be your armor, your weapons, your character skins, and whatever. As a player of the game, the more state you build, the more you're compelled to stick around, because you don't want to lose everything you've worked so hard for. The more state you have, the more you can exploit that state to get more. The rich keep getting richer. The same mental models apply to let's say SaaS retention.

Julian Shapiro (30:38):
This is as old as time, or at least as old as modern capitalism. If you think of credit card rewards or frequent flyer programs, you spend money. You accrue points. You convert the points into rewards. Once users build momentum doing that, they're less likely to switch to a competitor. That's the age old example of building state. Software, it's unbelievably powerful. This building state concept is why mediocre companies like eBay or Craigslist remain completely unbeatable for decades. Even though the UX is bad, people don't like using them, they fail to innovate, no one topples them and it's because of state.

Julian Shapiro (31:16):
Let's walk through some examples. State, kind of like my PLA mega spiel, mega rant there, subdivides into a few categories, but I'll make this one shorter and less boring. The first subcategory of building state is when you're encouraging your users to accrue non-transferrable reputation, meaning they're doing stuff to build reputation on the platform and they cannot take that reputation to them off platform. They're stuck there to get the compounding advantage of that reputation. For example, let's say you've spent years getting 10,000 or more feedback ratings as an eBay seller.

Julian Shapiro (31:56):
You are not leaving eBay anytime soon, because that reputation's just too valuable. It's producing a huge boost in revenue because of the trust it engenders with buyers on eBay. It probably results in you ranking better in search results for an eBay query. Because you cannot move those 10,000 feedbacks to an eBay competitor, you're not incentivized to go use an eBay competitor. This type of stickiness, this non-transferrable reputation, basically applies to all marketplaces and directories. Same thing on Yelp. You as a restaurant build your reputation on Yelp. The momentum keeps you stuck there. You want to keep getting reviews and hone your reviews.

Julian Shapiro (32:32):
Airbnb with your properties, Etsy, for you as a seller, Alibaba, all of this stuff are examples of companies that are kind of old now, cannot be top old or haven't been yet. People are like, why? Well, because of this exact reason. This is why those companies pester you so much to leave reviews and provide feedback all the time. They want you to play into this game of in market reputation building. The second state building technique that a startup could adopt, and again, this is all under the guise of how do we maximize retention and build somewhat of a moat, for example, the second way you can do this is you encourage your users to accrue a non-transferable audience.

Julian Shapiro (33:14):
If I'm a big YouTuber and I've acquired a million subs, those subs can't be transferred anywhere else. I can't bring them to Twitter. In fact, YouTube doesn't even tell me their email, so I can't even bring them to a newsletter if I wanted to. The more subs you acquire on YouTube, the easier it is for you to go viral on YouTube. This is what I mean earlier by the rich keep getting richer. It's this momentum trap. It's very, very hard to convince any YouTuber to get off YouTube. If anything, they'll dabble with another network in parallel at best.

Julian Shapiro (33:43):
Basically if you have a startup where you're creating a marketplace or an audience graph, you want to encourage users to build a follower graph within that product that they can take advantage of by pushing their product or their content or their insights too. This is why Twitter... By the way, a big shout out to Substack, which actually allows customers to export emails off of Substack. Substack is not playing that same game, which is better for users and a very nice thing for the ecosystem. But this is why Twitch and Instagram and Twitter are just irreplaceable. I mean, not necessarily. Everything dies over time like Facebook, but they're just so darn hard to topple.

Julian Shapiro (34:26):
Let's maybe touch one more. I don't want to ramble so much about this. Well, this one's kind of similar. Basically if you spent a lot of time building a social graph in a product, like if I spent the last 10 years trying to remember the names of all my high school friends and elementary school friends and add them one at a time over the years to Facebook, or I've added all my colleagues for the last 20 years onto LinkedIn and I've built a social graph on these products where I've curated and found people, that's really sticky. You're building state in the form of taking time to expand the graph. The graph is a representative of the state, the work you've put in.

Julian Shapiro (35:04):
You don't want to lose those connections with people. That makes that product extra sticky. This is why social networks in general can be sticky. It's not just the fact that you have your audience there, it's that you've invested time. If Facebook doesn't allow you to export your graph out, then that makes it extra sticky as well, because you don't know how else to talk to old Jimmy from elementary other than Facebook. Anyway, there's actually many more of these examples of building state. I'm going to just stop with that. But the basic concept is what can you encourage users to do within your product that makes them more deeper entrenched in the product, and most apps just completely lack this.

Lenny (35:39):
I like that. It's a little bit like the concept of having skin in the game and just building more skin in the game with the product that you're using. One quick question, is there a company that you've seen do this, like add it on, and succeed and increased retention that you've worked with or out there? Just like is there a good example that comes to mind that added this piece?

Julian Shapiro (35:58):
Again, none of this is really under the context of telling people to add it on after they've decided what they're building. This is all in the DNA of the product you're choosing to build. I'm not sure. I haven't thought of those examples. I'm thinking more so in whose DNA, which company's DNA are they doing this brilliantly? For example, one form of state is... One I did not cover is when you're embedded infrastructure. If you're Twilio, Striper, AWS, it's really hard to move off or segment because it's so much work to redo your code and introduce all this risk to screwing up your code base. People have built patterns around how they work with your API.

Julian Shapiro (36:36):
A lot of modern API startups automatically capture the stickiness by virtue of being so deeply embedded into a product. Generally speaking, none of this is in the context of like, hey, add it on post hoc, pretty much.

Lenny (36:46):
Got it. I like that lens actually through a lot of these things you're talking about is maybe it's less like change your product to make this happen, and it's more idea selection. I know you're also an investor, and so it's a really good lens on how many of these things does this company have that I'm investing in.

Julian Shapiro (37:01):
Earlier I was mentioning why do I write handbooks, I wrote the handbook that PLA and state building come from to cement my diligence criteria for companies I believe might grow super fast and retain customers. You're exactly right. My investor's perspective is if you have a zero cost of acquisition mechanism for customer acquisition, such as PLA, and you can retain them through something like state building, but there are other ways to retain customers, then I lean in harder because I think you'll be more defensible as a company. Actually interesting little side note is you'll often hear retention and stickiness refer to as a moat, right?

Julian Shapiro (37:41):
But I find this term actually very misleading because very few companies have actual moats. To have a real moat, you're basically exploiting kleptocratic, meaning you're friends with the government and they're creating a literal barrier to entry for your competitors, or you have a scientific moat where you have an actual scientific breakthrough in the fusion energy space, plus protected by patents. Those are real moats. But the way most people use the word moat is wrong. In practice, your "moat" is just your mechanism for retaining users a little bit more than the average company.

Julian Shapiro (38:21):
I believe state building is one of the best ways to do exactly that. Really it just comes down to what are you doing to help users build state and get more value over time out of the product, not the same level of value over any time period.

Lenny (38:35):
Awesome. Shifting a little bit away from growth and into writing, which I know you've spent a lot of time writing about, very meta, and sharing on Twitter and all the ways, you have a handbook where you go into this concept of novelty and a framework for how to be novel and why that's important in writing. I'd love for you to talk about why novelty is important in writing and ideally share your framework for creating something novel that keeps people engaged in reading.

Julian Shapiro (39:03):
Sure. This actually goes back to your question about Twitter. What can one do to build an audience on Twitter? It often comes down to writing things that are novel. Novel is what powers click bait in most cases. The other way is via curiosity gap, where you raise a question you don't answer, but the other half is novelty is what gets people to click into a thread and read it. Novelty, I define, as new idea, so something I haven't heard of before, that's also significant, so it's not some trivial fact about Kim Kardashian, and it's something that I wouldn't have easily intuited on my own.

Julian Shapiro (39:44):
When you have those ingredients, it's new, it's significant, and you wouldn't have easily thought of it on your own, that's when you trigger that dopamine hit reaction, I'm not being scientifically accurate here, but you're going to get that dopamine hit like, "Whoa! That's super cool." The more you have readers pausing going, "Whoa! That was interesting," the more novel your writing is. My whole approach to writing is write something out, and then point out all the points of novelty. I do that by actually having 20 friends read something I've written and highlight the sentences that made them go, "Whoa."

Julian Shapiro (40:17):
And then I have this visualized map in a given blog post, where are the areas that people go, "That's really interesting," and then I can see all the white space between the interesting parts. I go in and I condense that white space. I chop it down so that the frequency of novelties as high as possible. This is how you get a blog post that just has this phenomenal momentum that gets the read to completion rate to be very high. The question is, what exactly does novelty look like? I've identified about five different categories for it, and this is the backbone of how I write in many cases.

Julian Shapiro (40:51):
The first category of novelty is what I call counterintuitive information. You tell people something and they go, "Oh wow. I never realized that the world worked that way," or different categories and you tell people counter-narrative information. That's where people respond, "Wow. That's not how I was told the world worked." Whereas counterintuitive novelty is, "That's not how I would've thought the world worked," counter-narrative novelty is, "That's not what I've been told. I've been lied to. Now you're telling me the truth." That also triggers a dopamine hit. Third category of novelty is just pure shock and awe like, "That's crazy. I would've never believed that's true."

Julian Shapiro (41:30):
For example, there's a volcano that's going to erupt the next 15 years that's going to swallow this whole island. Wow, that's shocking. Holy moly. Next category is what a lot of popular Twitter users do is what I call elegant articulation, where you're taking an idea... Naval does this, Naval on Twitter, the founder of AngelList. He'll say something that's a complicated rich thought and boil it down into a very concise sentence. And then the reader goes, "Wow, that's beautiful. I couldn't have said that any better myself."

Julian Shapiro (42:02):
That also triggers that dopamine reaction. There's a few more, but the point I want to get at here is all of these are formats for identifying the types of things you could say to get people to go, "Whoa." That's what I think of as novelty.

Lenny (42:17):
Something I've found to kind of identify something that I've written is going to be interesting is I just read it myself and I feel what I feel when I'm reading it the first time. Often I find that if I'm like, "Oh wow, this is really good and really exciting," I've learned to trust that feeling wherever that comes from. That's just like another way of knowing if your thing is interesting is like, are you excited about it? Are you interested in it as you're reading it? And that fades after you read it like 10 times and kind of edit and edit, but that's just a small tip I've learned, just kind of trust your own gut feeling when you're excited about something that you're writing about.

Julian Shapiro (42:53):
I agree. And that's why I tell people when you first encounter something that to you is novel, write down with a score, like let's say out a five, zero to five, how novel that thing was to you when you first heard it. You want to remember and capture the degree of novelty, because to your point, Lenny, it's going to become less novel over time. And then if you pull that out of your idea bank for a blog post in two years, it'll like, oh yeah, that will blow people's minds, even it doesn't blow my mind today.

Lenny (43:16):
Good tip.

Julian Shapiro (43:17):
To your point, the way you basically get novel ideas is you go live your life and write down every time you come across something that interests or surprises you, or any time you come across something that makes you think, "Well, that's obviously not true," meaning you found something that people say that you know the lie and you're about to tell people the way the world really works. Some examples of novelty... I'm scrolling through Twitter up here. This is a tweet I wrote where I wrote, "Reading many books is the most socially accepted vanity metric for adults." I give zero kudos for reading a hundred books a year, but I give you massive kudos for learning efficiently and making interesting things.

Julian Shapiro (43:59):
This tweet is an example of me using novelty. As we read the key novel part, it's where I say, "Reading many books is the most socially accepted vanity metric for adults." That is counter-narrative novelty, because the prevailing narrative is all the smart people I've ever met, they read a ton of books. They always have a book in their hand. They're reading five books a month, blah blah, blah, blah, blah. I'm saying no, that's a vanity metric how many books you read. That's counter-narrative. That gives people a dopamine hit. They lean in. They want to see what my punchline is and that tweet got a lot of engagement.

Julian Shapiro (44:33):
One more example. See if you can catch the novelty here. New tweet, "The world is not run by exceptional people. This is the hidden reason for imposter syndrome. We mistakenly think imposter syndrome is due to low confidence or low anxiety. No. It's caused by not accepting that your new world-class peers aren't that special. It's just discipline." The key statement there that has the novelty is the world is not run by exceptional people, and the type of novelty being used there is counterintuitive. Your intuition is the world's run by the best of the best or many of these experts are there for a reason.

Julian Shapiro (45:15):
I'm saying not in most cases. Anyway, those are some examples of novelty. Of course, these tweets took off largely due to that reason. People love having their eyes opened. They'll reflexively retweet you to agree with your worldview if they feel like you're finally speaking truth, the power, in some sense, if that makes sense.

Lenny (45:34):
We'll link to those in the show notes. By the way, I love your reading your own tweets voice that you have.

Julian Shapiro (45:40):
I'm adopting my... Who's the guy from Star Trek who's amazing, who reads the kids?

Lenny (45:45):
Oh yeah, LeVar Burton. Reading Rainbow.

Julian Shapiro (45:49):
There you go. That's my voice.

Lenny (45:50):
Julian Shapiro, the new LeVar Burton. I know you have to run in not too long from now. We have two more topics. How about I set up both topics and then you kind of talk through as much as you want with each? That sound good?

Julian Shapiro (46:01):
Sure.

Lenny (46:01):
Cool. The fourth topic we want to talk about is topic selection, how meta, essentially picking what to write about, and you have a bunch of great advice on what's worth writing about and the framework around that. And then the fifth idea is something you called it the Creativity Faucet, which is essentially how to get more creative. I will turn it over to you to share your thoughts on these topics.

Julian Shapiro (46:22):
Sure, sure. My pleasure. The way I think about topic selection, meaning what is it you should write about for your blog posts, for your newsletter, Twitter, company blog, whatever, books, is you choose topics based on two factors, what would you actually be able to complete so you're not going to give a pathway through and what will actually be high quality. I have a framework for helping you figure out what that is. Basically I believe that your likelihood to follow through on something you start writing is a function of the objective you have with writing that piece and how strong your motivation is for seeing that objective to fruition.

Julian Shapiro (47:00):
Here's what that looks like more specifically. Anytime that I write something, I'm first trying to identify what is my objective. Here's a few examples of objectives that I'll use before sitting down to write. Number one, I want to open people's eyes to prove the status quo wrong, or two, I want to articulate something that everyone's thinking about, but no one is saying. I want to cut through the noise. Another objective might be, I want to contribute original insights to my own research and experimentation. Hence, some of my handbooks. Another objective is just telling a suspenseful and emotional story that maybe imparts a lesson.

Julian Shapiro (47:34):
These are all clear cut objectives that give me a guidepost. I know that I'm done writing a piece if I can read the piece and say, "I've accomplished that particular objective," because people don't know when they're done writing, "Oh, I petered out here and this seems like a good place for an outro." With an objective, you know whether you should actually stop. But then the question is, how do you sustain the motivation to see through an objective? Again, an objective might be something like open people's eyes by proving the status quo wrong. To do all the work necessary to accomplish that, you need a motivation in my opinion.

Julian Shapiro (48:08):
I'll pair one of those objectives that I've selected with a motivation. Some example motivations are, does writing this piece get something off my chest that I really badly need to get off? Or does it help me solve a nagging unsolved problem that I've been dealing with and this piece is way for me to explore and find the solution? Or is it like me obsessing over a topic that I want others to also geek out about? These are all powerful motivations that I pair with an objective to guarantee my follow through to get done writing the piece.

Julian Shapiro (48:41):
By the way, everything I've mentioned in this entire chat with you, the novelty stuff, the topic selection, PLA, state building, everything we've covered, I have tons of examples on Julian.com. That's why I'm not trying to go through every single one.

Lenny (48:55):
Yeah, and we'll link to all that.

Julian Shapiro (48:57):
Absolutely.

Lenny (48:57):
Awesome.

Julian Shapiro (48:58):
The flip side I'll point out is that I think writing quality overall is... Again, these are all me being hand wavy and these are not rules. There's no right way to write, just like there's no right way to paint. These are just frameworks I've developed, that when I use them, I'm more frequently arriving at success as far as I define it. The thing I want to point out though is that very closely tied to everything I'm talking about is my framework or my equation for determining how good any piece of writing is, is novelty times resonance. Writing quality equals novelty times resonance.

Julian Shapiro (49:36):
Novelty is like we discussed, here are all these things that are giving you dopamine hits where I'm opening your eyes about how the world really works and shocking you and elegantly synthesizing things, times resonance and resonance means I can tell you the most novel thing on the planet. But if I don't wrap it in a way that resonates and really lifts off the page and into your mind and is something you remember, then it's fairly ineffective novelty. It's more like just trivia. It's bland, dry trivia. When you add resonance to the novelty, now it becomes a beautifully written piece. Resonance is a matter of including examples, analogies, metaphors, stories.

Julian Shapiro (50:14):
Really writing quality is novelty times the storytelling power you have to make the novelty resonate in the back of people's minds. The way that I structure my writing process is draft one, I'm just focused on finding my novelty, just the backbone of what makes anything interesting. And then draft two, I come back and try to increase the resonance by embedding story and analogy and examples. That's basically my process there.

Lenny (50:41):
I like that a lot. Just to add real quick, something I've learned is that if your stuff is really useful, it doesn't have to be written beautifully. A lot of people I think are afraid of writing because they think they have to write really well, like be real good writers. What I've learned is it's okay if you're not like. You just be good enough and you'll get better the more you do it. The most important thing is the content is valuable and interesting, which I think you're describing as novelty. I just want to make sure people don't get scared away and be like, "Oh my god, I need stories and metaphors and all these beautiful writing." Initially you don't is my experience, but it helps in a big way.

Julian Shapiro (51:17):
I agree. In fact, the biggest criticism of my writing is that it is too dry, it's too novelty focused, and there's a lack of the resonance, but I do that purposely because oftentimes people can over-indulge in resonance and then it really bloats the piece. As a reader myself, I like reading super concise pieces, like reference manuals almost. I'm looking for the length from personal anecdotes, personal stories of people's lives or life lessons they've learned that they want to share with me, or actual fiction. To each their own. You're spot on. Do what you would want to read to me is the golden rule.

Lenny (51:52):
Awesome, and also don't be afraid. Don't feel like the bar's that high if you want to get started.

Julian Shapiro (51:58):
What have been your frameworks for sitting down and knowing that one of your newsletter editions is where you want it to be? And what do you think is the framework justifying that a piece is or explaining why a piece is good?

Lenny (52:10):
The thing that I always strive for is this needs to be actionable and useful. It's something someone could take and do something with that day versus just a bunch of theory and pontification and philosophy. It's like, oh, here's a thing you can go do today.

Julian Shapiro (52:25):
That's kind of my bar is make it very actionable, which I think is specific to the type of newsletter I have, not necessarily broad writing the way you're describing, but that's what I try.

Lenny (52:35):
I love that. I agree with you, my rules of thumb are like it has to be actionable, concise, and novel. I'm not sure if you've seen this as well, but to make something truly actionable, I have to leave them with a cheat sheet. Because if I have all these actionable steps, but they're spread throughout a monster newsletter edition, it's too much mental work to go and make my own cheat sheet out of and have a quick to follow series of steps. I feel like compression is a key part of making something actionable as well.

Julian Shapiro (53:06):
There's a book called On Writing Well that taught me a lot about cutting two-thirds of what you've written to get to the core of it. I'm curious, what else are you doing to try to harden each newsletter edition to make sure it's good? Is it just like, hey, this is actionable and we were pretty comprehensive and I checked it past experts? Is that the extent of it, or what are you trying to do to feel like it's fantastic? What's your review process when you pass it by others as well?

Lenny (53:30):
I'm happy to answer that, but I also know you got to run soon. I guess we could touch on... We could just save the fifth topic maybe for a follow up episode is one idea, or we could touch on it.

Julian Shapiro (53:40):
Sure. Up to you. Anything you want, my friend. If you want me to cover the next topic, super happy to. Up to you. Everyone listening right now is like, "Man, Julian's just been fucking rambling for an hour." I realized we were not having a conversation. Now I feel bad because I was so in my momentum of sharing some concepts that I didn't really have a conversation with.

Lenny (53:59):
This is very normal for this podcast, so do not stress.

Julian Shapiro (54:04):
All right. Good. Actually, you should leave this all in here so they know I feel bad. I'm not cutting anything. What was the last topic again? Remind me.

Lenny (54:12):
I was just saying, I think one of the things people really like about this podcast from what I hear often is they like that I'm not talking a lot. They kind of like that I'm letting the guests speak mostly, because a lot of podcast, the guest thinks they know at all, or sorry, the host and they just talk, talk, talk.

Julian Shapiro (54:27):
Oh, got you. The thing is you are brilliant. You're an actual host who is a useful, amazing human being and we want to hear your thoughts.

Lenny (54:35):
What was the last topic again?

Julian Shapiro (54:36):
The last topic was the Creativity Faucet. We can save that for another talk, or if you want to touch on it, we can do that too.

Lenny (54:43):
Sure. Yeah, let's do it.

Julian Shapiro (54:45):
The quick version here is that this is an idea that I saw recur across three of the most prolific creators in the world, John Mayer, Ed Sheeran, Neil Gaiman. Ed Sheeran might work with other producers and so on, but the basic thing between the three is they're very independent creators who are constantly making blockbusters in large part on their own. I was curious, what on earth are those three doing that very few other people are doing? Taylor Swift also. One day I actually found the answer, what is their approach to consistently making phenomenal content? The way I found it was interesting.

Julian Shapiro (55:23):
I was watching a masterclass, like Masterclass.com, with Neil Gaman and he explained his process for writing fiction novels. And then in the same year, I watched the documentary of Ed Sheeran explaining his process for writing songs and they were identical. And then a year later, I came across a YouTube video that I posted on Twitter with John Mayer spinning his process, also identical. I'm like, fuck, there's the answer. They don't have a name for their process, so I just call it the Creativity Faucet. Very quickly, what they do is they visualize their creativity as a backed up pipe of water. The first mile is packed with wastewater, and this wastewater has to be emptied before the clear water behind it can arrive.

Julian Shapiro (56:10):
Because your creativity pipe or Creativity Faucet only has one faucet, there's no shortcut to achieving the clarity, the clear water of good ideas, until you first empty the wastewater out. If we apply that to creativity at the beginning of every writing session, write out every bad idea that comes to mind. Instead of being self-critical and resisting these bad ideas, you have to recognize bad ideas is progress. Because once they are emptied out of you, the better ideas begin to arrive. Here's the key part, why do good ideas arrive after the bad ideas are empty? It's because when you've gone through a bunch of bad ideas, your brain, your mind starts reflexively identifying what elements are causing the badness.

Julian Shapiro (56:53):
Then it becomes way better at avoiding those bad elements and you become way better at pattern matching the novel ideas with way greater intuition. Most creators are resisting their bad ideas. If you sat down, scribbled a few thoughts in a blank document, and just walked away because you weren't struck with gold, then you never actually finished the creative process. There's no way you would've come up with gold. Like Neil and Ed, for example, they know they're not superhuman. What they're doing is in every creative session, they simply have the discipline to allot time no matter how long it takes, it could be an hour, to empty all of the bad ideas.

Julian Shapiro (57:28):
And then they're not worried about whether good ideas will come after the bad ones because they know the following process. You start with a weak imitation. You identify what makes your invitation weak, and then you iterate the imitation until it's finally original. And that is the process you have to just throw yourself into.

Lenny (57:46):
I love that. I feel like I don't do that enough. I feel like when I get to writing, I'm just like, "Okay, let's make this awesome." This is a really good reminder just to get stuff out. It connects to the concept of the shitty first draft. Just write. It'll be bad. And then you edit. You asked me this question, what my process is for writing, and most of it is just refining like a thousand times. I just kind of take a first pass and then I look at it, make it better, look at it, make it better, and just kind of keep editing for days and days and days until it's not bad.

Julian Shapiro (58:15):
I love that. That's what I've always done, until one day I was like, "I need a process here." Anyway dude, pleasure chatting. You're a gent. Sorry to all the listeners for rambling so much at a high pace. Cut anything you want. You can cut all of that. I don't care. Whatever you find interesting, go with. We're just going to have this final goodbye and that's it.

Lenny (58:36):
That was very anti-climactic. Cool, man. Where can folks find you online and how can listeners be useful to you?

Julian Shapiro (58:41):
Sure. You can go to Julian.com. It has everything, Twitter, handbooks, all that good stuff. And that's it. I hope you guys find the handbooks useful.

Lenny (58:50):
Amazing, Julian. I know you don't do a lot of podcasts. I really appreciate you being here. This was awesome. I'm excited to get this out.

Julian Shapiro (58:56):
Dude, truly my pleasure. I think you're awesome and you're why I'm doing the podcast. Really my pleasure, man. Have a great day.

Lenny (59:02):
Thanks, man. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:00:00):
It seems like there's a playbook for everything, there is a framework for everything, but the reality is you have to spend the hours and the time to really understand your customer.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:09):
You were the first marketing hire at OpenAI. I believe ChatGPT is the fastest-growing product in history. Let me ask you this. A lot of people might be hearing like, "Oh, ChatGPT." It's like, why do you need marketing?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:00:18):
Everyone knew of ChatGPT, but when you clicked one zoom level further, the thing that came up was, "I don't know what to use it for." The work of marketing ended up becoming creating this sort of use case epiphany where people could say, "I had no idea ChatGPT can do that." A lot of marketing metrics tend to be vanity metrics about the number of clicks that you got, number of views, number of impressions. I think those are all bullshit numbers. What is that experience that you want your customers to come away with when they interact with your brand?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:45):
If your advice is, "Don't just copy what other companies do," what should people be doing?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:00:50):
Put together a four-step process that has served me pretty well. The first step here is...

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:55):
Today my guest is Krithika Shankarraman. Krithika was the first marketing hire and VP of marketing at OpenAI, the first marketing hire at Stripe where she was the only marketing person for three years. She was also an early marketing leader at Retool and at Dropbox. She also did marketing for Android at Google. Currently, she is executive in residence at Thrive Capital where she supports their portfolio and founders on all things marketing and helps hire early marketing leaders for their startups.

(00:01:21):
In our conversation, we talk through all of the biggest lessons that she has learned about how to market your product from her time at OpenAI, Stripe, Retool, Dropbox and other places, including her four-step diagnostic approach to marketing, her anti-playbook playbook, what B2B companies can learn from consumer marketing, career advice for people looking to get into marketing, and also just what people that don't want to get into marketing should know about marketing to be successful.

(00:01:46):
A big thank you to Kevin Garcia and Kelly Sims for suggesting questions and stories to get into. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. Also, if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of a bunch of world-class products, including Superhuman, Notion, Linear, Perplexity, and Granola and more. Check it out at lennysnewsletter.com and click Bundle. With that, I bring you Krithika Shankarraman.

(00:02:13):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing and feature management platform built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams. Companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth and for understanding the performance of new features, and Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most was our experimentation platform. I could set up experiments easily, troubleshoot issues, and analyze performance all on my own.

(00:02:53):
Eppo does all that and more with advanced statistical methods that can help you shave weeks off experiment time, an accessible UI for diving deeper into performance, and out of the box reporting that helps you avoid annoying prolonged analytic cycles. Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insights with your team, sparking new ideas for the A/B testing flywheel. Eppo powers experimentation across every use case, including product, growth, machine learning, monetization, and email marketing. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com/lenny, and 10 X your experiment velocity. That's geteppo.com/lenny.

(00:03:31):
This episode is brought to you by Airtable ProductCentral, the unified system that brings your entire product org together in one place. No more scattered tools. No more misaligned teams. If you're like most product leaders, you're tired of constant context switching between tools. That's why Airtable built ProductCentral after decades of working with world-class product companies. Think of it as mission control for your entire product organization. Unlike rigid point solutions, ProductCentral powers everything from resourcing to voice of customer, to road mapping, to launch execution. And because it's built on Airtable's no-code platform, you can customize every workflow to match exactly how your team works. No limitations. No compromises. Ready to see it in action? Head to airtable.com/lenny to book a demo. That's airtable.com/lenny. Krithika, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:04:29):
Thank you so much for having me. I'm excited to be chatting.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:32):
So you were an early and the first marketing hire at some of the most iconic companies in the world. What I want to do with our chat today is basically go through a lot of these companies that you've worked at and see what lessons we can extract about your time leading marketing at these companies. And I want to start with OpenAI. No big deal. You were the first marketing hire at OpenAI. Things seem to have gone really well over there. I believe ChatGPT is the fastest-growing product in history. Does that resonate?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:05:03):
It does. Not that I can take credit for it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:05):
Well, we'll talk about that. Either way, nice job. Let me ask you this. A lot of people might be hearing like, "Oh, ChatGPT." It's like, why do you need marketing? It's like the most magical thing in the history of the world. How much value does anything add to making it as successful? Can you just talk about just the value that a marketing person adds to a product like that that's already incredible?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:05:25):
Yeah. When you think about all of the different stages of the funnel, awareness was clearly not the problem that ChatGPT or OpenAI had. Everyone knew of ChatGPT, but when you clicked one zoom level further, the thing that came up was, "I don't know what to use it for. I don't know what it replaces. Should I be using search for this? Should I be using ChatGPT for this? How can it even help me?" And so the work of marketing ended up becoming, creating this sort of use case epiphany where people could say, "I had no idea ChatGPT can do that. And yeah, maybe I should be using it for X, Y, Z reason in my own life." And so I think you have to be very diagnostic in terms of what can marketing be doing to help, rather than just going off of the typical top of funnel, and then middle of funnel and conversion-oriented tactics that end up being in a playbook.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:14):
So for folks that listen to this podcast, it's a lot of product managers, product builders. A lot of them don't have a lot of experience with marketing. I think it's an important insight there of just, this is a thing marketing can help you with is helping people understand how to use your product, understand use cases, understand examples, things like that. So I think as we go through this, I think this is useful for folks to understand of, here's what you may not be good at and may need marketing help with.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:06:38):
Yeah. When done right, product management and product marketing should be best friends, right? And you are working together at every stage of product development. Rather than thinking of it as a handoff at the end of the conveyor belt when the product's been built, you sort of hand it off to marketing to take it out the door. If you can think of it as sort of a three-legged race from the very beginning of product development, then you go to market with the right thing in the first place. You get these insights from customers, you hear the language that they're using, which can be the sort of cheat code for how to message and position the product in market. And of course, there's a creativity angle on how to differentiate your product in the market, but ideally, you're doing that in lockstep with the product management side.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:18):
The other element of ChatGPT's marketing success, I know that you spent a lot of time on the enterprise side, is just consumerish marketing tactics for enterprisey products. Can you just talk about that? And it feels like that's emerging more and more just like consumer tactics for enterprise products.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:07:35):
In typical organizations that I've been a part of and leading marketing for, the enterprise side of the house, the B2B side of the house usually fits the mold of demand generation where you're creating demand for the sales team and you're bringing new customers and prospects into the fold and into the orbit of the company. That again, was not the problem at OpenAI. When we turned on the contact sales form for ChatGPT Enterprise, which was one of my first launches at the company, our lead volume 40 X-ed overnight. It was unanticipated even beyond our wildest expectations. And so some of the things that I had to do are not typical to marketing at all. I sat down with ChatGPT and I coded up a Python script that ended up functioning as our first lead qualification, lead-scoring model. That was used in production for way too long, longer than I'd care to admit.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:25):
It's so funny. I think about when ChatGPT first launched and OpenAI just launched, everyone was just like, "How will you make money? How do you make money with something like this chatbot that's pretty smart, but sort of not that smart?" I remember there's a video of Sam Altman being asked, "How do you make money with something like this?" And I don't know if you just saw this, he just like, "At some point we will ask ChatGPT, how do we make money?"

Krithika Shankarraman (00:08:47):
Yes. And I think the reality is it's not a solved problem. And a lot of folks, a lot of companies in the AI domain are trying to figure out the right pricing model. And it's something that you've talked about in your newsletter and so on, but there is a value creation aspect to using AI that doesn't kind of neatly fit the mold of SaaS-based pricing or seed-based pricing, or even usage-based pricing. So, I think there are still some frontiers to figuring out where is the value, how do different types of organizations and companies and consumers find value? And again, it's not the typical sort of KPIs that you would typically try to optimize and maximize.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:27):
I will say, though, in terms of pricing, it feels like ChatGP, it works. It's just like a monthly fee, talk to it up to a certain limit. It's wild to think back now, there was a sense, "We don't have no idea how will this make money." Now it seems so obvious.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:09:41):
Truly was a research preview.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:44):
And I remember Sam Altman just launched, "Here, check out this chat thing that we are trying with," and then the fastest product growth in history. No big deal. I want to come back to this point you made about this playbook, anti-playbook kind of a thinking. You kind of pointed out that with ChatGPT and OpenAI, there was no playbook, and you find that often people following playbooks don't work. Talk about that insight.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:10:08):
In my current role in my career, I've spoken with a lot of founders, and typically, the founders reach out because I've worked at companies that they look up to and they're looking for that playbook. They're looking for, "Hey, just tell me how Stripe did it. Tell me how Retool did it. Tell me how OpenAI did it." And I really hesitate to share any such detail because there was a combination of context, competitive landscape, and the overall sort of zeitgeist of when the company's operating, how the company's operating, that really adds a lot of nuance to what works in the market.

(00:10:43):
And so doing the same things, like if you're just kind of copying the outcomes or the outputs of the strategy and trying to follow in the footsteps of the tactics, you're not paying enough attention to the inputs and, what were the variables and the deciding factors which led to that strategy in the first place? So what I like to do is try to unpack more of a framework for how do you get to become more of a diagnostician to understand the right strategy or tactic in the first place, rather than saying, "How do you copy something that led someone else to success?" Because those criteria may not apply to you at all.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:17):
So let's follow that thread because everyone's like, "Goddamn, I need a play. Just tell me how to do this." Okay, so there's no playbooks that you... If your advice is, "Don't just copy what other companies do that have done well," what should people be doing? How do they approach figuring out how to market their product and help it grow faster?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:11:35):
Yeah. So I was an engineer before I became a marketer, and so I have brought a little bit of an engineer's framework to the marketing side of the house. And so something that I've tried to do is put together a four-step process that has served me pretty well. The first step here is diagnosing. So, diagnosing the actual problem. Again, this usually means taking a zoom back when a founder comes and asks, "Hey, we really need to hire a demand gen leader. Who do you know in your network that we should be thinking about?" And I'm like, "Let's talk about your funnel. Do you have a lot of people coming in at the top of the funnel? And when they do come in at the top of the funnel and you start talking to them and having a sales conversation, how likely is it that you close them? How likely is it that you win that deal?"

(00:12:20):
That usually tells you very astutely, do you have product market fit? Once you're already in the room and people are converting, you have found that problem statement that is critical to them that is hurting them the most, and your solution is resonating as a solve to that problem. And so that means yes, probably throwing in more at the top of the funnel is a very good move to make at that time. But on the other hand, if you say, "Yeah. I mean, we get a lot of interest, but once they're in the room, they have a bunch of questions. They're asking about, how do you compare to X competitor and Y competitor? And why does it cost so much?" and et cetera, et cetera.

(00:12:59):
That probably means that there's more to be done in the product market fit zone rather than throwing in more at the top of the funnel because you have a leaky funnel at the bottom. And so hiring a demand generator may be the worst thing that you can do versus thinking about more of a product marketer who's thinking about the competitive differentiation, the positioning, the sales enablement that gets more people through at the bottom. So that's that diagnostic step at the top.

(00:13:24):
Second to me is analyzing your competitors' approaches. So to me, this is not about being super laser focused on your competition because that leads to these local maxima rather than thinking about face shift changes and breakthroughs that you can make as a company. But when you analyze your competitors' approaches, evaluating what others do in the space can kind of give you a useful baseline and identify opportunities and gaps and niches that your company can take in instead.

(00:13:51):
And then, this is the critical step. The next one is you have to intentionally take a different path than what everyone else is doing. And so driving a strategy that sort of sets the company apart is really critically important. I think it's so core to the discipline of marketing, ensuring that differentiation in the market. And you don't have to go into a cave to come up with these ideas and strategies. You can usually go and look at domains that are far outside of your own rather than your direct competitors and come up with some great ideas that you can cross apply and bring in and steal into your own domain or vertical instead.

(00:14:28):
And then the final piece is just experiment, test, validate all of that, and then scale what works and kind of discard what doesn't. So you really have to have a lot of that ability to throw away work when you might have spent a ton of calories on this wonderful piece of content. But if it's not working, don't double down on it. That bias of the sunk cause fallacy really comes into play, especially when you've poured your heart and soul into creating artifacts for marketing. So experiment, test, validate. Give people that psychological safety to fail, especially your teams and organizations. And then, yeah, once you find what works, really double down on it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:06):
Let me summarize what you just shared here. So essentially if you think you're like, "I need help with marketing," or, "I have a problem and I think I need to hire a demand gen person or a paid growth person or a SEO person, or I don't know, content writer," something like that, before you do that, first of all, go through these four steps.

(00:15:24):
So step one is diagnose. Spend time understanding what's the specific problem you want to solve, then analyze. This is so interesting, I've never heard it this way. So then it's analyze what your competition is doing so that you can then, one, find inspiration and see where gaps exist. And then it sounds like the core part of it is just make sure you differentiate and choose a different path versus just try to be the better thing or the cheaper thing. And then the final piece is just like, "Okay, here's our path. Let's test run some small scale tests to see if this would work."

Krithika Shankarraman (00:15:54):
Yeah. I'm a marketer through and through now. So I mean you got diagnose, D. Analyze, A. Take a different path, T. And experiment for the E. So it's the DATE framework. I've just kind of coined it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:05):
Oh, beautiful. Okay. We got a new framework hot off the presses. I love it. DATE, okay. So with differentiation, what's your thoughts on saying you're just a lot better or a lot cheaper?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:16:19):
Being cheaper is a race to the bottom, especially when you think about sort of scaling laws and how things are playing out. Every company is sort of becoming an AI company at this time. And so as models get cheaper and more capable, being cheaper is not going to be the thing that really is a durable approach in the market. And I think in terms of doing things differently, it's not just for the sake of it. I think it's really that novelty and that differentiation is something that people are craving for. They're not looking for yet another tool in the market. They are looking for something that aligns with their values, aligns with what their goals are. And so if you can be really crisp on understanding the user need, understanding what is the problem space in which they're operating, I think that one-two punch of a fantastic product experience, and then the marketing experience to match, can be a superpower for your company.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:11):
Awesome. Okay. So let's go through an example of a company you did this with, and then this may take us to another company you worked at in the stories there.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:17:19):
Yeah. One that comes to mind is definitely Retool. Retool was very different from both my experiences at Stripe and at OpenAI because both Stripe and OpenAI, for better or for worse, were inbound companies, right? There was so much latent demand that we were fighting off people breaking down the door trying to get to our products. With Retool, marketing was between the company and revenue. And we had fantastic product market fit with the enterprise space, with the developer community, but awareness was a challenge. And so how do we go out, not just wait inside of our house waiting for people to knock down the door, but rather step outside of our house and start introducing ourselves to the neighborhood?

(00:17:57):
So, thinking about outbound channels and building demand engines was the name of the game. And here, one of the ways to think about that is, "Hey, should we just scale the paid marketing channels that we already have working for us?" And that's when the diagnostic really came into play, which is, what are the leads that are coming through the funnel? Are they turning into sales-qualified opportunities? What kind of pipeline are they driving? A lot of marketing metrics, again, tend to be vanity metrics. They tend to be about the number of clicks that you got, number of views that a tweet got, number of impressions. I think those are all bullshit numbers.

(00:18:35):
Really, what you want to be looking at is your impact on either signups if you're a self-serve product, PLG, or in terms of a B2B company, sales leads and revenue that you're driving, pipeline and opportunity that you're driving. So we diagnosed that and we found that for the most part, our paid social channels were doing not much for us. And so we had to invest in net new engines. So that was the diagnostic. When we looked at some of the competitors, we saw that they were doing a lot of content marketing. They were doing a lot of events programming. And we could've kind of followed in those footsteps, but there was the ability to take a different path.

(00:19:13):
And so what we decided to do was double down on customer marketing and customer storytelling because the thing that differentiated Retool from a lot of the copycat competitors in the market was that we had terrific traction with true enterprises who were paying for the product, who believed in the product, who were expanding within the product. And so having them tell the stories on our behalf was so much more compelling, and no other company could replicate the kind of customers that Retool had in its bench. So, we wanted to make sure that we were using those logos, we were using those companies to the best impact possible, and then we experimented. We tried to put together webinars, different types of sales dinners, different types of event formats to see what actually worked best for us, and scaled the ones that worked and discarded the ones that didn't.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:02):
Okay, there's so much here. So in the diagnose step, I think in kind of a between-the-lines piece of advice here is look at what's already working. So you looked at, okay, maybe paid growth, maybe this, maybe that. And then it's like, "Okay, what seems to be working is people find us through maybe another logo, another customer that's fancy, and they're like, 'Oh, Netflix is using Retool. Oh, maybe I should check it out.'" So I think that's a really important lesson there is don't try to like, "Hey, we need to start expanding our top of funnel to all these different channels." There's one more-

Krithika Shankarraman (00:20:32):
And really litigate some of those channels, too, because on the surface they might be working, but are they actually driving pipeline and revenue?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:38):
Got it. So they may be showing vanity metrics. Numbers are nice at the top, but they're not sales qualified potential. They don't actually stick around. Okay. And then, the analyze competition is really interesting. So again, it's just like, "What are they doing? What can we be doing differently?" Does it ever make sense just to do what they're doing but do it better, or is that rarely a successful path?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:20:58):
You still have to do something a little bit different. I recall a very specific example at Stripe where our product, Stripe Connect, which was made for marketplaces like Uber and Airbnb, where not only are you accepting money as a platform, you're also paying out people on the seller side of the marketplace. The competition truly was to become a payment facilitator. So rather than using another off-the-shelf service, instead of using Stripe Connect, you might go off and become a PayFac yourself. And a lot of the services, organizations, the consulting groups that were helping companies become PayFacs, the things that they were doing was really leaning into that old school terminology, the jargon of the legacy systems and so on and so forth.

(00:21:43):
And Stripe kind of figured out, "Hey, we need to rank higher for the SEO terms that people are searching for. So how do we help rank for PayFac without actually talking about ourselves as a PayFac solution?" So we decided to kind of do a reverse RFP system where we created a piece of content that said, "Hey, if you want to be a payment facilitator, here's the secret playbook. Here's all the things that you have to do. And by the way, if this feels onerous or annoying, it is, and you should use Stripe Connect instead." So there was still a little bit of a zigging where others were zagging. Yeah, but I think if we had done the same thing in terms of becoming a consulting service to become a payment facilitator, Connect would be nowhere near the sort of run rate or revenue that it drives for the company.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:29):
Okay. And this is a great segue to Stripe, which, another company you were the very first marketing hire at. You were also, I believe, the only marketing person for three years at Stripe.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:22:38):
I do not recommend that to anybody.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:41):
There's a lesson there. Okay, so let's talk about Stripe. What are some of the biggest things you learned marketing at Stripe that you think might be helpful to other marketing people and founders?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:22:51):
Oh, man, there are so many things to choose from because I was Stripe for almost eight and a half years. Joining as the company's first marketing hire, building that marketing function from the ground up, it really gave me the privilege of working very closely with our founders, John and Patrick. I would say actually I was not the first marketer at Stripe, John and Patrick were the first marketers at Stripe because they were developers themselves. They truly understood the developer community. And when that audience for Stripe was squarely developers to begin with, they knew exactly how to authentically reach that audience.

(00:23:24):
And so I had to unlearn a lot of the things that I had learned at Google and Dropbox coming into Stripe in order to reach developers authentically. The experience really taught me the importance of deep product understanding as well. You couldn't really play act at understanding the product, especially when developers are trained to spot bugs, right? So not only do they spot those bugs in code, they spot those bugs in marketing and in blog posts.

(00:23:51):
And so if the marketing pieces are your first impression of the product, they're an extension of the product itself, you have to hold yourself to a very high bar in terms of how you communicate about the product. And so we did a lot of investment in design work, in polish in terms of how the marketing came together. And yeah, the value of creating marketing artifacts that were deeply integrated with the company's mission and the craftsmanship that went into the product was another lesson that I learned very deeply at Stripe.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:23):
So kind of along those lines, again, people may look at Stripe and be like, "Okay, it's the best thing ever for payments. Why do we need marketing? It's just like, engineers build it and integrate, it works." What is it that marketing most adds to a product like Stripe?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:24:40):
Across my time at Stripe, marketings are very different purposes. And so I kind of see it in different epochs or chapters of my time at the company. The first chapter when I joined, our head of partnerships at the time, Cristina Cordova, handed me a Hackpad at the time, which is like a notion-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:59):
I remember Hackpad.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:25:00):
Oh, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:00):
It turned into Dropbox Paper.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:25:02):
That's right. And so she had kept a Hackpad, a secret Hackpad away from the engineering team, which was all of the features and products that we had shipped but had never communicated to our customers about. And so the launch sort of ended with shipping the feature rather than communicating with the user. So the first chapter at Stripe was really just getting through that backlog and making sure that the ethos at the company changed to say, "Hey, your launch isn't complete if you're just code complete. You have to actually ship it to the customer and make them aware of it." So usage became the north star, engagement became the north star rather than just the binary, has it launched or not?

(00:25:41):
The second chapter at Stripe was really starting to expand what a launch meant, right? So, going from just putting out a blog post for people who were already subscribed to the RSS feed of the company versus thinking through, "Hey, how do we reach out to them through an email, through other channels? How do we really invest in this fanatical community that is getting so excited about the product experience?" So we pulled together developer experience as a function, built out developer relations to really have that community feeling and vibe.

(00:26:13):
And then it was about starting to think through the multi-product ecosystem. So Stripe went from a single-threaded payments processing company to one that had multiple different products and features for the audience and the user base. So then the work of marketing became, how do you help people understand and navigate potentially this multi-product ecosystem and platform to figure out what's the right set of features and solutions that they should be using for their needs?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:41):
And so this is, again, a good example of marketing can do a lot of different things and depends on the stage, depends on the needs. It almost starts again with diagnose. Where do we have a need for marketing and growth?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:26:53):
And especially in hyper-growth companies, I think you have to run that diagnostic every three months, every six months in order to stay adaptable and flexible because those top level goals do change. At some point, we really have to figure out how to scale our sales function. We have to figure out how to scale internationally. And so being adaptable to that meant constant reprioritization and making sure that you were also hiring people who weren't super deep in particular disciplines, but having a team structure that was T-shaped, people who could be flexible to those needs of the company.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:24):
Coming back to your point about how there's no playbooks, is Stripe another example where it's like, this has never been done before, we shouldn't copy what other payments companies have done in the past?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:27:34):
Yeah. If we did, we would still be talking about PCI compliance and payment gateways.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:40):
There's so much of what you share that reminds me of Raaz from Wiz, who also, you were an engineer originally, she was a product person. Yeah, I think. I don't know if she was an engineer, but a product person. So it's your-

Krithika Shankarraman (00:27:52):
Her first PM, actually. Yeah, Raaz is great.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:54):
Okay. And I think there's a few things that are so interesting here. One is you both have non-marketing backgrounds, you went from another function. And I think, you tell me, it gives you a whole new perspective on marketing, not just the traditional education of marketing. Is there anything there?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:28:09):
One thing it's definitely made me is very skeptical of most marketing channels and strategies and tactics. And so I would be one of the first people to say, "Is that really going to work? What developer is clicking on paid ads? Isn't a better thing that we could be doing for them telling them to install ad block?" So I think that skepticism means that you just have a higher bar for the quality of the content, the substance of the content. You want to make sure that the marketing is as substantive and as crafted as the product experience itself.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:40):
The other really interesting corollary here is she was very big on avoiding the generic acronyms and classic industry norms, I forget what they were, for cloud security. But it's just like, "We're not this thing. We're Wiz. Here's what we do."

Krithika Shankarraman (00:28:53):
They are definitely a company that zags when others zig. I still have my Wiz socks, which have these beautiful 8-bit characters on them. Their branding really stands out in the sea of sameness in SaaS conferences.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:05):
Okay. There's something I heard that you did at Stripe that I wanted to ask you about that worked really well. When you came into Stripe, you looked at all of the biggest customer support issues and you turned those into docs to help people serve themselves. Can you just talk about that insight and the power of doing something like that?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:29:22):
Yeah, and this was a great practice that existed at Stripe even before I joined, which is all new hires would do a support rotation just to build empathy with our customers. So, users first was a very core operating principle for the company, and we spent about 20% of our time collectively talking to customers, talking to users, talking to non-users to understand their needs, their gripes about the product. And that tradition, I think, continues to today. The support rotation specifically was such a fantastic fountain of understanding, "Hey, these are the areas that people are confused about."

(00:29:54):
Again, I kind of mentioned this sort of cheat code of talking to your customers and using the language that they use to describe their problems as a shortcut to fantastic product marketing and messaging, because it really tells you what are their pain points and how can you meet them where they are. You want them nodding their heads along as they're reading your landing pages. And so when I was doing the support rotation, there were thematic things that kept coming up. People were asking, "Hey, do you process subscription payments or recurring payments?" Or, "Can I pay people out with Stripe?" And I was like, "Of course you could, but there's no reason you should know that because we don't tell you anywhere."

(00:30:30):
And so that ended up being a stacked rank backlog of landing pages that we produce that just educated people. And this is really important when you have strong top of funnel demand, and potentially not as many people and you're not trying to scale your teams linearly. Having those educational resources, especially for developers, a fantastic marketing funnel sometimes doesn't look like talking to sales. It often never looks like talking to sales. It looks like a self-directed educational experience. Even the sales process ends up being very consultative typically with very technical folks on the other side. So yeah, that was a great way and a great program to figure out what content we should focus and prioritize.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:12):
These are really cool just little ways as a new marketing person. You can add value really quickly is kind of what I'm taking away.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:31:21):
Talking to customers is at the top of the list.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:24):
Today's episode is brought to you by LinkedIn Ads. One of the hardest and also most important parts of B2B marketing is reaching the right people. I'm constantly getting ads for products that I will never buy, and I almost feel sorry for the money that these companies are spending pitching me on their spend management software or some kind of cybersecurity solution that my one man business just does not need. When you're ready to reach the right professionals, use LinkedIn Ads. LinkedIn has grown to a network of over 1 billion professionals, including 130 million decision makers, and that's where it stands apart from other ad platforms. You can target your ad buyers by job title, industry, company, role, seniority, skills, even company revenue.

(00:32:08):
All the professionals that you need to reach in one place. Stop wasting budget on the wrong audience and start targeting the right professionals only on LinkedIn Ads. LinkedIn will even give you $100 credit on your next campaign so that you can try it for yourself. Just go to linkedin.com/podlenny. That's linkedin.com/podlenny. Terms and conditions apply. Only on LinkedIn Ads.

(00:32:32):
There's something else that I know that you're a big advocate of which is internal reviews and just making sure everyone's aligned, which I think a lot of people and especially startups try to avoid. Like, "Let's just move fast. We don't need to have all these meetings where people review stuff," but I know you're a big advocate of that. Talk about why that's so important.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:32:48):
Yeah, this is a hill that I would die on, which is that good process or sufficient process is actually something that speeds up a company rather than slow it down. It stems from this idea that we talked about a little bit, which is that marketing is an extension of your product. It's the first touchpoint your customers have with your product. And ideally, you're setting expectations there in terms of what they should expect once they sign up for the product or commit to a contract and start using it within their companies. And when I think about that, consistency is really, really important.

(00:33:20):
The other part, the other facet of why process is important is because especially as you're in hyper-growth companies, scaling teams is part and parcel like what you're trying to do. And when you bring in someone new, you want them to be just as self-sufficient as somebody who's been at the company for two years. So in your second week, can you be as successful as someone who's been at the company for two years? And the reason that I have that principle in mind is because it makes you kind of break out of your shell of, "I've been at this company for some time now. I understand the sort of unspoken rules of the organization. I've built up enough social capital that I can withdraw from to get something done. And I know which conference room to stand outside of to get the founder to review a piece of content before it goes out the door."

(00:34:09):
That is not scalable, that is not sustainable. And so if you want somebody to be successful and contributing member of the organization very, very quickly, setting up some of these processes with the intention of trying to help them navigate how to go from idea to execution can be very empowering and powerful. Nobody wants to do the wrong thing. They want the guardrails to understand what great looks like at the company.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:33):
Can you speak more about what this looks like? Say a startup wants to start implementing something like this.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:34:38):
Two simple processes that you could put into place today is, one, set up a forum called Marketing Review. This can be a live meeting that you host for an hour a week or it can be a Slack channel where people are posting things async, or even an email alias where things get sent to. Have that be transparent to the rest of the organization so anyone in the marketing team, anyone in the product organization can join that forum. What that does is it creates a fishbowl where you see sort of, what are the themes that come out when somebody reviews a piece of content? Are they looking at the strategy? Are they looking at the audience? Are they looking at the words? Are they looking at the sort of design approach? So you learn through osmosis of looking at some of these discussions.

(00:35:20):
And then I would say don't overdo it. I would say there are probably two checkpoints in a program that are really important to get aligned at. One is the 20% review. A 20% review is a strategy review. What are we trying to accomplish? Who are we trying to do it for, and what is the rough approach that we're going to take? If everyone feels comfortable with that, you come back at the 80% mark where you've done a lot of the work on the artifacts, the different types of teams that have to be involved and how do you take something to market it in the first place.

(00:35:49):
And the reason that I say 80% is sort of critical because if you come in at the 99% mark and you're just looking for a rubber stamp of approval, and you don't really have the slack in the system to be able to make any changes, then that review was worthless. So come in at the 80% mark where you can still make some substantive changes before it goes out the door. And that serves the purpose of consistency so that your brand is showing up in a consistent way to the audience. And two, it helps the rest of the organization learn from each other.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:19):
There's almost this unspoken element of what you're describing that I want to dig into a little bit, which is the need and value of having consistent and high quality marketing, communication. Why is that important? There's always this talk of just move fast break things. "We're going to be scrappy. We're not going to be obsessed with perfect quality of our, I don't know, websites and emails." Just, why is that important? Why do you value that? Why should companies maybe value that more?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:36:45):
It's funny because with the companies who value velocity actually do value their brand just as much, but oftentimes they think of these as two siloed separate initiatives that they have to put their headspace and calories towards. And I actually think they are not mutually exclusive. They are actually very interconnected. And so when you understand the consistency of your brand, it actually empowers the organization to move faster because you kind of understand how you want the brand to show up in the world. What is that experience that you want your customers to come away with when they interact with your brand?

(00:37:25):
And the brand is not just marketing artifacts, it is your product experience. It is how your customer support team talks to them, how they resolve tickets. Are you getting passed between a bunch of different teams or is someone just resolving your ticket right away? It's the experience that they have for candidates when they come to recruit your company. So all of these variety of touch points that touch so many different organizations and teams within your organization, they are the amalgamation that makes up your brand. And so if you think of these two things as separate silos, you are optimizing for entirely the wrong thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:02):
I've very viscerally learned the power of brand doing my newsletter. I so fear doing something very wrong in my newsletter. It's like, saying something that's completely off or having something broken, or sending an email by accident to everyone that's not ready. I just feel like once I break that, just there's so much power and trust that people have built for what I share and there's so much power that comes from that trust. If I launch a new podcast, people will assume it will be good if they trust what I do and I maintain high quality. And so it's just like a constant fear I have now of breaking that trust.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:38:40):
Yeah, I mean whether it's fear that drives you is questionable because I think it's also a commitment to your craft.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:51):
Yeah, yeah.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:38:51):
But I think that's exactly right. A brand is an expectation that you create within your audience.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:57):
And to what you said, if you have a strong brand that people trust, everything gets easier. You pitch them a new product. Like if Stripes like, "Oh, we have a new billing service."

(00:39:08):
"Oh. Oh, I bet it'll be awesome because it's Stripe." Or if OpenAI launches something. So it just makes life easier if your brand is strong, if there's trust.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:39:17):
Yeah, and you got to take that responsibility seriously because even with something like Stripe, we know that people are going to come try out things that we put out the door. And so we wanted to make sure that that met up to people's expectations. And same thing with OpenAI. When we launched something, even though we were trying to be first to market and that velocity was so important for the company, oftentimes it also came with sometimes putting the brakes on to kind of understand, how can we improve the quality of the experience? How can we make sure that it is safe? So there were different criteria at the two companies, but a similar ethos overall for the brand experience that we wanted people to experience.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:55):
Let's actually come back to OpenAI. How long were they around before you joined? It was like many, many years, right?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:40:01):
Many, many years. So OpenAI had been around for almost a decade as primarily a research organization. They had launched ChatGPT about a year before I joined. And so that was the first foray into saying, "Hey, our work is not just announcing research breakthroughs, it is about putting products into the market."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:19):
So there's a few questions I want to ask here. When is a time to bring in a Krithika? When is it like, "Okay, we need help here"? Or, "A bunch of smart people doing great work, people have the product, but I think we need a marketing person that knows what they're doing."

Krithika Shankarraman (00:40:33):
I think the first criteria is having tremendous product market fit, which is really important because you're throwing fuel on the fire, and you might be throwing different types of fuel on your particular fire. So one pillar for marketing that you have to think about is product marketing. So, if you have a high velocity engineering organization and product organization that is putting out a lot of different features and your customers aren't able to keep track, maybe the engagement's not so high for some of the newer features versus some of the core features that you had in the past, a product marketer can really help bring a discipline of launch excellence and customer engagement, differentiation in the market. How are you positioning the product?

(00:41:15):
The second pillar for me is demand generation. So if you have much more of a sales driven buyer journey in motion, how are you bringing the demand engines to bear so that your lead generation, your pipeline generation is staying really strong and solid? Or you might want to think about brand, right? You might want to think about community development as a big part of what you're doing as a company. So it really depends, but I think in all of these, you found a spark of product market fit before you're really going for it.

(00:41:43):
The second for me is that you're distinguishing enough between capital and marketing and lowercase and marketing. And there's an important distinction I've learned over the years, which is capital and marketing, the marketing team, the marketing function at the company is responsible for those channels and artifacts and engines that are driving the funnel for the company, but they are not the end all be all of the discipline of marketing.

(00:42:08):
And that's where the lowercase and marketing comes in, which is, what do you stand for as a company? What is the storyline that you're telling as a founder when you're talking to the press, to the larger business community? And then it really is a whole company motion where the product team is thinking about, "How are we going to market? What are we going to market with?" The sales team is figuring out, "What is the right ICP, the right customer profile that decision makers, that we need to be reaching?" And then it is this entire joining of the organizations to make that happen really effectively.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:47):
Yeah. I think along these lines, there's a reason Brian at Airbnb merged marketing, or product marketing and product management. However much of that actually happened or not, but the intention-

Krithika Shankarraman (00:42:58):
I would be so curious to see a follow-up a few years on on how that's been going.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:01):
Yeah. Okay, let's have Brian back to talk about that. That'd be really interesting. I wanted to actually ask, an interesting thing is happening with ChatGPT versus Claude, and it's so interesting. Claude is arguably better at many things at code, at least at this point. Things are always changing. It seems to be a better writer in a lot of ways. People prefer it for writing, but it's just like ChatGPT is just dominating. It's like, that's what people associate with AI now is just ChatGPT. It's just caught mindshare globally. What is it, do you think, that allowed ChatGPT just to be that? Is it just first mover advantage? Is it some kind of other element? Has it been better longer? Something really interesting is going on there.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:43:46):
One of the things that comes to mind is the orientation when it comes to large language models, and AI in general, is that we're just at the very beginning innings of this whole paradigm shift. And so every single week there is a new breakthrough in AI that comes out from some lab or the other. There's this one-upmanship on point changes and eval numbers and so on and so forth. But I think to customers, the users of the product, the things that make it delightful are the same things that make any product delightful. And there's a sense of loyalty that builds up over time when there is a shorter and smaller delta between your expectations and your reality.

(00:44:30):
And where those expectations are exceeded, it is accretive to the brand and your loyalty to the product. And where there is a negative delta, that tends to be something that it really detracts. I guess, long story short, what I'm trying to say is that all of these companies have to think in a much more long-term oriented fashion because it's not about a race of the best chatbot and the best outputs. It's about, how does AI become a positive force for humanity?

(00:44:58):
And so that's going to take a lot of change management and a lot of collaboration between a variety of different organizations rather than just the companies themselves and the product experience itself, because it's going to permeate every aspect of our lives. Our personal lives, our academic lives, our work lives. And so to make that transformation happen, my hope is these companies are not super focused on just their competition and one-upmanship, but rather thinking about the paradigm changes that need to happen for our society at large.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:31):
It does feel like they are taking that responsibility really seriously, but it is a massive responsibility. Before we leave OpenAI, it feels like it may be the most impactful, important company in the world right now just because they seem to be at the furthest edge of where AI is going. And so it's just such an interesting place to study. So let me ask you this. Just as a person working there, what's something people may not know that's a wonderful, positive element of how open AI works that's just like, "Oh, that's super interesting"? And then, what was maybe a challenge of working at OpenAI?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:46:08):
A surprising thing that surprised me at the company was just the warmth and intellectual curiosity of my peers and leaders at the company. And truly, the sort of commitment to the mission of making artificial intelligence that benefits all of humanity was not just lip service. It was something that was embodied day to day. The sort of questioning that happened, the sort of pressure testing that happened, the rigor with which products were developed, go-to market strategies were developed, was bar none.

(00:46:38):
And so that's something that I really admired, and it was a privilege to be a part of that organization. I think challenging, of course, is just being at the eye of the storm, right? The eye of the hurricane. So, all eyes are on OpenAI at all times, and I think that is a good thing because of the ramifications of the product. But it also really raised the stakes in terms of how we operated and with what scrutiny, everything that we did was looked at with.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:09):
Do you recommend that sort of experience for people? Because I imagine work-life balance wasn't great. I imagine there was a lot of stress and worry constantly. Who's the right... When in your career is this a sort of gig to take on versus not?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:47:25):
I'm a big believer of what Claire Hughes Johnson, who was COO at Stripe, used to share with us, which is there is a concept of a work-life blend and sort of making sure that you're working at a company that has three components. I think first and foremost is always people. So, are the people that you're surrounding yourself with ones that push your thinking, who are kind, who are genuinely interesting people to spend your hours with? Because you're spending a vast majority of your time with them.

(00:47:54):
The second to me is product, right? Do you go to sleep thinking about the product, waking up, wanting to put it into the hands of more people because you know it is going to be good for them or useful to them? I'm not one of those marketers who can pick up any product and market it. I have to have that conviction behind the product itself.

(00:48:15):
And then third is sort of potential, right? Not just potential for the company to do well, but potential for your discipline to have an impact on the trajectory of the company. And so when you have that kind of potent combination, it can really change your perspective on what's draining, what's energizing. But being very self-aware of what gives you energy is also very helpful to align with the needs of the company, also.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:41):
Let's shift to talking about Thrive, which is where you work now, and talk about what your role is. And what's interesting, I think, about this role is you get to work now with a bunch of different startups instead of go really deep with one. So share what you do there. And then, what are some things you've learned there so far from a perspective for marketing?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:48:59):
Yeah, surprisingly, more people know about Thrive these days than used to even just a few years ago. Thrive's a very unique type of investment company. And sometimes, when I made the leap, people used to ask me, "Oh, was this always in your ambition to make the leap into the investment side of the house?" And I can honestly say it wasn't. But I think being at a firm like Thrive really gives you a very different perspective and it strengthens your ability to be a stronger operator, whether that's in marketing or go-to market or strategic finance, or whatever other pillar within the company there is.

(00:49:32):
Yeah, Thrive's mission is to be the most meaningful partner to founders. And so there's a lot of high-concentration, high-conviction investments each year. And Thrive is also unique in that it's a network of builders, and so they are really pulling their investment strategies from having been founders themselves. So my role at the company is to help our entire portfolio with all of their marketing needs, so sometimes it means being interim CMO for some portion of time until they find a great leader to fill that seat. Sometimes it means pressure testing their strategy and making sure that their growth targets are ambitious enough. Sometimes it means looking at a Figma file for a landing page that's going out the next day and making sure the words are as good as they can be.

(00:50:14):
And that variety across a bunch of industries, a bunch of stages of companies, everything from a company that hasn't even been incorporated yet, all the way to Databricks and Stripe and OpenAI when it comes to the types of organizations that we work with. And in the end, the variety of domains can range from consumer to healthcare, to defense, to B2B SaaS, to AI. So it is a variety pack in the best way possible.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:43):
And so what are some things you've learned so far? Because I imagine this is a very different experience. I don't know, especially things that you've changed your mind on even, working with a bunch of companies, early stage versus, what can I say?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:50:57):
It's a really different method of operating. And so when you're in the leadership role for marketing within a single organization, you have at least a medium term north star in terms of what your teams are trying to drive for the company. And as much context switching as there might be, there is still one company, ideally one product, one buyer journey. That hasn't always been the case, especially with OpenAI and Stripe, but it can span B2C, B2B, B2D.

(00:51:27):
Thrive is very different in that if you want to be a meaningful partner to the founders, you cannot just jump from 30-minute call to 30-minute call to 30-minute call. You have to go deep to understand the context. And if anything, it's really underscored my ethos that you as a marketer, the best thing that you can bring to the table is your adaptability and flexibility. So, to really diagnose and not just try to spot patterns and themes and playbooks for these companies, but rather be very deep in the trenches with them to understand their unique context, their unique concerns, their unique characteristics, and their values and what they want to bring into the world.

(00:52:05):
The reason that they want to work with Thrive is not because we are bringing our past experiences to the table, but rather because they're trying to do something new that has never been done in the world. And so those are engagements that are the most exciting is that you are building and going into uncharted territory alongside these founders.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:26):
I bet they're all like, "Krithika, what is the playbook for growing this B2B SaaS company?" And you're like, "Nope."

Krithika Shankarraman (00:52:30):
And I say, "There is none."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:31):
Damn. But we got the framework that we talked about. Okay, I want to zoom out a little bit and talk about just career advice for marketing people, whether it's early stage or later stage. You have this concept, the chameleon CMO. Talk about that and why that's important for marketing folks to think about.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:52:48):
Yeah. The conventional wisdom for many CMOs is to be like a T-shaped marketer. And what that means is go deep in one of these pillars that we talked about, product marketing, demand marketing, brand marketing, and that kind of becomes your calling card in the world. If a company needs brand expertise, they go for this kind of flavor of CMO. Or if a company needs to really grow their pipeline or their demand gen or their consumer growth, they go for more of a demand and growth-oriented CMO. And I think this chameleon CMO concept is a bit of a novel one in that, again, I think modern marketing leaders have to be really good at a bunch of different things.

(00:53:30):
They have to be very analytical. They have to be best friends with the data science pod because they need to understand the impact of their marketing. They, of course, have to bring creativity, but it is in service to the buyer journey. It is in service to revenue goals and goals that they share with the sales team or the product team and so on, so marketing operating in a silo is no longer a real possibility. So the ability to diversify your interest, maybe going from T-shaped to comb-shaped is probably the right approach here so that you can go deeper in different domains when it is useful for the company through the diagnostic that you do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:08):
That sounds very hard. I love this beneficial of the comb shape. It sounds like I have so much to learn, so many little skills to build.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:54:16):
Before AI can come in handy. Some of the most brand marketers can become very analytical with the support of a tool like ChatGPT. If your eyes glaze over when you look at giant dumps of CSVs, it's nice to have a partner that is nonjudgmental to kind of push your thinking and to help you understand the details of the data behind the brand work that you might be doing, or vice versa. If you're a very creative product marketer, a very analytical growth marketer, you can work with ChatGPT to be more of a brainstorm partner and really push your thinking on the creative side. So I think becoming a non T-shaped marketer is getting a little bit easier.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:00):
That's such a good point. A good segue to an AI question. Hey, we got to talk about AI. One of your former colleagues, Kevin Garcia, wanted me to ask you something. He suggested I ask you about taste and creativity in AI. So he said that you're one of the best writers that he's ever worked with. You combine technical backgrounds with creative taste. You do pottery, you should. And you're a voracious reader. And he wanted just to poke at what you think about just how taste and creativity and writing change in the era of AI.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:55:31):
I think it's going to become so much more important. First of all, I will say I am not a ChatGPT hyphen person. I was an em dasher well before it became a ChatGPT thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:41):
Me too. Me too. I hate that. But just for people don't know, people are filtering out em dashes, right? Because they think ChatGPT is the only thing using em dashes?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:55:49):
Yeah, and I don't know what to do about it because this is such a core part of my identity, but-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:55):
That's a big statement, the em dash.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:55:58):
To take a step back though, I think if anything, taste is going to become a distinguishing factor in the age of AI because there's going to be so much drivel that is generated by AI, can be generated by AI, that power is at anyone's fingertips. But truly, the companies that are going to distinguish themselves are the ones that show their craft. That they show their true understanding of the product, the true understanding of their customer, and connect the two in meaningful ways. If they can use AI to augment their efforts to make that happen, that's better than them subsuming their efforts. So to build taste, there's plenty of past episodes that you yourself have recorded that get into building that work. But to me, that is going to be a real differentiator for not only great marketers but great companies to stand out in the field.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:50):
There's a concept that I love that recently I learned from Guillermo at Vercel. He calls it exposure hours. That's when I asked him how to build taste, and that's kind of a value they have at their company is just increase your exposure hours to great stuff, because that is how you build taste. I love that. It's such a simple actionable thing you can do.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:57:09):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:09):
Yeah.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:57:10):
And at Thrive, we have this share channel, which is just sharing things that we're seeing out into the world. It's not particularly deal flow news or competitive news or anything like that, but it is things that we have seen that resonated with us for whatever reason.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:24):
Along these lines of not over-relying on ChatGPT, AI tools for writing and creativity, it feels like there's going to be a big issue with people just starting early in their career where they just never learn how to do the thing, and they just rely really heavily on ChatGPT and tools like that to write, to email, to communicate well. I guess, do you have any advice for folks that are early career, just how to find that balance of not over-relying but still leveraging these tools?

Krithika Shankarraman (00:57:53):
I think there's two schools of thought here. One is that sort of the domain, the discipline itself stays static and the way that you approach it changes over time, whether you're going at it in a manual way or an automated way or an AI augmented way. But I think the other school of thought, which I more believe in, is that the discipline itself is changing. And so what it means to market a product, what it means to show up as a fantastic operator is in and itself changing. So if you're not leveraging some of these tools, you will be putting yourself at a disadvantage. But understanding the underlying mechanics, this is why I would still be a very firm believer in STEM education, is that you understand the fundamental concepts. And then you can have a choice and optionality in how you decide to apply those concepts, but the concepts themselves have to be there in the foundations.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:46):
Yeah. Easier said than done because there's all these tools now and you're just like, "Hey, I need to write a report for school. I guess I could just, maybe this time I'll just ask ChatGPT to help me with this one."

Krithika Shankarraman (00:58:56):
Yeah, the mindset of learning has to be maybe the one that we have to really imbue as a value. Because being of that growth mindset, if you go to school just to earn the grades or to finish the coursework, it's a very different mindset than if you go to school to learn those concepts and to understand how to apply them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:20):
That's something that stuck with me from my chat with Toby Lutke from Shopify. We were chatting about just what is the most important things to incubate in your child? And his answer I loved, which is just, "Curiosity."

Krithika Shankarraman (00:59:32):
I love that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:33):
Yeah, and that's what you're kind of speaking to is just if you're curious about learning, you'll almost avoid some of these things or you'll use these tools in a really interesting way just to learn things more deeply.

Krithika Shankarraman (00:59:43):
And that stays with you into your career, right? Because you can either go into your career trying to get to that next ladder in the promotion rung or you can get there to bring a genuine curiosity to, what makes us different? What makes our customers tick? And how do we find those unique insights that can unlock something that nobody else has?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:04):
That reminds me. To sort of close out our conversation, I wanted to come back to pricing strategy. I have that in my notes here and I haven't gone back to it. So let's focus on the AI and pricing strategy. Just say someone is trying to figure out pricing for their product and they have some kind of AI product. What are some tips, some piece of advice to think this through? Any general frameworks you use?

Krithika Shankarraman (01:00:25):
Again, there's no playbook. I feel like it's such a non-answer, but I think the real answer is experimentation. And we found this firsthand multiple times at Stripe, but also at Retool. I think there was a very visceral example where we decided to bring our free product into the hands of more users and sort of what was available in the free plan. And then there was another one that we tested out as a pricing function where we decided to do something quite controversial, which is to take the thing that our sales team was gated on, a self-hosted version of Retool, and made that available self-serve to anybody who wanted it. They didn't have to talk to a salesperson. And that kind of blew up the funnel, right? Because the amount of pipeline that the sales team saw had diminished considerably, but it also helped them focus up market, on higher ACV deals.

(01:01:13):
And so that trade-off is really hard to make, so the only way we could do it was through experimentation and piloting to build conviction. So I would say AI is no different in that you kind of have to test the market to see what works. Is it a seed-based model? Is that where people are deriving value? Or is the way that they speak about the value of the product something quite different? Is it hours saved? Is it the amount of things that they could do now that they couldn't do before? And so there might be a metric there to go off of, and I don't think anyone solved it, especially with agents coming into play. How you pay for AI workers is going to be very different. What is that unit of completion for things like code generators? It's going to be a Wild, Wild West before we come up with something that is as internalized now as seed-based pricing or usage-based pricing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:10):
Wild indeed. I want to actually follow this insight you had around Retool. That's really interesting. Yeah, so you opened up self-hosted Retool. What was the insight there, because this might be useful to people, that convinced you to play with that? Seems like a big deal change to how you price and do trials.

Krithika Shankarraman (01:02:30):
There were two guiding principles here. One is, do people actually want to talk to sales before they get a self-hosted thing? It's sort of like the SSO attacks, right? Is that really the thing that you want to gate your value on? So, that was one. And so we saw a lot of demand from smaller customers that still wanted self-hosted for a variety of reasons, because they worked in regulated industries or they worked with very private data and PII. And so it wasn't just something that was, "Hey, if you have 10,000 employees at your company and you're an enterprise, you want self-hosted." It was that for a variety of different reasons, regardless of your company size, you might want self-hosted. So that insight kind of led us to say, "Hey, where is the delineation here? Because the sales team should be talking to larger customers, landing larger deals." And so to align those two was one of the driving principles.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:19):
Awesome. Okay. Two final questions before we get to our very exciting lighting around. I'm going to take you to a couple of recurring segments on this podcast. The first is AI Corner. And with AI Corner, what I try to get to is some way that you have figured out to use an AI tool in your work to do better work or do faster work, to be more efficient. Is there something there that you could share? And if not, that's also totally cool.

Krithika Shankarraman (01:03:46):
Ooh, it is hard to pick because there's not many things I don't use AI for these days, and oftentimes it's a catalyst and an accelerant to the work that I'm already doing. But I think I can actually unlock my ability to talk to dozens of companies across the Thrive portfolio in any given week, and the ability to get deep on their context, their environment, their competitive landscape. We can do that because of the tools and the products that Thrive has invested in from an engineering perspective. So we have internal tools that are driven with AI that give us a lot of insights and access to expertise for these companies so we can show up as more meaningful partners in a day-to-day basis.

(01:04:29):
So I think the ability to mix AI tooling then accelerates work that you're already doing, and then AI-based tools that unlock superpowers that wouldn't otherwise be available to you unless you're going deep into Google Groups archives or talking to people across the organization to pull out things that are inside of their brain. That kind of institutional knowledge being made more accessible by AI is actually more powerful sometimes than the tools themselves. And in fact, even at OpenAI, it's one of the things that we advised most enterprises to invest in first is their own operational efficiency rather than just the AI magic dust they could sprinkle on top of their product experience for their customers.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:15):
Awesome. Okay. Final segment of the podcast we call Fail Corner. And the idea here is we have all these amazing guests, all these super successful people on the podcast, all these stories of epic wins and nothing but success. And I think in reality, that's not the case. And it's important for people to hear that things aren't always up and to the right and always win, win, win. Is there a story from your career you can share where things didn't work out and what you learned from that experience?

Krithika Shankarraman (01:05:44):
And again, this question's hard because there's so many things to choose from as potential examples here. And you're absolutely right, Lenny, in that most careers are not the sort of linear journeys that are reflected on somebody's LinkedIn profile. No, I'll talk about a fantastic success, which is called Stripe Relay, which you probably... Oh, I'm just kidding because nobody remembers it. It was ahead of its market. We launched it back in 2014. It was supposed to be the platform with which e-commerce companies would tap into social commerce. The buy buttons if you remember that. And it launched to a lot of fanfare, but then eventually failed. It didn't produce the sort of revenue or the numbers that we had expected.

(01:06:28):
And the understanding here was that as much as one side of the marketplace, or you might have some conviction that you need to put something into the market for a particular moment in time, the timing of the market really matters. And the timing of multiple parties coming together to make a platform work really matters. And so the learning here was we hadn't gone deep enough into the market dynamics. We hadn't done enough user research. Did people really want this? And if they did, what were their alternatives? What was the stacks that they were operating in? And would they adopt a net new tool versus one that integrated into existing systems directly like their e-commerce inventory management systems and so on? And so for that reason, I think, again, it was ahead of its market and ahead of its time, but a clear flop regardless of the effort that we put into that launch.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:22):
This reminds me of when Kevin Weil was on the podcast talking about Libra, which was his cryptocurrency project that Facebook ran, and he's just like, "Okay, that was a terrible time to launch something like that where people trusted Facebook the least in our history." And now may be a good time to try something like that. Basically, a cryptocurrency platform to send money internationally for free. What a dream that would be. Okay. Krithika, is there anything else you wanted to share or maybe something you wanted to remind people of from what we've talked about? Just to leave folks with a final nugget before we get to our very exciting lightning round.

Krithika Shankarraman (01:07:55):
If there's one thing that folks take away, I hope it is that they know that there isn't one clear answer to any of the marketing problems. It seems like there's a playbook for everything, there is a framework for everything, but the reality is the work is hard. You have to spend the hours and the time to really understand your customer, and there is no replacement for that, and there isn't going to be even with the advent of AI. And the other part of it is to deeply understand your product as well. What are you bringing to the table? And not just your product, but your company's values, your unique approach that you're bringing to the table. And really be intentional and thoughtful about that because in the absence of that, nothing is going to be a substitute to bring that combination of ingredients together.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:45):
With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. We have five questions for you. Are you ready?

Krithika Shankarraman (01:08:51):
Hit me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:51):
Here we go. What are two or three books that you find yourself recommending most to other people?

Krithika Shankarraman (01:08:57):
On the professional side, one book that I recommend to most people is April Dunford's book on positioning called Obviously Awesome. She does a great job breaking down how to position a product from scratch if you've never had to do that, and she's just so great for her real talk. So, really highly recommend that. And then I love fiction, so I would say one of the best reads in the last couple years has been Madeline Miller's Circe, which is a retelling of a Greek myth. Lyrical prose, beautiful writing, highly recommend.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:32):
Love the combo. April Dunford, we're huge fans of her on the podcast. She's been on twice. I think her book is in my background. We'll link to her episodes.

Krithika Shankarraman (01:09:40):
And mine.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:41):
Oh, wow. Okay. So cool. Yeah, she's the best. Okay, next question. Do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show that you have really enjoyed?

Krithika Shankarraman (01:09:48):
I'm really late to the game, but I'm finally catching up on Severance. So, no spoilers, but I'm about halfway through the first season.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:54):
Wow, okay. It's hard to weigh the spoilers, but yeah, keep going. It's amazing. Do you have a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love?

Krithika Shankarraman (01:10:03):
Granola for meeting notes because, all right, I love taking meeting notes as a way to stay engaged in the conversation and to pay a lot of attention, but I also know I'm furiously typing away. And so the ability to augment my notes and bullet points has been a game changer.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:20):
That's two guests in a row that said Granola, and I'll give a plug. You get a year free of Granola if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter. For not just you, but your whole company up to some limit. Check out lennysnewsletter.com and click Bundle, and sign up and get Granola. So cool. I love that.

Krithika Shankarraman (01:10:36):
Happy to help, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:38):
It's helping Granola, and me, I guess. Yeah, it's great. Okay, thank you. Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you find useful in work or in life?

Krithika Shankarraman (01:10:49):
My teams have now gotten tired of me saying this, but I say it all the time, which is the delta between expectations and reality is the function for unhappiness. And so it is much easier to change expectations than it is reality, so I tend to spend a lot of my energy making sure that expectations are set. Not just with customers when it comes to our external marketing, but internally with stakeholders, project partners, and even within the team so that they understand what are some of the trade-offs that we're making, or why we're making certain decisions. So I could not espouse that philosophy enough.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:25):
I love that this isn't, because I think when people first hear that it's about your own happiness, but I love that it's about other people perceiving how a something did and setting their expectations correctly. Final question. Okay, we've already talked about the em dash, but I want to ask you again. What I'm finding is, so the story here is basically people have discovered ChatGPT's using em dashes a lot, which are these long dashes that you have to use special couple letters on the keyboard to use. I'm a huge... I use these all the time, and people are starting to filter them out on Twitter because they're assuming it's generated by ChatGPT. There's content that has em dashes they assume isn't real. Will you continue using em dashes in spite of all this?

Krithika Shankarraman (01:12:06):
I have begrudgingly reduced my usage of em dashes-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:10):
Same.

Krithika Shankarraman (01:12:10):
... but you will not pry them out of my cold dead hands if you tried.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:15):
Oh, man, me too. I don't even know. It's like command, options, dash or something to even put it in there.

Krithika Shankarraman (01:12:20):
No, it's option, shift, minus.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:23):
Option, shift, minus.

Krithika Shankarraman (01:12:23):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:24):
I have to type it. I can't conceptualize in my head. Yeah, and then there's actual rules for when an em dash is the right thing versus, there's a middle-

Krithika Shankarraman (01:12:32):
Em dash and the Oxford comma, the two core tenets of my toolbox.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:36):
Is an Oxford comma where you add the comma at the end or you don't? Is that the-

Krithika Shankarraman (01:12:36):
You keep the comma at the end. You must.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:39):
Okay. I'm all for that, too. It looks so weird without it. But there's also another, like a shorter not em dash. I guess it's called something else, right? There's like-

Krithika Shankarraman (01:12:48):
The en dash, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:48):
En dash.

Krithika Shankarraman (01:12:49):
That's for ranges of numbers.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:51):
Okay, okay. I love that you know all this. Okay. Well, with that, Krithika, this has been so fun and so awesome. Thank you so much for being here. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, maybe work with you, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Krithika Shankarraman (01:13:05):
Krithix.com is where you'll find links to all my online presences. And one of my personal missions this year is to meet as many of the up-and-coming marketing talents in the world. So anyone that you know is earlier career, ambitious, but really showing their impact at their organization, please introduce them to me. I would love to chat.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:26):
And then what's the best way for them to reach out to you? Is it just on your website?

Krithika Shankarraman (01:13:29):
Yes, please.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:30):
Amazing. We'll link to that in the show notes. Krithika, thank you so much for being here.

Krithika Shankarraman (01:13:34):
Thank you for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:35):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00):
Before you came on, I asked on Twitter, what should I ask Seth Godin? The most recurring theme actually had to do with AI. How do you think all these new AI companies build brands to distinguish and differentiate themselves?

Seth Godin (00:10):
AI very soon is going to stop being a feature the same way electricity is not a feature. What AI companies and all companies need to do is say, what's in this for the user? What promise do I want to make a difficult promise, a remarkable promise, and then how do I keep it?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26):
You wrote a new book. You basically talk about how a great strategy has tension at the center of it.

Seth Godin (00:31):
Tension is at the heart of every art form and every innovation. What we do when we launch a new product, we say, we have this thing that can do X, and now the person is imagining what their life might be like if that were true. If they fall in love with that possibility, now there's tension. Did you tell the truth? Is it going to work for them?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51):
There's the section that stuck out to me, these four insights that basically determine what your life is going to be like outside of actually building the product.

Seth Godin (00:59):
For a product person, these are the critical choices and you probably have glossed over them.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11):
Today my guest is Seth Godin. Seth is an absolute legend. He's published 21 books, including 18 international bestsellers. He's been blogging every single day for almost 10,000 days in a row now. His writing and his advice have inspired me and so many people all over the world for the past few decades. He shares wisdom and advice around stuff that everyone can benefit from, including how ideas spread, when to quit, how to lead, how to stand out, and most of all how to change everything. In addition to his writing and speaking, Seth has founded several companies, including Yoyodyne and Squidoo. He also started the altMBA program, and as you'll hear in our conversation, he actually started his career as a product manager. In our conversation, Seth shares advice on how to know if you have good taste and how to build your taste, how to build a brand in an increasingly crowded world of AI startups and AI content, his thoughts on the Jaguar rebrand and also the Tesla Cybertruck.

(02:10):
We also delve into his new book, This is Strategy, including why every great strategy has tension at its center, why you need to understand the systems within which you operate in order to build a great strategy and how choosing your customers, your distribution strategy, and how you validate your idea will inform the product you build and the life that you live. We also talk about how he used Claude as a writing assistant in developing this new book.

(02:33):
This episode is short and packed with insights, which I know is what you all love. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Seth Godin.

(02:52):
Seth, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Seth Godin (02:55):
What a treat, Lenny. Thank you for having me. Lenny was my late mom's nickname, so it's good to say that out loud.

Lenny Rachitsky (03:02):
That's so cool. I've never heard it used for a woman, and every Lenny out there I've met is wonderful, so I imagine she's wonderful. First, I just want to say how honored I am to have you on this podcast. When I actually started this podcast, I was like, and I was listening to you on Tim Ferriss at that point, and I was like, man, what if one day I get Seth Godin on my podcast? How cool would that be? I've read so many of your books. I have a bunch of them in the bookshelf back there. I reference your stuff all the time, so thank you again for doing this.

Seth Godin (03:29):
Well, thank you. It's a treat to talk to you.

Lenny Rachitsky (03:33):
Today's episode is brought to you by DX. If you're an engineering leader or on a platform team, at some point your CEO will inevitably ask you for productivity metrics, but measuring engineering organizations is hard and we can all agree that simple metrics like the number of PRs or commits doesn't tell the full story. That's where DX comes in. DX is an engineering intelligence solution designed by leading researchers, including those behind the DORA and space frameworks. It combines quantitative data from developer tools with qualitative feedback from developers to give you a complete view of engineering productivity and the factors affecting you. Learn why some of the world's most iconic companies like Etsy, Dropbox, Twilio, Vercel, and Webflow rely on DX. Visit DX's website at getdx.com/Lenny.

(04:25):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta. When it comes to ensuring your company has top-notch security practices, things get complicated fast. Now you can assess risk, secure the trust of your customers and automate compliance for SOC 2, ISO-27001, HIPAA and more with a single platform, Vanta. Vanta's market-leading trust management platform helps you continuously monitor compliance alongside reporting and tracking risk. Plus, you can save hours by completing security questionnaires with Vanta AI. Join thousands of global companies that use Vanta to automate evidence collection, unify risk management, and streamline security reviews. Get $1,000 off Vanta when you go to Vanta.com/Lenny. That's Vanta.com/Lenny.

(05:18):
I want to start by asking a question that one of your former colleagues suggested I ask you. Wes Kao. I imagine you remember Wes?

Seth Godin (05:25):
Of course. Wes and I sat in a room just the two of us for years.

Lenny Rachitsky (05:29):
So what she suggested I ask you, and this question I love, is she... I asked her, what did you learn most from Seth Godin working with him? And she immediately said, it's helping her build better taste and increase her standards, having really high standards. So I want to ask you first of all, just how do you know if you have good taste and high standards and then how do you build good taste and higher standards?

Seth Godin (05:54):
Great question. Thank you, Wes. I define good taste as knowing what other people want just before they do. So if you're the only person who wants peanut butter covered licorice, you're entitled to eat peanut butter covered licorice, but you don't have good taste because everyone else thinks that's weird. And people, whether they're jazz musicians or fabric designers are seen as having good taste when they bring something to the world that the world didn't necessarily expect but is glad to see.

Lenny Rachitsky (06:25):
What do you find helps? So Wes learned from watching you that she realized, okay, my standards are not nearly as high as they could be. Other than working with you, maybe that's the answer is work with people like you that have really high standards. Just what do you find is most helpful in helping people build taste and also just increase their standards?

Seth Godin (06:46):
Standards, it's worth understanding what quality is and the people who listen to this podcast know better than most. Quality is not luxury. Quality is not perfection. Quality means meeting spec, and if you meet spec, you're done. If you don't think the spec is good enough, make a better spec. But if you meet spec, you're done. And so what it means to have high standards is that you relentlessly improve the spec in service of the people you're working with and for.

(07:16):
And what it doesn't mean is that you take something that meets spec and refuse to ship it because you're a perfectionist. That's hiding. And so what I learned at Spinnaker where I had my first job, real job as a product manager, was this idea that we weren't there to make perfect for us. We were there to delight the person who was buying the software. And our standards were untouchable. We said, "If that person, the one we're describing is delighted with what we shipped, it's good. And if they're not, it doesn't matter what kind of excuses we have." This is the opposite of what most people in this job do, which is they say, how do I please my boss? And if you're just doing your job, then don't expect to get rewarded for more than just doing your job because we can find lots of people who can just do your job.

Lenny Rachitsky (08:10):
That reminds me of one of your other really powerful pieces of advice about how no matter your job, this is a tangent, but it really stuck with me once I read your advice here is no matter what job you have, you couldn't love it, enjoy it, be amazing at it, even if you're just like a waitress or whatever. Can you just talk through that? Because that's so powerful.

Seth Godin (08:29):
Well, I think I got it from the late Reverend Martin Luther King Jr., and the idea is there's no perfect job. A friend of mine, Tim, is a famous jazz saxophonist and he's got to schlep from city to city, and he's got to play to half empty rooms and he is got to deal with this and deal with this. So you're never going to have unlimited artistic freedom. But what we all have is the ability to understand where the boundaries of our work lie and go there.

(09:01):
And if you're a barista and you've chosen to be a barista, maybe because it's the best thing you could get, well you're not going to get the next hour over again. So what would it be like to be the best barista in the world for an hour? Would that be worth it for you? Because I've had menial jobs in food service and I got to tell you, when the boss forces you to be mediocre and bored, there's no amount of money they can pay you to do that job. But if you're there and you have a chance to add delight to someone's day, you're doing that for you, not because you're getting paid.

Lenny Rachitsky (09:34):
And you could totally tell these people in the world when you go to a barista that just you can tell, just loves their job. I know imagine she knows this is not her career long-term, but she just embraces it and just has fun with it. There's so much power to that. On a different note, you mentioned that you were product manager, which I did not know. That's amazing. So most of the people listening to this podcast are product managers. They're either product managers, founders, people that want to be founders, and then people that work with product managers. So first of all, I guess could you just share that part of your life? Because I don't think people know that.

Seth Godin (10:05):
All right. So the origin story could take all day, but I'm not going to tell the whole thing. I'm going to tell the part that I thought was normal that turned out to be the luckiest thing in the world. The summers between the two years of business school are very important to establish your career arc. I got a job at Spinnaker Software. Spinnaker invented educational computer games. I was the 30th employee. And the summer was spent doing assistant brand manager kind of stuff, going to meetings with the ad agency, writing copy. But at the end of the summer, they had a lovely going away party for me, because I was flying back to California. And then at the end, the president of the company, the chairman of the company and the head of marketing bring me into this side when they say, "We have a secret project, we want you to work for us while you're at business school and we're all going to pay you almost nothing."

(10:52):
"Okay, what's the secret project?" "We're going to do computer adventure games with illustrations and music based on science fiction novels, and we've already acquired the work of Ray Bradbury and Arthur C. Clarke." Now, I had read every science fiction book in the Clearfield Public Library from Asimov to Zelazny. This was a dream come true, but they thought my job was going to be make the packaging and run the ads. And what I discovered, first of all is that I couldn't really go back to business school. So I showed up hardly at all at Stanford and just took a lot of red eyes. But I discovered that the engineers, the development team, they had a lot of people vying for their time. And if I didn't figure out how to get them to give me way more than my fair share of development, I wasn't going to have any products to make next Christmas and then I was going to be out of a job.

(11:46):
And so I started a newsletter internally, I was one of the first people in the world to have desktop publishing because I was a beta tester for the Mac, and in it I would mention anybody in the engineering team who had worked on my project and I would say something good about them. And then I would print it out and put it in every single person's inner office mailbox. And within three months, four months, partly because the project was really good, 40 engineers were working for me and no one was reporting to me. And so I became the de facto product manager and that is when I learned marketing is the product. You don't make a product and then hand it to some marketing yahoo and say, go put a logo on this. That the product we made, and five in a row went gold, saved the company. Though product is why it worked.

(12:38):
And so I was supposed to know how to code but I didn't, but I could be in the room. The last month, RadioShack had bought how many units? 3000 stores times five times five, a lot of units. And if we had missed a date, they were going to cancel the order and the company would go bankrupt, and the software wasn't even close to done. And we didn't have any source control like we do now. There was no cloud, so it was all in my head. So I did not leave the office. I'm not exaggerating this, I did not leave the office for the last 22 days, slept for four hours a night upstairs, and if anyone had a question, I could tell them who to talk to.

(13:19):
That was so thrilling. It was so thrilling to make those decisions, to cajole this team, none of whom were in it for the money, to make something we were proud of. And then the stuff ships, everyone else goes home to sleep for a month, but I am the project manager and the marketing guy, so I got to stay at work. And the next day the phone rings and it's Herbie Hancock on the phone, the great jazz musician, and Herbie says, "The receptionist said you're the person in charge of Fahrenheit 451." And I said, "Herbie? I'm 24 years old, man. Herbie?" And he went on and on about how he had stayed up all night to play it and that he loved it.

Lenny Rachitsky (14:00):
I love how natural of a product manager you were in these things you shared of just thinking everyone deflecting credit and all these things. It's sign of a great PM. Along these lines, I wanted to ask actually, so you're a PM early on. Now, you obviously spend a lot of time marketing. I know you're saying there's obviously a strong connection between the two, but is there anything you find that people building the product most often miss or misunderstand that just annoys you or do you think they need to hear?

Seth Godin (14:26):
Maybe I got seven, but I'll try to do them off the top of my head. The first one is this, empathy is not about kindness and empathy is not an option. This is something that you are making for other people. So the whole idea of RTFM, read the manual, I'm angry at you. If you're saying that to your customers, you made a mistake, they did not make a mistake.

(14:49):
The second one is that the thing about projects is when you run out of time and you run out of money, the project is over. Don't run out of time, don't run out of money. Good intentions are no reason for an extension. The professional doesn't ask for an extension because the professional understands that things you didn't expect are going to happen. That's part of the deal.

(15:14):
And I guess the third one would be for software, particularly software as a service, if you don't build the network effect into what you are making, you are almost certainly going to fail. You cannot hope that Apple's going to pick you, promote you, and magically have you be successful. The question is, will this work better for my users if they tell other people about it? And if the answer is no, then why would they tell other people about it? And if they don't tell other people about it, no one's going to hear about it. But if the answer is yes, then your marketing problems pretty much solved.

Lenny Rachitsky (15:51):
I feel like each of these is its own book that we could talk through. And I want to come back to this last point and how it relates to the purple cow. I want to spend a little time there, but first I'm going to ask a marketing question. So before you came on, I asked on Twitter, what should I ask Seth Godin? He's coming on my podcast. I got a flood of suggestions. The most recurring theme actually had to do with AI. Actually the co-founder of Intercom asked this question and it echoes what many people are wondering. So his question is how do you think all these new AI companies build brands to distinguish and differentiate themselves in a world that's increasingly filled with AI companies, AI products, AI content?

Seth Godin (16:26):
Well, the first question is what's a brand? Because it's not a logo. A brand is a promise. It's what do I expect from you. It's would I miss you if you were gone. And Hyatt Hotels has a logo, Nike has a brand. The way we know this is if Nike opened a hotel, we'd know what it would be like. But if Hyatt decided to make sneakers, we have no clue. They might be comfortable, but that's all we would know. And so if you want to build a brand, you got to stand for something and you got to say what you don't do. And the second thing is AI very soon is going to stop being a feature the same way electricity is not a feature. That lots and lots of things run on electricity, but they're not electricity companies. They just happen to use electricity.

(17:13):
So what AI companies and all companies need to do is say, what's in this for the user? What promise do I want to make? A difficult promise, a remarkable promise. And then how do I keep it? So making absurd promises might work at the VC level, but it doesn't work when you're talking to consumers because you can only break that promise one time. And so to wrap up the brand part, airlines don't have brands and airlines don't have loyalty. And the way we know this is that the only reason people stick with an airline is for the points, which is bribery. Loyalty is would you pay extra to stick with this? And if you wouldn't pay extra, then the brand has no value.

Lenny Rachitsky (17:58):
I love this phrase, make a promise and keep it. And the AI element, that raises the bar because many more promises are being made, fewer promises are probably being kept. So is the advice there, continue making an ambitious promise and then the key is actually deliver on that and that's what builds you brand?

Seth Godin (18:15):
Yeah. I have a very emotional connection to Claude.ai. I think they have a brand. ChatGPT's reputation with me is not good because it regularly over promises and under delivers and it does it without kindness or humility. Whereas Claude, I don't know how they did it, at least in my experience, brings kindness and humility. So when it doesn't know, it's very clear and it's not lazy and it's not angry at me. And so I happily pay extra for Claude because it has a brand. Whereas ChatGPT for me is just a tool that I use if I have no other options.

Lenny Rachitsky (18:55):
I love the Anthropic/Claude's billboards. "We're the ones without the drama." The AI company without the drama. I was going to save this to the end, but let's actually talk about it. So you mentioned somewhere that you actually use Claude to help you write this book and refine the book, which I think is going to increasingly happen. Could you just share that process of how you did that? What did you do that might be helpful to people to help you write this book?

Seth Godin (19:20):
Well, to be clear about my brand promise, because it's true, every word that has my name on it, I wrote. Every blog post, every book. I don't have a team. This is my whole staff is me. What I did with Claude and which I encourage people to do in the book is I would upload a list of four things and say, what did I miss? And it would suggest three things to complete the list. And often they would be things I hadn't thought of. And then I could go write about that or I would upload a couple chapters and I would say, what are the claims I'm making here that you don't think that I'm sustaining? And it became this patient editor that is so hard to find in the real world because editors aren't paid enough and given enough time to do their job right. And what I find is if I have a sentence that doesn't sound enough like me, I can ask Claude to help me figure out why that's true.

Lenny Rachitsky (20:24):
I love that tactic of using it to figure out what you missed. I feel like you agree with this. I find that when I write, part of it is I'm putting an idea out there. I want to see what I got wrong and what I missed. And I like that you basically skip that step and don't put it out and just make the thing you put out actually better.

Seth Godin (20:42):
Well, the thing about blogging every day is at first it felt like how am I going to keep up? But once I could build a queue because I didn't want my streak to end-

Lenny Rachitsky (20:55):
How long is the streak at this point, by the way?

Seth Godin (20:58):
Post number 10,000 comes out at the beginning of 2025.

Lenny Rachitsky (21:02):
Oh my God. In a row.

Seth Godin (21:04):
In a row. Some days there were two. But what I found as I got a little bit of a queue is that I would feel bad because I had something to say, but I couldn't because there was already one in the queue. So I shifted from I have to write something to I get to write something. And now because I've taken the pressure off, I have time to rewrite it because I don't have a shortage of ideas for tomorrow. I have extra ones.

Lenny Rachitsky (21:34):
This episode is brought to you by Paragon, the developer platform for building native customer-facing integrations with third-party apps. Our native integrations on your product roadmap, whether it's to ingest context from your user's external data and documents, or to sync data and automate tasks across your users' other apps, integrations are mission-critical for B2B software products today. But building these integrations in-house cost and average of three months of engineering according to the 2024 State of Integration survey, which results in difficult roadmap trade-offs. This is why engineering teams at Copy.ai, AI21 and over 100 other B2B SaaS companies use Paragon so they can focus their efforts on core product features, not integrations. The result, they've shipped integrations seven times faster, all while avoiding the never-ending maintenance that comes with rolling your own integrations. Visit useparagon.com/Lenny to see how Paragon can help you accelerate your product's integration roadmap today and get $1,000 in credit on their pro and enterprise plans. That's useparagon.com.

(22:41):
So let's talk about your book. You wrote a new book. It's called This is Strategy. I've been reading it over the past week and I've been so into it that I actually left it at my mother-in-law's house. I don't have it with me. So it's called, This is Strategy. It's about how to build strategy and develop a strategy. There's a lot to love about the book, but the section in the middle that is what most stuck out to me that I want to spend a little time on. You have this four sequence of advice that I love, so I'm just going to read it real quick. Choose your customers, choose your future. Choose your competition and choose your future. Choose the source of validation and you choose your future. Choose your distribution, and you're also choosing your future. Can you just talk through these four insights, these four steps that basically determine what your product and life is going to be like outside of actually building the products directly?

Seth Godin (23:31):
Yeah. And for a product person, these are the critical choices and you probably have glossed over them. You have probably assumed it's a given and you've sacrificed your agency over the four most important things you should be choosing. So the first one is picking your customers. If your motto is you can pick anyone and we're anyone, if your hope is that you have to win SEO to get anything, you're not going to succeed. When you choose your smallest viable audience, what language they speak, how much money they have, what problem they're trying to solve, what their technical facility is, whether they're short-tempered, whether they're kind, whether they're going to stick with you, you have chosen everything that's going to go into the product and what your future is going to be like. And so the Humane Pin people, whatever it was called, made a mistake when they picked their customers because they showed up like they had a finished Apple-quality product and they were trying to appeal to the kind of people that would buy on pre-order a finished Apple quality product.

(24:40):
When they shipped something that wasn't that, and they knew it wasn't that, they're doomed. Whereas if you say, here we are in Product Hunt, we're only looking for 400 people. We're looking for people who like the Raspberry Pi. Who wants to wonk with this thing? Now you can dance and you can have all these other things happen because you picked a different customer. If you decide to be a wedding photographer in the Hamptons, well you better expect to have some very spoiled, cranky brides and grooms, and grooms and grooms, and brides and brides, that you have to deal with because you picked your customers. Okay, so then the second one which comes with that is who's your competition? Because if you're competing against Walmart, why are you surprised that they keep lowering their prices? That's what Walmart does, right? That way you decide which space that you're going to operate in. You've built an enormous set of boundaries around what you do.

(25:36):
The third one is validation. If you are trying to please your boss, that's what you're going to do. If on the other hand, you can have one difficult conversation with your boss and say, can we agree that I'm not trying to match your taste, I'm trying to match the taste of these 400 people that we've agreed are our customers? Every other meeting is going to go way better from now on because you've made it clear who you're trying to please.

(26:01):
And the last one, choose your distribution matters a lot in the software business. For example, a video game, which is where I started, we were in Target and Lechmere and mass merchants. Our competitors were in Ziploc bags in computer stores. Well, when something like Steam shows up, when something like downloadable shareware shows up, everything about your product changes. So again, these four things are choices, and if you're glossing over them it's because you're afraid.

Lenny Rachitsky (26:33):
And I think it's important to note, it's not like you can just change these at will and just like, okay, cool, we'll change your distribution. These are intertwined. But the important point here that I hear is just make sure the product you're building understands this is how you'll be distributed. This is who you're selling to.

Seth Godin (26:49):
Yeah, I mean, so a friend just sent me a business plan. They're making a food product and they're saying, we're going to distribute on Shopify and we're also going to sell to businesses, airports, hotels, and people who need to sell the food. I'm like, there's only two of you. No, that's not what your business... You got to pick, today, before you even turn the page, who are you for and who are you not for?

Lenny Rachitsky (27:15):
Along the lines of picking your customer reminds me, a friend of mine started a company selling a product to real estate agents and she just warned me, be careful who you're selling to because you're going to be spending a lot of time with these people. Make sure you're ready to be doing that.

Seth Godin (27:28):
One of my very first books was a advertising supported directory paid for by law firms. This is not something I want to recommend to anybody.

Lenny Rachitsky (27:38):
Another great nugget from the book that really stood out to me is this idea of tension. The importance of tension. You basically talk about how a great strategy has tension at the center of it. Why is tension so important to a good strategy?

Seth Godin (27:53):
Okay, so let's agree that tension and stress aren't the same thing. Stress is generally not good. Stress is two things at the same time, I want to leave, I need to stay. Right? I hate my boss, but I need this job. That's stress. Don't look for stress. Tension is at the heart of every art form and every innovation. Tension is it might not work. Tension is da-da-da-na-na, and the other person says, da-da. Because they need to finish the sentence.

(28:23):
So what we do when we launch a new product is we say, we have this thing that can do X, and now the person is imagining what their life might be like if that were true. If they fall in love with that possibility, now there's tension. Did you tell the truth? Is it going to work for them? And when I was a kid, PF Flyers were the sneaker to get, this was before Nike. And the promise of PF Flyers was that they would finally make you fast enough to run away from the bully. And I remember 10 years old walking into that shoe store and there was real tension in my head because I needed to get away from that bully, and I was keeping the PF Flyers people to their promise, and they didn't tell the truth.

Lenny Rachitsky (29:08):
It comes back to your point about not delivering on the promise that you make to build-

Seth Godin (29:08):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (29:13):
... A great brand, right? Okay, I want to take a little tangent into Purple Cow territory. I have your book right here, by the way. I have many of your books in the back, but I don't want to make my library... Oh, what is that? A milk carton?

Seth Godin (29:26):
This is the first 10,000 copies came in milk carton.

Lenny Rachitsky (29:28):
Oh man, I missed out on that. Was there any purple milk inside? What color is a purple cow's milk? We'll never know. We'll never know. I know you've talked about this concept a gazillion times. I feel like still people don't actually... Many people haven't heard it. Many people don't truly understand it, and it's the thing that I reference most of your piece of advice. Could you spend a little time just chatting about this topic of the Purple Cow, the importance of being remarkable?

Seth Godin (29:57):
Okay, so let's start with Steve Blank. I'm sure you've talked about his idea of customer traction. The single best way to tell if a startup's got any hope whatsoever is do the people who engage with you stick around? Do they come back for more? The second piece is, do they tell their friends? And if they tell their friends, what do they say? The word remarkable means worth making a remark about. So I'm not talking about coming up with some viral video that's ridiculous in its gimmickry. I'm saying if you make something where the person's life gets better if they talk about you and you know in advance what you want them to say, then they are more likely to say it. So Marissa Mayer probably created more stock market value than any other product manager I can think of. And the way she did it was there weren't very many people at Google, but she was the one who said, "No, you can't put another button on the homepage. There are only going to be two buttons on the homepage." And over and over and again.

(31:04):
At the time I was at Yahoo. Yahoo had the chance to buy Google for $10 million while I was there. That's a whole interesting story. But Yahoo had 183 links on the homepage and Google had two. And the statement built into that is we are making you a promise, and the promise is we are smart enough to take you where you want to go without you spending a lot of time browsing through 183 links. Tell us what you want and we'll take you there. And so I was a tech-forward person, and if a friend came to me lost on the internet, confused about something, I'd just send them to Google because I knew they wouldn't come back to me for more help, because okay, fine, they're gone. It's going to work. That's what to say about Google at its launch is, hey, just type in what you want and you'll find it. They built that into the product. That makes it remarkable because I wanted to tell other people about that because it would raise my status as a tech innovator.

Lenny Rachitsky (32:05):
And the implication here, and you talked about this, is that most likely the way you will win is word of mouth. It's hard to win with paid ads. It's hard to win with sales teams unless you're building B2B software. What you need to focus on is how to build something people tell their friends about. And the core of that is being remarkable. And I love just the way you break it down. Being remarkable is being something people remark about.

Seth Godin (32:30):
Yeah, and if you think it's just for small companies, that's how Microsoft beat WordPerfect, because Microsoft Word was the format you needed your coworkers to work in if you were using a modern computer, because if they insisted on using WordPerfect, then you were stuck with WordPerfect. Whereas they had a migration path and once you migrated, you didn't go back. So again, it's in my interest to insist you use Word. So I did.

Lenny Rachitsky (32:58):
This point about Mercer Mayer of doing this thing that was controversial, it comes back to your point of creating tension. It feels like it created tension both with visitors and internally. There's also these quotes that I have here that are along these lines that you've said in the past, I don't think they're in this book. If it scares you, it might be a good thing to try. And safety is risky. Is there anything you want to say there?

Seth Godin (33:22):
Well, so one of the things I talk about in the book is that systems are everywhere we look and they're largely invisible, taken for granted. I spend time with high school seniors talking about college. They don't see the college industrial complex. They just think it's normal, because that's what it is to grow up in the suburbs. And what systems do to protect themselves is they invent culture. Culture is the way things are around here. And so if you think something is scary, that's probably because the system wants you to think that.

(33:57):
And so you shouldn't do something foolhardy. You shouldn't be fearless. But what you should do is think about why does it scare me to do this? What system will be offended if I do that? Am I trying to work with the system or am I leveraged enough to help change the system? And so the first people who put up downloadable software, all the feedback was, you can't do that. It'll be pirated. You'll never make a penny. Okay. That might happen, and I can see why that feels scary, but I could also see why the dominant system of software distribution doesn't want me to even experiment with this. But I only worked on the software for five months, let's try it, because if it doesn't work and it gets pirated, I'll just have to make new software. It's okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (34:44):
It's interesting, the opposite of that was also true with Salesforce. Their whole pitch was no software. It's all in the cloud. Once that became the system, that became the tension and the risky move.

Seth Godin (34:55):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (34:56):
So you have this quote, actually. I want to spend more time on the system concept because it's so core to the book, and so core to your advice for how to be better, you have this actual quote. "What does it mean to be a strategic thinker? It means to see the system." What else can you share about it just for people that are trying to become better strategically, to understand what you mean when you talk about the system, how to see the system?

Seth Godin (35:18):
We have to invent systems anytime we engage with other human beings, because interoperability is essential. There's a system for how we greet other people in our culture. You shake hands, right hand to right hand. And just show up sometime and give the Vulcan salute instead and watch what happens. It's very awkward because we just needed to get this over with and now that's part of the system. And so systems serve a valuable function until they don't, because then the system starts doing things to support itself, to reinforce itself. So for example, there is a system that says we should interview people for jobs. And the most successful interviews are people where they show that they are like us, they look like us, they went to schools like us, they have privilege and background like us. That is toxic, because it diminishes not just diversity, but our ability to put real talent on the team.

(36:19):
And if you don't see that system and name that system, you're going to keep doing what you were doing. And I was talking to someone yesterday who said they had been working with a company and the last four people that they had hired had been captain of their Ivy League tennis team. Well, clearly there's a pattern here and it's being reinforced by people who don't want to get in trouble, but the system's not helping them. And so yes, we need the metric system and we need the zip code system. Those keep working really well. But if you are trying to show up in a place where dominant players don't want you to succeed, you're going to have to find something in the system that gives you a chance to change the rules.

Lenny Rachitsky (37:07):
This metaphor that I love that's along these lines of better waves make better surfers, that a lot of your success is driven by choosing the wave versus the skills that you have. Can you just talk about that?

Seth Godin (37:18):
Yeah. So it's surprisingly profound. I don't know where I came up with it, but when I see people who are great at surfing, they're almost always on good waves. And my son who surfs a lot, I have noticed, passes up waves that other people might take waiting for the right wave because he knows he will be able to surf it better. So when you think about which company you're signing up to bring software from, which people you're willing to put on the key roles, are you willing to wait for the superstar who's going to change things or are you in so much of a hurry to make an imaginary deadline that you're going to ship mediocre work? Because all mediocre means is average. And so if you don't want to be mediocre, you better do something different than the other people are doing. Otherwise, you're going to get what the other people are getting.

Lenny Rachitsky (38:10):
As you talk about this, I'm thinking about, I don't know if you saw Jaguar's rebrand and their whole launch. And it feels like it's been rejected by the system. Any thoughts on that? Maybe what they got wrong or maybe it was genius?

Seth Godin (38:24):
Okay, so you've picked a topic that I really like to talk about. Jaguar did not rebrand, Jaguar re-logo-ed. And the logo might be a sign that they're trying to rebrand and make a different promise, and they're switching to all electric, which I'm in favor of. But they made, I think, a very significant error, which is if you're going to start a car company, a hundred million or a billion dollars are going to get spent earning trust from people who never heard of you. If you're starting with one of the most iconic and beautiful and beloved car brands that has the luxury of having almost no cars in the world that could undermine what you want it to stand for going forward, it's perfect. Own that, that's brilliant. And to walk away from that so that you could please some art director, I don't understand why you think you're rebranding when you just put a logo on that undermines many of the awareness assets you already had going for you.

Lenny Rachitsky (39:28):
It feels like they got very, very controversial. They went against the status quo more maybe than they should. I don't know. What would you have done if you were them?

Seth Godin (39:36):
You may recall when the International House of Pancakes decided to falsely announce they were changing their name to the International House of Burgers and made a new logo, because they wanted buzz. This is a Wendy's Twitter tactic. Buzz does not sell hamburgers. Oreo's got a lot of buzz when they did that tweet about the Super Bowl blackout. There's no evidence they sold even one more cookie. They're not in the business of entertaining us. So Jaguar isn't going to sell more cars because people like you and I are talking about their re-logoing. What's going to make them sell cars is customer traction. What they need to do is find 50 people who have authority and get them in a car that changes them somehow, that transforms them.

(40:26):
And it's interesting if you think about two things that Tesla did right at the beginning with the model S. The first one is, according to someone I know who worked there at the time, the number one thing people would talk about when they saw you in the parking lot of the supermarket was the door handles, because the door handles popped out. They popped out in a way that's annoying and dangerous, but it was noticeable. So there was a conversation.

(40:52):
And then what would happen is they'd say, what do you think of it? And you'd say, get in the car and you'd switch to ludicrous mode and you'd drive at zero to 60 in 2.4 seconds and they'd start screaming. This was fun for you and told a story to the passenger. This is how customer traction begins because I can't do that in a different car, right? Compare this to the clown car, the Cybertruck, which was intentionally divisive and most people don't want to not only drive one but have one on their block because divisiveness is not selling. That what's selling is being of utility, to help someone get what they want. So here you have a category, the pickup truck, the number one category for all cars in the United States, just sitting there waiting to be taken. You can cross the chasm if you're someone like Tesla. And instead, they decide to pull a stunt, and that's not okay. It's not good product management. It's not good marketing.

Lenny Rachitsky (41:56):
Interesting. So you think Cybertruck are not going to be a success?

Seth Godin (42:00):
Well, I think, compared to what, right? So the Ford F-150 some years has made more than a hundred percent of Ford's profit, meaning without the Ford 150 pickup truck, there is no Ford. That's how big a category that is. You have a car with momentum and a public company where you've earned the trust of a lot of people. Now you have a category, pickup trucks, that are purchased for a very specific reason to show your neighbors you care about utility. Even if you never use the bed, that's the story of driving a pickup truck. So now, if you bring people in that category who are inherently skeptical of change and inherently skeptical of design trickery, something that is nothing but change and design trickery, no, they're not going to adopt it. You could have sold an enormous number of people who might've bought a Ford 150 instead. That crossing of the chasm is how you become really significant.

Lenny Rachitsky (43:01):
I feel like this alone could be its own separate podcast conversation. I wish we had more time. I'm going to ask one last question, and this is a quote that I found of yours that I also love that is reminiscent of Elon Musk, actually, as we were just talking about this. "The secret to leadership is simple. Do what you believe. Paint a picture of the future. Go there. People will follow." Can you just talk about that?

Seth Godin (43:25):
I might be a little too glib because what I need to highlight is the painting the picture of the future needs to be based in empathy. You can't paint a picture of where you want to go. You have to paint a picture of where they want to go, and it's this non-narcissism that is where professionals do their work. That you are not entitled to raise money, you're not entitled to have market share, you're not entitled to get a good price because you worked hard. What we can do is be of service. We can open the door to help people get to where they always wanted to go. It's very difficult to change what people want, but it's pretty helpful to offer people a chance to get to where they always wanted to go in the first place.

Lenny Rachitsky (44:14):
Seth, this was a dream come true. I appreciate you coming on the podcast. I appreciate you saying that. Where can people check out your book? Where should people go to learn more about what you're up to? Anything you want to share.

Seth Godin (44:25):
So I'm not active on social media, but I do have a blog at Seths.blog. If you go to Seths.blog/TIS, you'll find everything you need to know about the book and the strategy deck and the collectible chocolate bar and whatever other thing I've dreamed up in the meantime.

Lenny Rachitsky (44:42):
Chocolate. Seth, thank you so much for being here.

Seth Godin (44:45):
These were great questions, Lenny, I could talk to you all day. Thank you,

Lenny Rachitsky (44:48):
I appreciate that. Same. Bye everyone.

(44:52):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at LennysPodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
Is performance marketing just something every company should be doing?

Timothy Davis (00:00:02):
Hot take, paid is for everyone. If you look at the way each platform is doing, Google, you have to scroll pretty far down to get to an organic listing. Meta, it's almost a pay for play now.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:13):
When you take over for an agency at a company, you crush their performance within a month. I'm curious to what you find they are doing wrong?

Timothy Davis (00:00:20):
Instead of thinking about being on top of the page, and that's like ego marketing, I want to be number one. I want to be there all the time. It's about showing to the right person as often as possible.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:31):
Any other tips for people just to experiment with the platform?

Timothy Davis (00:00:33):
Each platform is different. The user behavior is different. Make sure you're not too hard on yourself if it doesn't work. It's okay to fail because we're either winning or we're learning.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:45):
Today, my guest is Timothy Davis. Timothy has led performance marketing for all of Shopify for the past two and a half years, and as a consultant has helped companies like Pinterest, LinkedIn, Redfin, and Eventbrite kickstart and scale the performance marketing teams. In our conversation, we get incredibly tactical on all things to performance marketing and paid growth, when to start investing, how to run signs of life tests on each platform, what platforms to investigate and what platforms to bet big on, what types of companies are best suited to invest big on paid growth whether you should invest pre-product market fit or not, what agencies often get wrong and what to look for in your investment when you're just getting started? Plus, what your first three hires should look like, tips for which platforms are most interesting right now, a peek at Timothy's actual reports that he runs to judge performance, if you're watching this on YouTube and so much more.

(00:01:37):
This episode is for anyone who's trying to figure out how to kickstart or improve their performance marketing investment, and I guarantee you'll get something out of this that'll make your life better. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Timothy Davis. Timothy, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Timothy Davis (00:02:04):
Yeah, thanks for having me. A long time coming.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:06):
Yeah, I'm really excited we're finally doing this. I actually posted on Twitter for people to suggest questions for this topic and there's just so much interest in what we're going to be talking about, which essentially we're going to be diving deep into all things paid growth, all things performance marketing. By the way, I have a cold. For people, if in case you wonder why I sound a little weird, but the show must go on. I want to start with just setting a little context for folks that aren't super familiar with performance marketing and paid growth. When we talk about performance marketing/paid growth, first of all, are those two terms interchangeable to you? And second of all, what falls under the umbrella of performance marketing/paid growth?

Timothy Davis (00:02:42):
Paid can be a lot of things. It can be online, it can be offline, it can also even be affiliates. Typically, when I talk about performance marketing, it's about online only, but you could argue offline could be performing and affiliates could be performing and stuff like that. They can be interchangeable, but I would recommend if you are talking about it, to specify which one you're talking about. Because when you do say paid, because I'm in the industry, I would just, "Oh, they do Google Search and they do Meta and they do things like that." But if you do offline and you just say paid, we may be talking about things, but missing each other on two ships passing in the night. So I think historically, people, when they have said paid growth, have been fully focused on just online.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:43):
Just online. Okay. Got it.

Timothy Davis (00:03:31):
But I would argue in the last couple of years, you could definitely roll offline into that conversation as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:38):
Okay. So performance marketing, when someone hears that term, it's essentially marketing that you can measure the performance up.

Timothy Davis (00:03:43):
Correct. Yes, nail on the head.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:46):
This episode is brought to you by buildbetter.ai. Back in 2020 when AI was just a toy, BuildBetter bet that it could cut down on a product team's operational BS. Fast-forward to today, 23,000 product teams use purpose-built AI in BuildBetter every day. First, BuildBetter uses custom models to turn unstructured data like product and sales calls, support tickets, internal communications and surveys into structured insights. It's like having a dedicated data science team. Second, BuildBetter runs those structured insights into workflows, like weekly reports about customer issues, context-aware PRDs and user research documents with citations. It even turns stand-ups into action items that automatically get assigned and shared into your tools. Plus, with unlimited seat pricing on all plans, BuildBetter ensures everyone at your company has access to this knowledge. Truly, no data silos. In a world of AI demos, over promising and under-delivering, see why BuildBetter has a 93% subscription retention. Get a personalized demo and use code, Lenny, for a $100 credit if you sign up now at buildbetter.ai/lenny. I'm excited to chat with Christina Gilbert, the founder of OneSchema, one of our long time podcast sponsors. Hi, Christina.

Christina Gilbert (00:05:07):
Yes. Thank you for having me on, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:09):
What is the latest with OneSchema? I know you now work with some of my favorite companies like Ramp, Vanta Scale and Watershed. I heard that you just launched a new product to help product teams import CSVs from especially tricky systems like ERPs.

Christina Gilbert (00:05:25):
Yes. So we just launched OneSchema file feeds, which allows you to build an integration with any system in 15 minutes as long as you can export a CSV to an SFTP folder. We see our customers all the time getting stuck with hacks and workarounds, and the product teams that we work with don't have to turn down prospects because their systems are too hard to integrate with. We allow our customers to offer thousands of integrations without involving their engineering team at all.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:47):
I can tell you that if my team had to build integrations like this, how nice would it be to be able to take this off my roadmap and instead, use something like OneSchema, and not just to build it, but also to maintain it forever.

Christina Gilbert (00:05:58):
Absolutely, Lenny. We've heard so many horror stories of multi-day outages from even just a handful of bad records. We are laser-focused on integration reliability to help teams end all of those distractions that come up with integrations. We have a built-in validation layer that stops any bad data from entering your system and OneSchema will notify your team immediately of any data that looks incorrect.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:18):
I know that importing incorrect data can cause all kinds of pain for your customers and quickly lose their trust. Christina, thank you for joining us. And if you want to learn more, head on over to oneschema.co. That's oneschema. co.

(00:06:32):
Is performance marketing just something every company should be doing or is there certain business models where it's like, "No, you're probably going to grow through other channels mostly like SEO or sales or word of mouth.

Timothy Davis (00:06:42):
Hot take. I would say, paid is for everyone. If you look at the way each platform is doing, Google introducing AI, plus with paid taking up the first four spots, you have to scroll pretty far down to get to an organic listing. Meta, it's almost a pay for play now. You have to do promoted posts for people to even see your content. I would say it does depend on the industry you're in. If you're say, leaning heavily into influencer marketing, that is still a paid component. You may not be doing Meta ads, you may not be doing paid search, but that is a paid component. But I would say at baseline, everyone should be doing paid search. The way I usually explain it to people is paid search is user driven. You have to type in a relevant keyword for your ad to show.

(00:07:36):
Anything else is more disruptive media. You're on Meta and you're looking at pictures of babies and cats, and then all of a sudden, you see an ad for Shopify. You're watching a YouTube video, maybe a YouTube podcast, and then in between, you get advertisements maybe for Shopify, maybe for Pinterest, maybe for Eventbrite. So all of that being disruptive media may not make a whole lot of sense for where you are as a business, but I would say paid search being user-driven, having to type in a relevant keyword for your ad to show, should pretty much be for just about everybody.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:11):
Everyone should do it. Super interesting. There's also the most companies grow through one growth engine primarily, say word of mouth, or SEO, or sales or paid. So for some companies, paid will be most of how they grow like say, I always think of Booking.com and Credit Karma and just like most of their growth came from paid growth online, paid growth. For some companies, it's just like a layer, a small 10, 20% of their growth. What are signs that you have the potential for paid/performance marketing to be most of your growth, like say 70, 80%?

Timothy Davis (00:08:47):
I always say, where are your users? You will have some data that will allow you to understand that say right now, you're doing really well on TikTok. Some would argue that's an emerging channel right now. Great. If that's doing really well for you, maybe you take... Because that content could be used on something similar like Snap, see how that does for you. You could also lean into your Google Analytics or whatever analytics tool you are using and see if you're already getting users from that platform. If you're currently managing that, if you don't have a profile on there and obviously, you don't have a presence, it would be really hard for users to find you and get there. But always look at the data that's available to you within your analytics platforms and say, "Users are already finding us here. How can we turn that knob up to 11?" And you can do that with paid. Because if they're already finding you through that channel, what would happen if you were to just turn it up to 11?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:46):
Is there an example of a company you worked with that's known that as an example of that, where you're like, "Oh, I see everyone's looking, finding them on Google. Let's go turn it to 11."

Timothy Davis (00:09:55):
Yeah. So there was a company I worked with a couple of years ago called, Hairstory and IPSY. I know, very funny. Guy with no hair working on a company called Hairstory, but they were doing really well from a Google shopping standpoint. But when I started consulting with them, we looked at the analytics and we actually saw that they were getting a lot of people from Meta and TikTok at the time. And TikTok was very, very new and they didn't really know what to do with it. So said, "We'll do a small test." We can start on Meta with just some customer testimonials. Let's see how that does. We'll get interest in, build a funnel, get retargeting, and hopefully get conversions. TikTok was so new at the time that it was like, "We don't know what's going to work. Let's just try with what is currently available."

(00:10:47):
Then once we started doing it, we started noticing, "Hey, this doesn't make a whole lot of sense from a creative standpoint." We were missing the mark of what we were using on Meta was working, was not working on TikTok. So you can't always just take what is currently working on one platform and apply it to another because it is a different user experience. It is a different mindset that the user has when they're on there. So that was an example of where we were able to take those instances, look at their data and say, "They're already finding us here. How can we turn this up a little bit?" And I don't remember the numbers exactly, but it was pretty exponential.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:24):
Okay. So the core advice here so far, is look for where people are coming to you from today, and then that gives you a sign of where you should start to think about running paid ads, performance marketing on those platforms.

Timothy Davis (00:11:38):
Yeah. And also, there's a saying that my current director likes to use, which is signs of life. You can always do a very, very small test. You can just put a little money into a platform, see if there's a sign of life. If there is, then you can pull back and say, "Okay, we have signs of life. Now let's build a campaign around that." There's no reason to say, "All right, we have a signs of life. Let's now turn it up all the way." Do we have the right creative? Do we have the right campaign? Do we have the right messaging for the users on this platform? Then let's take that approach, as opposed to just, "Hey, signs of life, great, go run a hundred miles an hour." Make sure you're doing the right thing when you get into those platforms.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:22):
Let's follow that thread. A lot of people run little experiments on say, TikTok, and Snap, and Twitter, and things like LinkedIn, and they often don't see a lot of results and it's always like, "Hey, did we do it wrong or is it the platform's not working?" I know it's a very difficult question to give like, "Here's how you do a sign of life test correctly," But what are some things that you think either people do often wrong when they're trying to experiment with the platform or that you just think they should do when they're trying to look for signs of life?

Timothy Davis (00:12:49):
The number one thing I tell people all the time is use your own data, start with your own data. So take the existing customer base you have, load that up into the platform to build lookalikes. From there, you can do... And I'll use Meta as the example. You can do a 1%, all the way up to a 10%. So 1% match, 2%, 3%, so on and so forth.

(00:13:12):
What I tend to do is build ad sets, one at 1% because we know that one's going to be highly correlated to what we're looking for. Then a two to four, and then a five to seven, and then an eight plus. More times than not, the eight plus does not work, but there have been times where it has, so it's, "Hey, let's do it. Let's try it." But if you also have a very limited budget because some people don't have the luxury of having an unlimited budget like we do in some of these other companies I've worked at, just start with the 1%. See what that sign of life is because you already know that this is so tied to your existing customer base. If that sign of life is giving you a positive signal, now you have the information you need to build a campaign you need to be successful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:02):
What are these percentages referring to? You may have mentioned it, but when you say 1%, 2%, 3%.

Timothy Davis (00:14:07):
Yeah, yeah. So that is how closely tied they are to that user's behavior on the platform. So they're 1% tied to what they're doing. They're visiting similar pages or they have similar behavior on the platform, so they're more than likely going to be tied to what that user... They're not going to be that user exactly, but they're going to be very correlated to them where 10% is pretty wide base that you're going to hit.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:35):
I see. So the smaller the percentage, the closer they are, the closer it will look like there.

Timothy Davis (00:14:39):
Yep, there you go.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:40):
How do you know if it's the creative that is failing versus it's just never going to work? Is there something that tells you that's what's not working?

Timothy Davis (00:14:47):
It's a million-dollar question, to be honest with you. Because you could look at some of the metrics that currently exist in the platform. Click-through rate basically just tells you, are the users engaged? Because start with the target. You're getting the impressions are there. Is the target right? That should be your first thing. Yes, the target is correct. Users that we want to see are seeing our ads, but they're not engaging with it. That would be the first thing.

(00:15:15):
But the part that I think you're really trying to ask is creative versus the content. Because sometimes depending on the ad unit, you could have a story creative that is literally the creative has to stand on its own, not necessarily the content that's in it, but something like an in-feed creative has a headline, a primary, a description, and a creative. That's where honestly, the only way you're going to get an answer to that outside of the data that's available to you like click-through rate, reach, frequency and all those things to pull in more metrics, is a focus group to understand, "Hey, when you saw this image with this content, what was your result from it?"

(00:15:58):
Now, you can build a test within the platform to do a control versus a test where say, you take the creative with the same primary and the same description versus a creative that's just your logo with the headline and the description and see what the results are. But more times than not, you're not getting the understanding from the user of, well, why doesn't that creative resonate with you? And they'll give you suggestions in the focus group. Why does that work better for you than not? So that's a really, really hard question to answer without having those dialogue with the user to understand that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:34):
Yeah, that makes a lot of sense. How long do you recommend these tests run for these signs of life tests? And I like this term, by the way. I haven't heard this before.

Timothy Davis (00:16:40):
Ideally, in a perfect world, you're going to hear the word, statistical relevance. Mathematicians will tell you exactly what that number is. And I'm not going to pretend like a mathematician, but a lot of times, it's budget constraint. So there could be a VP finance. Anyone like that could just come to you and just say, "Hey, do you have $25,000 for this test?" You only have 5,000. Just get that information, get that data. You can then also build an off size off of that. Hey guys, we worked with our Meta partners, we worked with our Google partners. We put $1,000 behind this test. We know that our impression share was this, our reach was this. If we were to put $10,000 into it, this is the expected return we can get from it based on the click-through rate, the conversion rate that we got from the test that we ran.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:34):
Got it. So basically, we have limited number of dollars to spend. That'll tell you how long you could run one of these for.

Timothy Davis (00:17:41):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:42):
Any other tips for someone that's trying to experiment with a platform early on for these signs of life tests? So one is try a lookalike that is the most targeted version of the lookalike. So 1% you said, and then incrementally grown and incrementally increase that percentage as you spend more. Any other tips, I guess, for people just to experiment with the platform?

Timothy Davis (00:18:04):
Make sure you're not too hard on yourself if it doesn't work. A lot of times, companies I've either consulted with or worked at, there was always pressure or there was always a need to succeed at whatever experiment we put into market. I believe in creating an environment where it's okay to fail because we're either winning or we're learning. And more times than not, if we put something new into a platform that we know nothing about, we're learning the bells and whistles, we're learning the functionality of it. Just know there's going to be things you're not going to understand because each platform is unique, each platform is different, the user behavior is different. So give yourself some grace, understand that this may not work. And as long as you're learning from it, you're going to be okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:56):
I love that. In terms of which platforms people should explore, obviously there's Google, there's Facebook, Instagram, what are the platforms people should seriously consider at this point?

Timothy Davis (00:19:09):
Google for sure. And when we say Google, let's make sure everyone understands what Google entails. Google is YouTube, Google is Google search, GDN, Google Display Network. There's a lot of things in Google that you can do. I always say, if you have the creative available, you should really, really be looking at doing video because video is one of those things that I'm very bullish on. It is doing really well when you measure it the right way. And as long as you can get that creative and get it consistently just because you have one piece of creative, if it's doing well, you do need to have that creative refresh, kind of that flywheel going. Make sure you're doing Google Search, again, user-driven, YouTube, and Meta, and Meta contains both Facebook and Instagram. And then based on the data available to you, if you do see users on TikTok, definitely go after those. But if you're just starting out and you just want to get your feet wet into something, I would say start with Google Search, then get into Meta. And if you have video available, definitely get into YouTube.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:19):
Awesome. Okay. So Google Search, YouTube, Facebook, Instagram, TikTok. What about LinkedIn? Do you see things happening there for say, B2B companies?

Timothy Davis (00:20:30):
Yeah. LinkedIn is very expensive in comparison. So just know if you're going into LinkedIn, it's going to look almost three times more expensive than other channels. The targeting that's available on LinkedIn, knowing job titles, industries, actually targeting people at certain companies is very powerful. The example I always tend to use is that I worked at a company called SoftLayer. SoftLayer was acquired by IBM because they were trying to build out their cloud portfolio, couldn't do it. So they're like, "Hey, let's do the next best thing and buy this company." But when we were just SoftLayer, we were trying to get Coca-Cola as one of our clients. And you know those Coke freestyles where you can pick whatever drink you want and put the flavor in it?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:21):
No, that's awesome.

Timothy Davis (00:21:22):
Oh man, these are great. Maybe it's a cell thing, but basically, you go up to a Coke freestyle and say, "I want Dr. Pepper and I want cherry flavor in it." Or you want Coke Zero with cherry and vanilla in it, you can do that. It's the freestyle you get to pick. The reason they wanted it to be cloud-based is because there's a ton of drinks in there. So you need to be able to efficiently and effectively say, "This store needs more Sprite or this store needs more Sprite Zero." Because you have your whole portfolio in this one machine, so you want to be able to update things more readily. And it was between us, AWS and Microsoft. And met with the sales team and said, "What do we need to do to win this?" Because it was a big ticket item for us.

(00:22:14):
And what we found out was they had two concerns about us. It was recency and private security. So what we did was we found out where the decision makers were. So A, in LinkedIn, we took the anyone who works at Coca-Cola, we want you to see ads about security and recency. Outside of that, we also geo-fenced it because you would think Coca-Cola Atlanta, that's where the decision maker sits, but they were actually in LA. So in LA, we geo-fenced them, and we knew that they worked at Coca-Cola. The next time the salesperson got on the call with the team to say, "Hey, just wanted to check in." He was like, "Hey, hey, I get it. Security is fine. Recency is fine. We hear you." That was great to hear because it was something we were able to do on LinkedIn and we did it in other platforms as well. But we knew we were able to get not only to the decision maker, but everyone around that decision maker to say, "Hey, these guys may be the ones we need to go with."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:16):
Okay. So just to mirror back what you're saying, you're saying you ran ads on LinkedIn targeting the execs at Coca-Cola, trying to influence them to overcome these barriers they had to buying to working with you guys. Amazing. I've seen people do that on Google Search, but I've never heard of... It makes so much sense to do on LinkedIn and it worked. And did they know that you did this or they're just like, "Oh, I just changed my mind"?

Timothy Davis (00:23:42):
One of them was like, "We get it. We're seeing it everywhere." We actually tried because at the time, we didn't have an offline team. We actually tried to buy the billboards around the office as well, but I didn't know enough at the time from an offline perspective of the right people to talk to, how long it would take to do it. So we were trying to pour it on hard.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:03):
That's incredible. I could see why LinkedIn is more expensive. That's incredibly powerful. And is the advice then that LinkedIn makes more sense for higher LTV, higher CB type of products?

Timothy Davis (00:24:15):
Yeah, exactly. I would not recommend getting into LinkedIn and my LinkedIn reps may kill me for this. I would not recommend getting into LinkedIn until you've tested Google and Meta first. Now, you could be an enterprise level company and it does make sense to start with LinkedIn for sure, but depending on your audience, I would say more times than not, it would be a Google, Meta discussion before going to LinkedIn.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:40):
Okay. So just generally, start with Google and Meta. Is there one or the other usually? I guess, yeah, which one would you start with if you had to pick one?

Timothy Davis (00:24:49):
Always Google Search. I'm always going to say, start with Google search, but it's also creative dependent. If you don't have the right creative for Facebook, it's going to be really hard to convert because users are just going to either be turned off by what you're putting out there. And then also, depending on where your user base is. If they're not on Facebook, it's kind of a moot point. But if they're browsing around on GDN or YouTube, it makes more sense to go there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:15):
And then you said this insight about video is performing super well right now and you're recommending people use video. And the key there is you need to be able to make videos, video ads.

Timothy Davis (00:25:25):
Yeah. You got to make sure you have that flywheel.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:27):
And the flywheel is just people internally or some company agency that can make video ads for you?

Timothy Davis (00:25:32):
Correct. Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:33):
Cool. I guess, is there any advice there of just how to do that or what ads work well or anything there for someone else-

Timothy Davis (00:25:39):
So yeah. The thing with YouTube is I always say, start with emotion. If you can have an emotional connection with the user, is going to be way more impactful and way more powerful than anything else. And to take that further, when I say emotion, I'm talking about comedy, I'm talking about...

Timothy Davis (00:26:00):
I'm talking about happiness. It's not necessarily just, "Oh, we need an emotional connection with the brand." It is just making sure the user feels something after seeing your ad. Because then, they're more times not going to remember it, which then they will take a favorable action after the fact.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:21):
That is super interesting. One last question about platforms. Are there any other platforms you see working for people that are emerging maybe that people aren't thinking about, Reddit, or Snap, or X, or I don't know, anything along those lines?

Timothy Davis (00:26:34):
When you say emerging channels, my brain kind of goes to connected TV, podcast, VR, advertising, audio/voice search, and even AI stuff right now. I can tell you podcasts are doing really well for the people that I know are able to measure it correctly. Connected TV is also doing really well. You can take the, again, you're doing YouTube right now, being able to take that creative and repurpose it. But the VR stuff and the AI stuff, that is stuff that is, I would say, very emerging right now. Because to be completely transparent, I haven't experimented with those things yet. I kind of like letting other people be the guinea pig and learning from them, and then if someone comes to me and they're like, "Hey, we have budget for this, let's go ahead and test it." "Great. Let's go. Let's see what we can learn."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:34):
Awesome. Podcast ads. I'm glad you suggested that. I'm a huge fan. Thank you. They're working really well for a lot of our sponsors and I'm very biased, so you don't need to pay attention to me. But I also think there's a lot of opportunity there. Okay. Let's talk about when to start investing in performance marketing/paid growth. So, say, you're a startup, do you have any advice for when it's time to start, signs of life test or even... And then also, just when is it time to scale to go like, "Okay, let's go big on this."

Timothy Davis (00:28:08):
If you are a startup, typically, whenever I consulted with them, it was what are the goals, what are we trying to achieve, and when? Because if you're looking for something quick, paid needs to start immediate. And paid [inaudible 00:28:24] started yesterday because SEO takes time. SEO, depending on the market you're getting into, if it's emerging, people may not even know your product exists. There was a product I was working on years ago that if you were traveling to a hotel, and say, it was a romantic getaway with you and your partner. And you wanted the hotel suite or room done up with flower petals, and champagne, and stuff like that, they would do it for you. Well, they were working with someone before that was like, "Oh, we should totally be in paid search." And if you look at the keywords that they were doing, it was like, booking hotel rooms. It's like, "No, that's complete disconnect." And they're like, "Yeah, but we're trying to build awareness."

(00:29:08):
You don't want to build awareness through search. You build awareness through display media-based type media. When we transitioned all of their money over at the time, and this will age me, before Meta was a thing, when we transitioned everything over to GDN, that's when the company started really reaping the rewards. Because we were building the awareness around the product. So, it depends on what is the demand of your product and market. If you're doing something that is similar to another product and market, you could do competitor, I call it coattail riding. Say, Lenny, you and I create a product that is similar to monday.com. We can go out there and just start bidding on monday.com and say, "See why Lenny and Tim are better than monday.com." And start getting some people in interested, maybe kicking the tires, starting free trials, but they also have other keywords that they can go after in market. But if you're going after something new like hotel room, flowers, and I forget what keywords we were bidding on for that, it was years ago. People weren't thinking of that. It wasn't something they were searching for. So, it just really depends on, A, when do you expect results because SEO can take time. And B, what is the demand in the market for your product?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:33):
Some people use paid ads to drive early growth to bring customers, to help them figure out what to build kind of pre-product market fit growth. Is that something you recommend? Is that something you'd advise against? Is that strategy that you've seen work?

Timothy Davis (00:30:48):
Yeah. Product market fit is a huge thing. We've run into some of this at Shopify, and we definitely ran into this at IBM. So, for the longest time, IBM is, "We're a global company, we should be everywhere." But when we started looking at the data, it was, "Should we be everywhere?" For example, Africa, we were in the whole continent. We weren't just in, say, South Africa, or Egypt, or something like that. And the more we dug into it, the more we realized the biggest issue wasn't necessarily that users weren't interested in our product and weren't purchasing it, it was because we didn't have a product market fit mainly from an operation standpoint.

(00:31:33):
In Africa, there are multitudes of different types of currency. There's the franc, there's the rand, there's the shill, and we were just, "Hey, USD, thank you." So, of course, they weren't converting unless they were going out of their way to make a way to convert that. So, when we took a step back and we said, "Okay, where do we want to start?" It was South Africa. That's really where we were trying to get, quote, unquote, "stronghold" in, so we had to make sure we had the rand available. Once we did that, we started doing tremendously better because we had a product market fit. They had demand for our product, and now we were able to serve them, meet them where they were.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:19):
So essentially, you're saying probably not smart to run a bunch of ads if it's not working, if you don't have something people actually want yet in that market?

Timothy Davis (00:32:28):
Right. Or able to convert.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:31):
Because conversion is going to end up being really low, no one actually cares about what you're doing.

Timothy Davis (00:32:35):
All you're going to do is really annoy the users. Because, say, in the future they are, "Hey, I'm still interested, but I don't want to use that product because I already tried." It's like, "No, no, you can totally use it now." "I already tried. I had a bad experience with them." And some users will hold you accountable to that. One bad experience and I'm just never giving you my business.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:56):
Interesting. So, is that generally your advice if you're startup, you're not feeling like you actually have product market fit yet, should you even experiment with and do signs of life tests, or should you hold off until it's like, "Okay, it's actually working, let's go."

Timothy Davis (00:33:10):
From an operation standpoint, I always want to make sure those things are tied off. Yeah, it doesn't make sense to, again, if you have a major budget and you're trying to get awareness into a market, great, yeah, you can go after a market. But just know that it's probably not going to convert very well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:28):
Got it. So-

Timothy Davis (00:33:29):
I wouldn't recommend it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:31):
Okay, great. Awesome. Very clear answer. Let's talk about the mistakes that you see companies make when they're investing in performance marketing. We got introduced through Casey Winters's illustrious former podcast guest, two-time podcast guest and asked them about you. And he told me that when you take over for an agency at a company that you've worked with, you crush their performance within a month. I'm curious to what you see and find they are doing wrong that allows you to be such a hero when you come in and take over.

Timothy Davis (00:34:03):
I think agencies have playbooks. Now I've worked at agencies, I did consulting for a long period of time and it was never an approach I took. I looked at each account and each company as its own thing. But I think a lot of agencies just come in and they go, "Oh, this is like AB&C company. And this is what we're doing. Copy, paste, done, move on." And they're also not willing to get deep, deep, deep into the weeds of stuff. I may get a little too far into data than some other people. For example, I have ops cadence that myself and my team follow. So, within that ops cadence, we have things like finance, performance, structure, keywords, ad copy, quality score, targeting, et cetera, et cetera. And then, within each of those we have specifics. For example, the keyword subsection is keyword granularity, brand versus non-brand, search query reports, negative, so on so forth.

(00:35:06):
I feel like agencies don't necessarily get into all of those things every single month where some of those we're doing weekly, some of those we're doing biweekly, and some of those we're doing monthly. But they touch the things that they think they need to touch. They turn on automated bidding, they're doing their search query reports, and then they just kind of move on with their day because they have 50 other clients they have to get to. Well, what about looking at your conversions? Where are we converting? Have we tested different landing pages? What is a better user experience that we could be getting users right now? It's a five-step process, can we get it to a three? Partnering with PMMs to say, "Hey, here's something that I think could help improve our lead to conversion." Just stuff like that, that they're too busy with too many other things to focus really, really deep into those.

(00:36:03):
And typically, whenever I managed an agency in the past and I consulted, I made sure that you weren't stretched thin enough that you couldn't do those things. Because I'm a firm believer in hiring smart people and then getting out of their way. But each week having one-on-ones with them, just spot checking things, just saying, "Hey, I looked at this. This doesn't look right. What's going on there?" "Oh yeah, I do that on this day." "Okay, great. Just making sure you're covered." Because sometimes people won't scream uncle when they should be screaming uncle because they think it's a sign of weakness.

(00:36:40):
But let me know when you're overwhelmed. Maybe I have a solution for you. Maybe there's a way I can coach you to be better at something, or we just need to hire more resources. Because the client portfolio you have is five, and when we took them on, they were all at 100K, but now they're all spending 2 million plus. We need to offload some of that from you because you're doing such a good job that you've scaled them up. Let's give you three clients instead of five and hire someone to take those two.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:08):
So it sounds like basically they just don't have the time to care and spend on all the things that they need to be doing. And when you've held companies, you actually go deep and you have the time to do it well. I guess, when someone's trying to find an agency or someone like you, I know you don't do this much anymore. Any advice for just how to know if they're going to be great? Is it just agencies in general probably not a good choice? Is it hire someone in-house? I guess, what advice do you offer people that are like, "Oh man, I want to avoid this."

Timothy Davis (00:37:43):
Agencies are a good place to get things started. Even when I was consulting, I would, honestly, I'm a big believer in forward thinking, backwards planning. So, if I'm taking this contract on with this new client, what's the end goal for you? If your end goal is to have this at performing in $100 million spend, there's no way one person can do that. So let's create milestones along the way of making sure we're checking in and saying, when is the right time to hire? Whether that's a data scientist, whether that's a creative person in-house or replacing me full time. There's no reason that you should be holding a company back. If anything, you should be helping them get to that milestone. And I think that's why I've been able to do so well for myself because I show that, "Hey, I have the best interest for you and your company." As opposed to how much more money can I squeeze from you by holding onto you as a client.

(00:38:47):
I would say, agency consultant is a good way to start. Because if you as a business owner, you shouldn't have to log into, "Oh, I haven't logged into Google in three weeks to look at stuff because I'm doing payroll, I'm doing HR stuff, and I'm meeting with clients, and I'm doing sales." Start there, get it to a good place. Create that milestone of, "Hey, when we're spending 50K a month, I need to hire somebody full time to take this over." And just have that conversation with your agency and your consultant. I think more times than not, you will have a positive reaction to that. But if you don't, I would say that's a major red flag and probably someone you shouldn't be partnering with.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:27):
Awesome. Okay, so your advice is to get started on paid growth, buying an agency or a small shop consultant type person to get you started, have a conversation. And when we reach a certain scale, we're going to hire someone internally to run this for us. And then, potentially, they'll keep working with you. Potentially they'll start things in their own. Or is the assumption they'll start working with you, they'll become the owner of this thing, or is it like we may transition you out?

Timothy Davis (00:39:52):
That's a really good point actually. So, there have been times where a client's like, "Hey, we've reached our milestone. I want to bring someone in." That person comes in, and say, they're an expert in social media, like, "Hey, I still want you to execute on Google and Bing, because that is just not my bailiwick. I'll take over the social stuff, but we do need to talk about your fee. Maybe it does need to go down." "Completely acceptable. Let's have that discussion, make sure we're both aligned to what that should be." But yeah, there have been times where they're like, "Hey, we've reached our milestone. We got to bring someone on." But that person that they bring on is like, "Actually, I see expansion in this direction, but I can't do this. Are you willing to stay on, and help me with this? Great. If not, I'll just have to find someone else who can."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:37):
I want to talk about the team that you build over time, but later. But specifically, for this first person that you hire, what sort of person is this person? Is it like a data person? Is it a person that's just done specific performance marketing on channel? Or what do you look for ideally?

Timothy Davis (00:40:55):
I'm a big believer in... There was a book written by Nate Silver called The Signal and the Noise. Are you familiar with it?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:04):
No.

Timothy Davis (00:41:07):
So, Nate Silver is the guy who created.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:08):
FiveThirtySeven?

Timothy Davis (00:41:12):
Yeah, yeah. And in the book, he basically... I'm going to use the word art, I'm going to use the word art, detailed the art of probability statistics and applied him to real world circumstances. It included case studies with baseball, which of course I loved. Elections, climate change, poker, stuff like that. And I liked that book. It's kind of dense. But the thing I liked the most about it was the title. And just changing the title ever so slightly to signal not noise. So typically, whenever I hire people, I want to hire smart people and kind of get out of their way. But the biggest thing I want to focus on is what is your thought process when it comes to data?

(00:42:05):
Because I can teach anyone how to do Google ads. I can teach anyone how to do Meta ads. That is not the hard part. It is the data part that is the hard part because there is so much noise going on in those accounts. They give you everything, which is great. It's great that they give you all this information, but you can have someone that's "Oh, but look at the reach, look at the frequency, look at the CPMs, look at the CPC, look at the conversion rate. Look at the cost per lead. Look at the cost per MQL. Look at this." Hold on, that's a lot of noise you just said. So what is the signal and what is the noise? And let's make sure we're focusing on the right signal versus the right noise. And that has to be a data person because there's a lot of data in these platforms.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:51):
\This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing and feature management platform built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams. Companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp, and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth and for understanding the performance of new features. And Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most was our experimentation platform where I could set up experiments easily, troubleshoot issues, and analyze performance all on my own. Eppo does all that and more with advanced statistical methods that can help you shape weeks off experiment time and accessible UI for diving deeper into performance and out of the box reporting that helps you avoid annoying, prolonged analytic cycles.

(00:43:43):
Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insights with your team, sparking ideas for the A/B testing flywheel. Eppo powers experimentation across every use case, including product growth, machine learning, monetization, and email marketing. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com/lenny and 10X your experiment velocity. That's get E-P-P-O .com/lenny.

(00:44:10):
Everyone I talked to that's worked with you is just like, "Timothy is incredible at working with tons of data and finding the things that matter." Someone told me that it actually comes from your love of baseball, that you just go crazy with stats and spreadsheets of baseball games, and players, and things like that. Is there something there that you could share that is interesting?

Timothy Davis (00:44:28):
Yeah. So I played baseball my whole life, but when you blow out your arm and you're as fast as a sea otter, it's not very conducive for you to continue chasing that dream. But the one thing I always liked was the stats. Even as a kid when I would watch baseball games on TV, it's like, what's this guy batting? How often is he getting on base? How many RBIs? Like, "Oh, this guy is terrible average, but he has a lot of RBIs, so that means if there's a runner on base, he may not get a hit, but he's going to get that guy in. So you want to make sure you put him in the right spot in the batting order, so on and so forth." I could talk about that for hours. But again, that could be another thing where there's a lot of data available, which one should you focus on?

(00:45:16):
And ultimately, what is the optimization you're going to make to the lineup or to where you place fielders on the field to ensure that we're doing the right thing and becoming as efficient and effective as possible? As far as dealing with all that data, that is just, I would say, a skill I've learned over time. Early in my career, whenever someone was like, "Oh, we have this new project. Who wants to work on it?" "I'll do it." I was always just eager like a sponge. I wanted to get in as much stuff as possible. I did SEO for a portion of my career. I did email marketing. I did affiliates. And then, eventually, I remember the first time I saw paid, because again, I was doing SEO where I was like, "Yeah, we're going to do this and we think it's going to work." But we won't know for about six months.

(00:46:12):
Someone showed me the paid platform. I was like, "Wait, you know this is the keyword you're bidding on. This is how many times the ad was shown, how many people clicked on it? How many... Wow, this is amazing. I need to get more into this." And that's just kind of where it started. And when I usually hire people and we go through the interview process, I make sure that they can be data focused. Really, it's just ensuring that we're focusing on that signal and not the noise. And one of the interview questions I usually ask is I throw a bunch of data points at them and then say, "Out of all that, what would you do to optimize the account?" And more times than not that they're just overwhelmed. But the people that I like are like, " Well, what's the purpose of the campaign?"

(00:47:02):
"The purpose of the campaign is to drive conversions." "Okay, well, I would focus here, focus on how many clicks we're getting, and how many conversions, are we targeting the right people?" Because who cares about how many impressions you're getting? Who cares about the reach? Who cares about the frequency? If the goal of the campaign is to get the conversions, that's what we should be doing. If it was awareness, it's how many people saw it. If it was a consideration, how many people were getting into the funnel and are considering us from a white paper download or a demo as the product solution that they're looking for.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:34):
That's a great segue to the next question I wanted to ask you, which is just metrics that you love to focus on, pay attention to when you're helping people with paid ads. A lot of people think about CAC, a lot of people think about return on ad spend, LTV to CAC. I know it really depends on the goals as you said, but I guess, is there anything that you find is like, forget these metrics, these are kind of the bucket that you focus on most?

Timothy Davis (00:48:01):
Yeah, so for those metrics, I would say, I really hope you have a great finance partner. Shout out to Courtney and Nick the fantastic finance partners I have at Shopify. Nick's not there anymore. Sad cry emoji. But Courtney, we're able to collaborate on those things. Understand, this is the investment we're putting in, this is the expected return, this is the CAC that we can basically put a guardrail on. You have to be within. So, hopefully you have a really strong financial partner you can use for those. But as far as the stuff that I focus on, there are things that whenever we're looking at accounts, we'll kind of hyperfocus on. For example, Google will give you information about what is going on with your ad copy and how to ultimately show as often as possible. What I'm showing here is a visual of brand versus non-brand when it comes to expected click-through rate, landing page experience, and ad relevance.

(00:49:08):
The reason I like building reports like this is because it'll kind of show you where your hole in the ship is. If you look on the left side expected click-through rate, 75% above average. Landing page experience, 84% above average. Then you get down to ad relevance, a lot more colors than there are green, only 35% above average. So, for your brand ad copy, the clear direction you have from the data that's available to you is jump into the account and make it more relevant. That will improve your ad strength. And once you improve your ad strength, that will improve your quality score. And more times than, I think, it's a 12% increase in the number of impressions you can get if you increase from a below average to an above average for the data that's available here. And then, on the non-brand side, clear expected click-through rate, you really need to be working on.

(00:50:13):
And that data is also available here that you can kind of see. I put in red the one for brand, your quality score being at a nine, but your average CPC is $8. That is very interesting. It should be, the higher your CPC is, the lower your CPC should be. So that is an investigation that's like, "Hey, here's a signal, let's go do a deep dive." So there's further reports that you could look at. Looking at the ad strength again, average, excellent, good, or poor. You can see clearly on the non-brand side doing really well. They're doing really well here. Most of their ads, 46 of their ads are excellent and a bulk of their spend is going there. But if we look on the brand side, you have one ad, one ad that you could go in and just click pause on, that is a poor. And look at that CPC $7.

(00:51:19):
So just turning that ad off by itself, not only will... I'm a firm believer in that there's an account level quality score, not just necessarily a keyword or an ad quality score. So, just turning this one off and removing it from the account, this one ad could dramatically improve your performance. And then, Google actually tells you what you need to do to increase those strength things. So this report is ultimately powered by this one. So for your ad strength improvements, they'll tell you, "Try adding a few more unique headlines or unpinning some of the ad sets. Try including more keywords in your descriptions or your headlines." So-

Timothy Davis (00:52:00):
Including more keywords in your descriptions or your headlines. So they're actually giving you this information, but more times than not, I just feel like people are just missing this and just not taking action on it. So definitely some stuff available within the account that will help you focus on that signal versus the noise that you could be just getting from the clicks, the impressions and all those things that are available to you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:24):
That was amazing. For folks not watching on YouTube, you pulled up actual reports from, I think, imagine, past clients, is that what the data was from?

Timothy Davis (00:52:24):
Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:32):
Okay, so actual reports from past clients of how you evaluate, and this is Google Ads, basically.

Timothy Davis (00:52:38):
Correct.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:38):
Google Ads data. Incredible. Okay. And so within those reports, you had poor, excellent. How do you determine when something is going great? Is that something you set, like if it's above this threshold? Is that a benchmark you have, or is that Google telling you, "This is poor, or this..."

Timothy Davis (00:52:54):
Yeah, so that's Google telling you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:56):
Okay.

Timothy Davis (00:52:57):
There's sometimes where you'll work really, really hard to take that poor to an average, that average to an excellent, and there's just not a whole lot you can do sometimes. It kind of is what it is. But I would argue more times than not, people are not doing those things to improve their ad strength. So just if you have the change history available in every account, in Meta, in Google, if people are doing the test to try and improve and get better, great. You have the right people working. But if not, that's a clear indication that there's definitely room for improvement.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:40):
Something that someone asked on Twitter is for benchmarks around any of the stuff. How do you know when your CPC is good? I guess you just look at... Do you look at Google telling you it's excellent versus poor? How do you know if your conversion rate is good? How do you know if your CAC is good?

Timothy Davis (00:53:54):
Yeah, every industry and every company is going to be different, healthcare, lawyers, those are some of the highest cost and average CPCs I've seen. If I was to compare that industry, say to a B2B industry, it would not be very good at all. Honestly, what I would tell the user to do, every single platform has partners available, more times than not, they're kind of like salespeople. I actually really like the partners that we have at Shopify, because I do feel that they are partners. Shout out to Francisco at Google, and Sami and Alana at Meta. And Nick, and Sam, and Brian at LinkedIn, in case they all hear this. But I think they're really great partners, and they will give you that information.

(00:54:44):
They will actually say, "If you give me the five people you consider to be your top competitors, I will tell you if you are above or below a certain threshold." Now they can't tell you CAC because they would have to have transparency into conversions. But click-through rate, conversion rate, cost per click, things like that, they will give you that information because they will anonymize it, so you won't know who is who. If you say, "My competitor's monday.com," they won't say, "monday.com has a click-through rate of 5%." They won't tell you that. But they will tell you, "Of the competitors you gave us, and we added three more in just to say, hey, we found some people." And also to where if you only give them two, you can be like, "Oh, it's one or the other." That they'll give you that information because they want you to succeed. Because if you succeed, you spend more money on their platform.

(00:55:38):
So if you find out your average CPC is really high, take the actions that are in the account that tell you what you can do to lower it. But if you find out that you have a lower CPC, you're like, "Oh, great, I thought that was worse." And then you can communicate that internally to your team and say, "Hey, our average CPCs may seem high, but in reality we got with our partners, and we are on par with the industry."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:02):
Got it. So the advice is, don't seek generic benchmarks for any of these metrics. You can talk to your rep at Google, Facebook, LinkedIn, et cetera. And they'll give you essentially the numbers-

Timothy Davis (00:56:13):
Great summary. Yes, yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:14):
Amazing. Okay, going back to the report you just showed, is that a report you developed custom that gives you, here's the most important stuff to pay attention to? Or is it basically an export from Google Ad Manager, and...

Timothy Davis (00:56:26):
So these are all exports, so that this is just the visualization of the data that's available. So this all data is available in every account. This is data available in the account, this is data available in the account. Now in saying that, there are more reports that we get into, like impression sharing frequency. This is something I tend to look at, that not a lot of other people do. It's not about showing as often as possible because that's what impression share tells you, and that's kind of like ego marketing. I want to be number one, I want to be there all the time. It's about showing to the right person as often as possible.

(00:57:06):
Instead of thinking about being on top of the page, you should think about serving the right user, which can be measured with our click share. And then Google will put us on top of the page, which we can see through our top impression share. That's what this whole visualization is here for, where I feel like a lot of people don't do this type of visualization. And this can be done by leveraging all the user data available on Google, such as demographics, locations, if any audiences, in-market audiences. Testing different bid strategies and more.

(00:57:40):
So the data's readily available, but it's just making the visualization a little bit more digestible. And the reason that I actually have two here to show is because this is an example of when I was working on an account back in 2023, where we started making some changes. And you can see that, clearly, our impression share, I would say was baseline. It didn't really change too much, but look at our click share going up. Because now again, we're talking more to the right people, not necessarily just everyone, generic people. Versus this campaign that was... This was the test and this was the control, and you can clearly see that we were talking to a lot of people, but no one cared about what we were talking about. So this was an easy test to call and just say, "This one's performing a lot better." And then verifying the other metrics still look good, conversion rate, number of conversions, stuff like that. This one was the clear winner, so we went in this direction.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:41):
This is super cool. I love that you're showing this. And again, plug for YouTube to actually see the charts you're talking about. I see one more slide on this deck. I'm curious, what's there?

Timothy Davis (00:58:49):
Yeah, so this one, I'm hoping you have show notes that we can give a shout-out to somebody.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:55):
Yeah, absolutely.

Timothy Davis (00:58:56):
Yep. There's a website called PPC Hero. What I usually tell people is, "Terrible name, great content." The actual website used to be a little bit more cartoonish with superheroes on it, but now it's, they've refined it. But the writer there, his name's Jacob Brown. This is what he calls the true competition metric. And again, this is why I highly recommend we give people the link to the article because this does get a little dense. So what he does is that he creates four new metrics with the Auction Insights that are available. And two of those metrics are position above rate when we show, and amount of times they show and we don't. Added together, and it will show how often a competitor ranks above you in all auctions you're available for. Using this type of lens is an effective way to identify genuine threats.

(00:59:56):
Not that just, this data can be used to gain comprehensive insights like determining your position and impression share, but by creating a baseline that you can see how this data changes over time through different bid strategies, keyword ad copy optimizations and more. This is a very, very powerful one, because I do know a lot of people are always concerned about, "What are my competitors doing? How are they doing it? Why are they doing it?" And with all the smart bidding currently available...

(01:00:25):
Back in my day, it was all manual bid, so you could change the bid ever so slightly, and then be like, "Oh, now my competitor's showing above me," and this is even before Google gave us Auction Insights data. This is now available to us in the platform. Using this report will actually identify a true threat, as opposed to making an assumption based on personalization that maybe you're seeing when you Google a keyword, or using a tool like Semrush that ultimately is saying, "Oh, this person's appearing above you. Well, let's run this report and see if it's a genuine threat," as opposed to just maybe ego marketing going on.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:09):
Super cool. And this comes from PPC Hero, is this what you're saying?

Timothy Davis (01:01:13):
Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:13):
Cool. We'll definitely link to that. Are there any other tools or workflows that you find really helpful in analyzing this endless amount of data?

Timothy Davis (01:01:24):
Please, audience, if you are using AI in this way, let me know because a lot of this stuff I do can be a little manual and can be a little time-consuming. If they've found ways to automate through AI where I can provide the information that isn't sensitive, that they will make it a lot cleaner, and a lot more digestible, let me know. But a lot of the things, I have templates that you can load the data into, and it will just automatically give you the result from it. But yeah, right now, it is a little manual, but if there's a way to automate this through AI, please, users, contact me on LinkedIn and let me know.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:09):
Sounds like a startup opportunity right there.

Timothy Davis (01:02:11):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:12):
Sweet. Okay, let's move in a slightly different direction. Attribution, what a sexy, exciting topic. So attribution, basically it's how do you assign credit to a channel and to a campaign, so that you know where growth is coming from, what's working? What's the state of attribution today? What do you find is helpful? How do people do attribution well in today's world?

Timothy Davis (01:02:35):
Yeah, I'm a big believer and proponent in multi-touch. I fall into the camp of more time decay. Historically, the research I've done, users tend to forget very quickly where they first found your brand. Yes, you should get credit because this is the first time they saw your brand or the first time they interacted with it, for sure, let's give you some credit for that. But definitely not the reason that they ultimately converted. Linear is fine as well, but overall, I do think attribution by itself is biased. It does not answer the question of whether the person clicking on or seeing an ad would've converted anyways, even in the absence of that ad.

(01:03:24):
This is why numerous companies like Netflix and eBay have done studies to get an understanding of the incrementality of paid advertising campaigns, whether that's conducting GeoX or Conversion Lift tests at important slices of the marketing channel. I know eBay was very popular when they did that experiment. I think it was like 2012, and I'll have a link for you for that as well. Where they ultimately decided to cut almost all of their brand spend, because they found that users were already going to find them through organic anyway, so they were just kind of throwing money out the window. And it was really hard for competitors to get their ads at the top of the page because their quality scores were so low.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:07):
Okay, so multi-touch is the way you like to think about it. Basically give credits to all of the channels that you detected the user saw your ad on, and less credit if it was further back in time.

Timothy Davis (01:04:19):
Right, yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:20):
And then in terms of tooling, is there tools you love? Is it stuff you build in-house generally? How do people go about doing this sort of stuff?

Timothy Davis (01:04:28):
Yeah, I don't know if I want to say I have been fortunate or not, but most of the companies I've worked with, like the big companies of the world, the Pinterests, the Shopifys, the IBMs of the world tend to build things in-house. So from a third-party tool, unfortunately, I don't have a whole lot of go-tos for that. So again, either that's a, I've been fortunate or I've been sheltered.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:54):
And then, are there tools that you see people use, or is it just really nothing amazing out there?

Timothy Davis (01:05:00):
Yeah, none that I've seen that's like, "Oh wow, that's amazing." I will always say, make sure you're trying to leverage the in-platform tools because the biggest thing with performance marketing is the signal you're sending the platform. Because if you are telling the platform, "Oh, I want to get more of the users that are doing this action," it's going to do a really good job of giving you that. But if that action doesn't equal business results, you're not helping yourself at the end of the day. You're giving it, again, a lot of noise instead of the right signal. So try and leverage the in-platform tools. Or if there is a tool you're using, make sure it does allow third-party integration through the Google, Meta, TikToks of the world.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:51):
Then let's talk about incrementality. You mentioned this idea of how do you know if the money you spent led to incremental growth that wouldn't have happened if you didn't run that ad. Is there any advice there, anything you've seen about just how to think about incrementality correctly, and not just give yourself all this credit for stuff that would've happened anyway?

Timothy Davis (01:06:09):
Yeah, I mean, there are many ways to judge the effectiveness of growth overall. Like some of the stuff we talked about before, brand metrics, awareness, recall, things along those lines. There are also, I know some companies look at leading indicators like visits, and clicks, or tribute, which of the efforts are linked to or perceived drivers of actions. Like leads, conversions to prospect, prospect to scale. But really the results should be coming from either that GeoX or Geo experiment or Conversion Lift. The results of those experiments should ultimately fuel the plans for what we call IAF, incrementality adjusted factor, and will allow you to be more precise and how efficient each channel is.

(01:07:03):
Ideally, by region, sometimes you just have a holistic of like, "This is how Meta is, this is how YouTube is." But if you don't have it by region, don't fret, it's fine, just have it by platform. And kind of like what does that look in practice? When you're running a Conversion Lift test, you intentionally do not show your ad to some users when you win an auction, and instead Google shows the next bidders' ad. This is your control group, and adds up to some opportunity costs that is estimated in terms of impression share percentage, as well as spend holdback. Spend holdback is like how much money you will not spend because of this test.

(01:07:42):
And all of the platforms are willing to partner with you on this, because Facebook knows this, LinkedIn knows this. All of them know that they are very visually-based creative assets that are not getting as much credit as they deserve. So if you go to any of them, if say you don't have a dedicated rep you can call, and if you ask for this, more times than not, they are willing to partner with you in saying that, if you're not spending enough, they probably will not help you with this. Because there are certain spend thresholds you do need to meet. But I would say at least start there. And also if you're not spending more than I would say 50K a month in the platform, doing this is going to be a lot more work than you're going to get result from, you're just not going to have enough signal there.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:36):
So basically don't worry about running incrementality tests when you're-

Timothy Davis (01:08:39):
Yeah, when you're starting out.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:42):
Got it. Okay. And so basically to understand actual incrementality, every platform has a way for you to actually test it on the platform, and the team there can help you run it.

Timothy Davis (01:08:51):
Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:52):
Awesome. Okay. Let's go back to talking about team structure and how to build your own performance marketing team. So we talked about the first person that you hire and the advice there was someone that's very, understands how to find signal in noise. So there's that one person, and your advice there was maybe around like 50K. Was that like an actual threshold that you usually recommend, or is that just like an example?

Timothy Davis (01:09:14):
Every business is slightly different. I mean, if they're well funded, 50K may not... the threshold may be higher. But yeah, everyone's different. 50K may be, like if somebody said... If you were to just say, "Hey, give me a number," I would say, "50K to start having those conversations." Because if you're at 50K, say for the month of June, great, it's going to take us three months to hire someone anyway, so at least start the conversations now.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:39):
Awesome. Okay. What do the first three to five hires look like generally, that you recommend for scaling internally from its marketing?

Timothy Davis (01:09:48):
So the first thing, like we said, someone data-driven that can get into the platforms. The next is going to be creative. Because I need those two now working hand-in-hand, making sure the creative is matching the tone and also the performance that we're trying to achieve as a business. And then third would be a dedicated data scientist, a fully dedicated person. Because they can help you with things like the incrementality testing. They can help create reports that will ultimately make everyone's lives better. They will be able to build analyses that as a generalist will not be able to do yourself. There's a saying of like, "I'm not a data scientist, but I like to play one online." Because what they do, they ultimately make us look really good. Because we're ultimately the ones reporting on the performance of it, but they were the ones that helped build that environment, and build all those things for us to succeed.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:54):
And then in terms of the creative person, is that like a graphic designer? Is it like a marketing person? What's the actual skill set there?

Timothy Davis (01:11:02):
It would be more graphic design/branding. The reason for that is because if you have a good marketing mix, you're going to have... If we keep it to a three-step funnel of awareness, consideration, purchase, you're going to need to build some brand equity in a specific direction. You're going to need to make sure you're communicating value, which now you're not being as creative, you're being more directional. And then ultimately the purchase is like, "Hey, click here, convert now." So you do want to give them the ability to still be creative. "Hey, I hired you because you have a good creative eye and you're good at what you do, but now we need to focus on getting that person to convert." So you give them a little free rein to be creative, but then you also need them to be able to execute against that creative, you need to get those users to convert.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:54):
And they're also writing the copy, I imagine for the Google Ads.

Timothy Davis (01:11:59):
I usually say that should be collaborative. The performance marketer should be able to write most of the ads, but I can't tell you how many times in my career where I've written an ad and I'm like, "This is the greatest ad ever written known to man. People will write stories about this ad, it is amazing." And it flops because I'm not the target audience, more times than not. So I think it should be collaborative, and no idea should be left on the cutting room floor because... Perfect example. I was working with ADT, the security company. We wrote the most perfect ad when Google Ads only allowed a headline and two descriptions of 35 and 35. We got every single value prop in there somehow, it was amazing.

(01:12:50):
And the ad that it was going against was dollar sign, zero setup fee, dollar sign, zero install fee. That ad won. It was like that is... No, how did that... It barely uses any of the characters, and it tells you almost nothing, but it won. Had more conversions, a higher click-through rate. So we took that, and we applied that with the value props, and it did better. So it should never be like, unless the idea is don't buy our product, which hopefully someone is not writing that ad copy. It shouldn't be left on the cutting room floor. Always test it. Always be willing to learn what works, what doesn't.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:34):
For this first hire, what's the title of this person, usually in your experience?

Timothy Davis (01:13:38):
Lately, it's been growth marketing specialist, growth marketing manager, because they're going to wear multiple hats. Like at any startup that you're at, you're going to be asked one day to, "Hey, I want you to do performance ads," and then tomorrow it's like, "Hey, I need you to help me build out this spreadsheet for a spec sheet that you have no idea what you're doing." So you're always going to wear multiple hats, so just having a general title like that to start out with. And then if that person matures into a role, you can make them more of a specialist. Or if they start showing signs of like, "Hey, I really like doing the social stuff, and we've scaled enough. Okay, let me hire a paid search person." So yeah, I always start with a general, and then as the team grows, we get more into specialties.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:28):
So growth marketing person, it's kind of like the broad umbrella.

Timothy Davis (01:14:32):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:32):
And then are these people sitting in Google Ad Manager and Meta Ads and just like running ads manually?

Timothy Davis (01:14:38):
At Shopify, we call it GSD, getting shit done. I'm a firm believer in getting shit done. You should be in the account, like I mentioned earlier with that ops cadence, we have stuff we need to be doing weekly, bi-weekly, monthly. The bigger the company gets, the [inaudible 01:14:55] you wind up in more and more meetings talking about the things you want to do, and how you're going to do it and stuff like that. But keeping those people kind of sheltered away from that and focused on those things, are going to drive the best results for you, you possibly can get.

(01:15:11):
And that means hands-on keyboards in the Ads Manager, tweaking things. Setting up a calendar. I'm a firm believer in setting up a calendar. "We started this test on this day, that means this test will end a month from now." Put a notification, so you have a cool down period, and you report out to the org what you did, how you did it, why you did it, and then the results from it. And then, all right, what we learned from this is this, and we will be applying that to our next test, and this is how. So yeah, hands-on keyboards doing all of those things. So again, hiring those smart people, and just getting out of their way.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:47):
I love that. In terms of how this team grows, you mentioned when we were chatting, that you wait for someone to cry uncle, to hire more and to add to the team to kind of avoid bloat. Talk about that.

Timothy Davis (01:16:02):
Unfortunately, we've seen a lot in the news lately with a lot of tech companies letting go of some really talented people, and that is, I feel like just created bloated organizations. We, every month, my current manager, Dean, created this calculator that we look at that says, "How much time are you spending in meetings?" If you have any PTO coming up, put that in there. Optimizations, reporting, stuff like that to basically add up to how many days are in the quarter? Because every quarter... Well, not every quarter, but most quarters you'll have vacation, or you'll have, say, what we call a Shopify burst, where it's we meet in real life to get shit done in real life as opposed to remotely. Put all that in there, and then what does the number equate to? Oh, we're in the red right now for these two to five people.

(01:16:59):
How many quarters has it been that way? Okay, it's only this quarter. This quarter, we have a summit coming up, or we have a burst coming up, or we have a lot of travel because we're meeting with partners, so on and so forth. So maybe this is an isolated thing, let's go ahead and wait till next quarter. All right, next quarter, it's red again. All right, now maybe we need to start having the conversation of, what this new hire will take over, what they will be responsible for, and how much work they'll be taking on and doing, to replace some of this red that is going on.

(01:17:31):
And if it equates to a full head, great, we can move forward, we've made our business case. But sometimes it doesn't. Sometimes we're just red, and we need to do a better job of making sure, "Hey, we need to step out of these meetings. These meetings are sucking out our time and we don't need to be a part of it." Or, "This launch, we don't need to be a part of. We just need to be consulted on it. We don't need to be in every single meeting every single time, or every single communication." So just making sure we're looking at the right things before we decide to hire someone and making-

Timothy Davis (01:18:00):
Just making sure we're looking at the right things before we decide to hire someone and making sure that we have stuff for them to do.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:06):
And red means they have more work?

Timothy Davis (01:18:09):
Yeah. More days than there are in the quarter.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:12):
And so they basically estimate, "Here's how many days I need to do the things I've committed to for the quarter." And then it's like, "How many actual days do you have this quarter?"

Timothy Davis (01:18:20):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:20):
That is super cool. And so step one is, 'Okay, if you're in the red, let's cut some stuff." And then if they're still in the red and you've cut stuff, then, " Okay, we need to start hiring."

Timothy Davis (01:18:31):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:32):
That is very cool. Is that a Shopify thing or is that something you do at your team?

Timothy Davis (01:18:36):
I've done stuff like that at other companies before, but kind of bringing it forward again, I don't want to take the credit for it. Dean was the one that brought it back up. It was like, "Oh yeah, I used to do this. I don't know why I stopped doing it." So it's definitely something I've used at other companies for sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:52):
That is super cool. You mentioned this opps cadence. Is that something you can describe just what this cadence looks like of how you run?

Timothy Davis (01:18:59):
Yeah. So I love me a spreadsheet. So it's just a spreadsheet. And visually, I'll do my best to describe it. Let's say column A has those buckets I was talking about a finance, performance structure, keywords, so on and so forth. And then within those buckets ... Or let's call those ... Everyone loves rocks and pebbles right now, right? So that's your big rock. Your big rock is keywords.

(01:19:24):
Then within that you have pebbles. Keyword granularity, brand versus non-brand, search query reports, negatives, so on, so forth. And then within that we say how often we're doing it. Are we doing it weekly, bi-weekly, monthly? And then that allows us to ... If anyone in the organization's like, "Hey, how often are you guys updating ad copy?" Easy answer. "How often are you guys doing search query reports?" Easy answer, And it allows us to make sure we hold ourselves accountable to those things because a lot of times we have a lot we're doing, We're working in Google, we're working in Meta, we're working in YouTube. You could easily forget, "Oh, I didn't do that. I got to make sure I do that again." So it's a way to hold yourself accountable, but it's also a way for me as a manager to go in and kind of spot check that and make sure that they're doing the things that need to be done in the account.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:19):
The core of this, essentially, there's a spreadsheet that everyone aligns on of here's when and how often we do certain activity to operate this performance marketing machine that you've built.

Timothy Davis (01:20:30):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:30):
Awesome. And it's both internally so that everyone knows, and then also when people ask, "Hey, when are you going to do this?" "Okay, here's the data."

Timothy Davis (01:20:37):
Yeah. Yeah. So if a cross-functional team or partner wants to know, easy answer. "We got it for you right here. Here's our whole opps cadence."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:46):
In terms of the team, something else folks told me about you is that you're very hardcore about training new people that you hire. What does people mean by that?

Timothy Davis (01:20:56):
Yeah. There's a book called ... I think it's The First 90 Days, and in it actually has a graph that shows when the person starts having impact and how many days it's been. And more times than not, it takes about ... We've all heard it. 90 days for someone to have impact.

(01:21:14):
I want to try and make that 45 days, if not 30. Most of the time it has to do with learning the culture, learning the people understanding, "Yes, you've done paid before at this other job, but this is how we do it here." That's where the opps cadence really comes in handy. It's like, "Here's how often we do it here. I understand maybe you did it monthly there, but we do it here biweekly. And you're saying you used to do it biweekly, we do it weekly and this is how."

(01:21:47):
And also giving them responsibility early on for something. For example, Kat on my team was hired 8ish months ago. She was thrown into the fire very quickly. It was like, "Hey, we have this campaign coming up called additions. Here's everything we did last additions. This is the results. These are your responsibilities, these are the expectations. Go. Go forth and conquer. As you come along. There may be something that doesn't make sense. I'm here by all means ask questions."

(01:22:24):
But what I've noticed is twofold. One, when you're clear in what is expected of them, like, "You are expected to do this when and you already know how to do it. Great." Or also in one-on-ones, I'll just open up the account and say, "Hey, this is how I do it. Let me show you the way I'm doing it and how quick it is for me. And you can learn, even though we're remote, I'm showing you as if you're sitting right over my shoulder or we're face to face. This is how I do it." So if you're doing something different maybe ... One plus one is two, three minus one is two, and that's fine. We both got to the same answer. But if you're doing nine times five minus two times 12 divided by 15, nope, we can simplify this."

(01:23:13):
So making sure that they're efficient and effective with their time, they're focusing on that signal versus that noise and giving them responsibility early on to really take ownership of something. You can see that people are a lot more quicker to pick up things and start getting that flywheel going of, "Hey, I want to have impact as soon as possible." Versus, "Oh, hey, go read this handbook week one. Week two, let me introduce you to the team. Week three." It's like slow rolling. "We can speed this up guys. We can get people up to speed and making impact a lot sooner."

(01:23:52):
And also don't expect them to be perfect. You can't expect people to be perfect right out the gate. " I can't remember every little thing I need to tell you, and there may be things I can learn from you." I can't tell you how many times I'm still learning from people around me. It's like, "Oh, that's great. I didn't even think of that or I haven't tried that. I should totally do that." So just know that they're not going to be perfect out of the gate, but giving them clear direction and expectations, we'll get them where they need to be.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:28):
I could see why your team is so effective and so successful. This all makes a lot of sense. You mind if I do a rapid fire set of questions that people asked on Twitter about very specific stuff?

Timothy Davis (01:24:40):
Yeah. By all means.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:41):
Okay, ATT, there was a huge change to the way cookies and attribution and tracking worked online and it felt like paid ads kind of like, "Oh, shit. That's not going to work anymore. It's over. Facebook is dead." Clearly that hasn't happened at this point. Just what is the impact that ATT has had on paid ads and performance marketing?

Timothy Davis (01:25:02):
We were just talking about this the other day because we have ... Full transparency, we have people fully dedicated to mobile on the team, and I had reached out to Sasha who's on the team and said, "Hey, what are we doing with ATT? What are we doing scan? All those things? Because has any of our tactics really changed because of say, low opt-in rates?" And the direct answer I got from her was, "As long as we can use scan to provide attribution and measurement for iOS, we're fine." It's like, "Okay, that's very straightforward. I appreciate it." So as long as you're doing those things, you should be okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:50):
Amazing. That's great. So basically the show goes on, things change, but people find ways to work around it. Okay. Creatives, how impactful are creative in the performance of ads generally? Is that like, "Holy shit. People are way under estimating the power of a creative." Or is it like, "Okay, it's like a fringe impact?"

Timothy Davis (01:26:10):
Way underestimating the power of creative. The best example I can give ... Do you remember Dollar Shave Club?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:19):
Absolutely. Their video.

Timothy Davis (01:26:21):
All right. There you go. You remember it. That was creative. Now the person buying it may have done a really good job of just targeting males, but I would argue girlfriends at the time probably would've been aware of it as well. Really good creative should be doing a really good job of telling a story. And if it does that ... Again, going back to what we talked about at the very beginning, if you get that emotion with users, whether that's pulling at the hard strings or comedy, it's going to have a lasting impact.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:57):
Okay. Chuck on Twitter asked, "When someone steals your traffic, say in Google search results and buying up keywords around your companies, what should you do? Any advice?"

Timothy Davis (01:27:07):
Yeah. So that actually goes back to the visual that we showed and I'll pull it back up as I'm talking through it. The biggest thing is just know that anyone can do that. You can do it too, if you are ultimately concerned about it. But a lot of times competitors could be doing it on accident. And what I mean by accident is within Google, if you're bidding on keywords, Google will do what's called a close variant. If you were to do say e-commerce solution, I bet you Shopify shows up as a close variant at some point or Square or anyone like that. So they could just be mismanaging their account first and foremost. Don't give them that much credit that they're doing this maliciously or even doing it with intent.

(01:27:59):
And again, it will be in the show notes. If you do pull this report and you do notice that there is a clear threat that's going on here, first things first, let's make sure that they're not doing anything egregious like saying, "Lenny and Tim are better than Monday.com."

(01:28:15):
You cannot be, if the brand is trademarked within Google, they cannot use your name within the ad copy. Google more times than not will disallow it, but they could misspell it. I can't tell you how many times I've seen Shopify spelled with two I's because Google isn't catching it, but we can always put in a claim to say, "Hey Google, please remove this."

(01:28:40):
But if we do run this ...You can kind of see that the orange line here, and for those that are just listening. Orange line is rather consistent over time. There is a two week period where it dips, but it does come back up. There's another line that at the beginning of this visual, green is actually above orange. And if you look at the green one over time it almost disappears. So the reason I would say make sure you're looking at this report, and it's not just ego marketing, it could be an error. The issue could be the green one, specifically, could have been getting a close variant. They identified it, they removed it. "Oh wait, a couple of weeks later, we didn't fully remove it. Now let's remove it completely. And now they're almost gone completely." So make sure you're looking at the data and reacting to consistent competitor conquesting versus something that could just be an accident or users not knowing what they're doing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:40):
Amazing. And this is PPC Hero again, right? PPChero.com or whatever?

Timothy Davis (01:29:44):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:44):
Okay, cool.

Timothy Davis (01:29:45):
We'll share it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:46):
Yeah. We'll link it to it in the show notes. Okay. Last question. AI. You mentioned AI. You're looking for AI tools to help you with your workflows and analyze data. I guess is there anything you've seen AI impact in the work of paid growth and performance marketing, or is it like in the future might, other than obviously the algorithms on the platforms?

Timothy Davis (01:30:06):
I remember having this conversation a couple of months ago. AI, couldn't get away from it, right? It was everywhere, and what we were doing was leadership on know, "In all of our quarterly planning, what are we doing about AI? How are we using ai? What are we doing that's different?"

(01:30:28):
As always, I go to the partners and I say, "Hey, what are we doing about this?" And Francisco at Google, actually, he made a really good point. "You guys have been using AI for years now. Smart Bidding is AI. All of the recommendations within Google Ads is AI. Ad copy recommendations is AI, and that's always been in the platform, so we've always used those things."

(01:30:59):
So it was kind of like, let's reset the conversation of, "Hey, this has been here. We have been using it, this is how we've been using it and moving forward, these are some of the things we think we'll start doing." I do think it's having a huge impact from a content standpoint and a creative standpoint. Now, if those two kind of converge together, you have a perfect storm, right? But it is something that I keep a relative close eye on, but like I said earlier, hopefully some of your users can share more information with me. But it's not something that I would say is overly impactful yet, but I could see how it could be used maliciously if you can do API connections and things along those lines, for sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:48):
Wait, what do you mean by that?

Timothy Davis (01:31:49):
Again, Google will disallow certain things, but it takes time sometimes. If the term is copyrighted in Google for ad copy, it'll disallow it immediately. But say they need to do a check, you'll see a lot of times under review or pending in the account. But you'll also see impressions potentially attached to that. It's because Google's like, "Oh, we'll serve a little bit of it, and then if it's malicious, we'll pull it back." I could see a way that somebody could automate AI to where it's always updating it to where it's like, "Oh, let's just get a little drip here, a little drip here, a little drip here." And that little drip equates to a lot, but that's something AI could help with a human doing that would just take forever and be a total waste of time.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:34):
Got it. Just run tons of ads, just keep trying, trying, trying trying stuff. Slip through the cracks. You mentioned creative. It actually came back to question I forgot to ask. Going back to the team that you hired to run this sort of stuff, you hire this one person, growth marketer, specialist type of person, and the next hire is a creative. What's a sign that it's time to hire the creative person? Is there anything there? Is it just like, "We have budget and this is working?" Or is there anything else of, "Like, okay, this is a good time?"

Timothy Davis (01:33:00):
Yeah, if you're using a creative agency and they're getting you everything you want and you're happy with it, then it may not make sense to hire a creative. But more times not what I've noticed from creative ... Creative independence tend to do better than an agency. The biggest difference I see is that matching the right tone, matching the right creative look and feel that you're going for is accomplished way better in-house, and also coming up with new ideas that you can test quickly and iterate on versus, "We only have so many hours with the agency this month, or we only have so much budget we can spend with them." Where if you have that person in-house fully dedicated to the product itself, you'll never run into those caps.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:49):
It feels like if anywhere that scenario AI is going to empower that initial hire to do more creative on their own, you would think?

Timothy Davis (01:33:56):
Yeah. Yeah. And that's not always the best way to go. I've seen some ads in there where it's like, "Oh yeah, they're being scrappy. I see what they're doing." But to your point, maybe that's where AI kind of bridges the gap. Because I can't tell you how many times in the past it's like, Guys, we've got to be able to do retargeting, but we have no creative to do." Google has the dynamic ad builder and they've had it for I feel like years now, and that was just like, "Give us a couple of images and we will make a display ad for you that should perform because we're testing many different iterations of it." Meta is probably going to come along with something as well that it's like, "Give us a picture of your product and we'll put different backgrounds on it and test what works and what doesn't." Things along those lines.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:45):
That makes so much sense. Timothy, we've covered so much ground. This is everything I was hoping it would be. Before we get to our very exciting lightning round, is there anything else that you think would be important or valuable for listeners when they're trying to do this stuff on their own? Any other nuggets left that we haven't already covered?

Timothy Davis (01:35:05):
Yeah. I said it at one point, but I'll reiterate it. I'm always forward thinking, backwards planning. Just as you're going through it, "Where do you want to be and ultimately how do you think you're going to get there?" Because say your goal is to be on all platforms. "I want to be on Pinterest, I want to be on X, I want to be on everything." "Okay, forward think. That's where you want to be. Now let's backwards plan. "What can we do right now? We can do search because that's only content and that's keywords. We can do that. All right, now we need creative, but where do we start?" And then make iterations along the way. It's just always forward think, backwards plan, and that's for anything.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:49):
What are other examples of forward thinking? Because in a sense everyone will be like, "I want to be on every platform." I guess what are other things that people think about when they're like, the forward thinking is like, "Oh, we want to win Google search." Is that an example of forward thinking? What else? What else should people thinking?

Timothy Davis (01:36:06):
Yeah, exactly. What are those goals you want to hit? One of the things that we look at is what emerging channels to perform in it. "So what is it going to take for us to consider this channel a performing channel that is an always on, we're we're adopting it as BAU? So that's going to take a thousand conversions a month at this much spend with this much lift associated with it. So okay, we know what that looks like, so we're going to backwards plan where we're going to start. We're going to start with this one ad creative. "Okay, that works. Then we're going to go to this next ..." Because within each platform, they all have multiple types of ad units You can use. Say in LinkedIn, there's feed, there's conversation, there's video, there's carousel. So it's what are the milestones along the way that you're going to do to ultimately get it from testing emerging channel to perform them? So that would be an example of something more micro than macro.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:16):
Got it. Well, with that, we reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Timothy Davis (01:37:22):
Oh yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:23):
First question. What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Timothy Davis (01:37:28):
Daily Stoic by far. A book I read every day. Quick excerpt of what you can do from a stoic philosophy standpoint. Great By Choice is another good one. And Deep Work.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:45):
Favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Timothy Davis (01:37:49):
X-Men '97. Thoroughly enjoyed that. But that may be a lot of nostalgia. I actually never watched RRR when it first came out. Highly recommend that. That was a lot more enjoyable than I was anticipating. The Playlist, which is about Spotify, Welcome to Wrexham and Billion Dollar Code, also on Netflix, about Google Earth. Very interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:38:16):
Yeah, RRR. That movie is intense and very long also. It's like, man, I

Timothy Davis (01:38:21):
Three and a half hours.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:38:23):
... just have to split it up into different days to finish it, but it is incredible. No intent. Okay. Favorite recent product you've recently discovered that you really love?

Timothy Davis (01:38:31):
I drink too much caffeine and I've been trying to cut it out and I kind of circled back to this product I used to use called Magic Mind. It's a little shot every single day. Tastes really good and it does help with focus I find. If it's a placebo, great, I don't care, but it's helping me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:38:52):
That's amazing. I'm also a huge fan of Magic Mind. I'm friends with the guy that started it. So funny that you love it. I drink it often.

Timothy Davis (01:38:53):
Great.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:39:00):
I am on the subscription plan and I think he uses Shopify to sell it.

Timothy Davis (01:39:05):
He does. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:39:06):
It all connects. Amazing. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to share with friends or family? Find useful in work in life?

Timothy Davis (01:39:15):
Happiness is dedicated by expectations or dictated by expectations. That can't be more true more times than not, and it's similar. That's why I said there's two, and this one's similar to it. You won't see it for what it is until you stop looking through the lens of what you want it to be.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:39:35):
Amazing. It reminds me of an equation a colleague of mine once shared. He wrote a book of emotional equations or life equations. It was happiness is reality minus expectations.

Timothy Davis (01:39:48):
Yeah. Love that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:39:51):
Okay, next question. Who's had the most influence on you in your career?

Timothy Davis (01:39:56):
Well, we mentioned him before, so I got to bring him back up. Kasey Winters for sure. We were at a wedding. He showed me the original version of Google Analytics. For those of you that don't know, it's called Urchin, and when he showed that to me, it was, "Wait, you know all of this information about users coming to the site." I knew I wanted to do marketing, but at that moment I knew I was going to do digital marketing and watch him grow in his career. He's watching me grow in my career. We still balance each questions off of each other. We cannot not have a phone call under an hour. So definitely the most impactful.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:40:36):
Is there something about Casey Winters that people may not know? He's a two time podcast guest, huge friend of the show.

Timothy Davis (01:40:44):
Casey is really good at tennis, like insanely good at tennis. You want to know how good? This is how good he was. In high school, he played ... I'm pretty sure it was our senior year. He hadn't played in a year, maybe a year plus. He was still ranked top 10 in the state of Louisiana for tennis players. Hasn't played in a year and still considered one of the top 10 players. Insane.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:41:15):
Did not know that. I actually played tennis in high school, and so that's amazing. I did not know this. Thanks for sharing that. Timothy, this was incredible. I think this is going to help a lot of people figure out [inaudible 01:41:28] marketing, run more paid growth ads, figure out who to bring in to help them do this. Thank you so much for sharing and for being here.

Timothy Davis (01:41:36):
Of course. Appreciate the time.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:41:38):
Bye, everyone.

(01:41:40):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at Lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Zoelle Egner (00:00:00):
There is sometimes a recommendation or an instinct just like, "Ship things super, super quickly and get them out there." And I'm not saying don't move fast. Obviously you need to move fast in the early days, but make sure someone rereads your email so that it sounds good. Invest in having a decent photo or a decent illustration. If you have sample content, this is actually a big one, sample content for your productivity app as an example. Take the time to not have it be like Jane Doe 12 times in the name list. Have it be references to your industry so that people are like, "Oh, hey. That's a joke about Steve Jobs. I'm a designer. This person is thinking about me."
(00:00:35):
It's small stuff, but it tells that person, like, "The people who worked on this were thinking about me as a customer, they built it with me in mind, and that means that it is more likely that this is going to fit my needs than something generic." And that builds up both the brand trust that we've talked about, but also the personality of the company, and makes people want to root for you. And frankly, when you are small, you need everyone rooting for you that you can possibly get.
Lenny (00:01:02):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast, where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard won experiences building and scaling today's most successful companies. Today my guest is Zoelle Egner. Zoelle was one of the earliest employees at Airtable, where she led their early marketing and customer success teams, and generally just helped Airtable grow into the legendary business that it is today. She also spent time in Box. She's advised dozens of startups on marketing and growth, and is now head of marketing and growth at a startup called Block Party. 
(00:01:32):
In our conversation, Zoelle shares how to punch above your weight as a startup, the most effective and impactful growth and marketing tactics throughout Airtable's history, including their use of billboards, marketing investments that are often high ROI, and those that are rarely a good use of time, why PR and launches are actually useful to startups, and also when they aren't, and a lot more. It was so much fun chatting with Zoelle, and I'm really excited for you to learn from her. With that, I bring you Zoelle Egner after a short word from our wonderful sponsors.
(00:02:03):
Today's episode is brought to you by OneSchema, the embeddable CSV importer for SaaS. Customers always seem to want to give you their data in the messiest possible CSV file. And building a spreadsheet importer becomes a never ending sync for your engineering and support resources. You keep adding features to your spreadsheet importer, the customers keep running into issues. Six months later, you're fixing yet another date conversion edge case bug. Most tools aren't built for handling messy data, but OneSchema is. Companies like Scale AI and Pave are using OneSchema to make it fast and easy to launch delightful spreadsheet import experiences, from embeddable CSV import to importing CSVs from an SMTP folder on a recurring basis. Spreadsheet import is such an awful experience in so many products. Customers get frustrated by useless messages like, "Error on line 53." And never end up getting started with your product. OneSchema intelligently corrects messy data so that your customers don't have to spend hours in Excel just to get started with your product. For listeners of this podcast, OneSchema is offering a $1,000 discount. Learn more at oneschema.co/lenny.
(00:03:10):
This episode is brought to you by Pando, the always on employee performance platform. How much do you love the performance review process? Yeah, it's time consuming, subjective, biased, and there's rarely any transparency. With the rapid shift to distributed work, it's a struggle to create the structure and transparency that you want to help your employees have the highest impact and growth in their careers. Pando is disrupting the old paradigm of performance management, including a continuous employee-centric approach, so employees stay engaged, see their progression in real time, and know exactly when and how they can level up. With Pando, managers can leverage competency based frameworks to effectively coach and develop their teams and align on consistent growth standards resulting in higher quality feedback and higher performing teams. Visit pando.com/lenny for more info and get a special discount when you sign out and reference this podcast. That's pando.com/lenny. Zoelle, welcome to the podcast.
Zoelle Egner (00:04:12):
Hi, thanks for having me.
Lenny (00:04:14):
It's very much my pleasure. Something that is pretty cool is that we actually met in my newsletter Slack community. I actually looked this up of how we actually started chatting, and it was me cold DMing you to get a discount on Airtable for the newsletter subscribers. And you very happily got me that, hooked us up, and then you became a go-to Airtable person for advice on what Airtable did right and wrong over the years. And so thank you for being that person and also I'm really excited to have you on this podcast and to learn from you.
Zoelle Egner (00:04:43):
I am super excited to chat.
Lenny (00:04:45):
Awesome. You're probably best known for your time at Airtable, which, correct me if I'm wrong, you're employee number 11.
Zoelle Egner (00:04:53):
That's right.
Lenny (00:04:55):
Okay, and at Airtable you led marketing, you led the customer success teams, so we're going to chat about all that stuff. But before we get into that, I want to chat briefly about this other project that you worked on, that from the outside felt like a really fascinating thing, and a really impactful project, and a really cool team. And it's called Vaccinate California, I think, is that how you pronounce it?
Zoelle Egner (00:05:13):
Mm-hmm.
Lenny (00:05:13):
See, I just-
Zoelle Egner (00:05:13):
VaccinateCA.
Lenny (00:05:15):
VaccinateCA. Okay. Could you just talk a little bit about what this was? What were you trying to do? What was the impact you had? How did it all go?
Zoelle Egner (00:05:21):
Yeah, absolutely. So VaccinateCA existed to help people in California find and get a COVID vaccine as quickly as possible, and that sounds really trivial right now, but you have to wind back to January of 2020, when vaccines were first coming out, and it was really hard. So just as a reminder, because most of us have blocked that from our memory. 
Lenny (00:05:40):
Yeah.
Zoelle Egner (00:05:41):
The federal and state systems didn't really exist yet, and so everything was this horrible hodgepodge, where eligibility depended on not only what state you were in, it was down to the county, and even sometimes the individual facility. You would be at a Walgreens, and talk to them, and they'd be like, "Oh, you have to be over 65, and also in one of these 12 categories of employment in order to get the vaccine." And then you'd go a mile away and they would tell you something totally different. So people would stand in line for hours. There were phones going off the hook, utterly madness, and really, really scary for a lot of people who were trying to figure out how to keep themselves safe. 
Lenny (00:06:17):
Yeah, I remember those days well.
Zoelle Egner (00:06:19):
Yeah. So this organization was founded essentially by a tweet by Patrick McKenzie, for those of you who are on Hacker News Patio11. And he had basically this really simple premise, which is, "If you call a pharmacist, and you ask them who they can give a vaccine to, and what vaccine they have, and then you put that answer on a map, someone else doesn't have to make the same phone call. And that takes lots of pressure also as a healthcare system and also helps people to match supply and demand." 
(00:06:47):
So surprisingly, somehow, that tweet, which is essentially like, "Call people, put in spreadsheet, put online," turned into an entire, full nonprofit that was mostly on Discord, Zoom, Airtable, and not only had this entire hundreds of volunteers who were making phone calls in the state of California and eventually, actually, nationally, we became Vaccinate The States eventually, we were also doing this thing called web banking. So we would go and scrape all the official sources as they started coming out, and then validate them because they were not always correct. And eventually we had the most comprehensive database and map of locations in the entire country, including more comprehensive than the federal government and most of the states because they had really complicated limitations on what they could and couldn't publish based on some relationships they had. We didn't have those limitations.
(00:07:37):
So it meant that we became this clearing house, essentially, for this information and we built an API. We were working directly with Google. And if you ever looked up vaccine locations on Google Maps, that was us feeding that to them, which was really cool. And we also made maps you could see on county websites, so it would help you understand what was available in your area. One of the coolest things that I've ever worked on.
Lenny (00:08:01):
Okay, exactly. That's exactly I imagined how epic this was. Just to make sure people understand what you're describing, basically you had hundreds of people sitting there on phones calling vaccine locations, getting the specifics of who is able to get a vaccine there, and then just giving people a pointer of where they can get a vaccine.
Zoelle Egner (00:08:18):
Exactly. So I came in initially, a colleague of mine at Airtable had been helping out with the building out of the backend. And they started getting media attention. And they thought, "Oh, well this will help more people understand that this resource is available." So I got brought in to do some PR help, basically help them figure out how to get the word out, and then ended up actually quitting my job at Airtable to work on it full-time.
Lenny (00:08:40):
Oh wow.
Zoelle Egner (00:08:41):
Yeah, I was on the board and also managing all outreach and other stuff. So we did lots of really cool education, helping people understand their eligibility at all. Built a bunch of fun tools for that as well, but it was a pretty incredible six months, where we filled a really critical gap in the infrastructure of the country. 
Lenny (00:08:58):
It's wild that was the best solution, is just call people and create your own. 
Zoelle Egner (00:09:03):
You know?
Lenny (00:09:03):
I imagine there was, at Airtable, were you using to store the data?
Zoelle Egner (00:09:07):
Oh yes. 
Lenny (00:09:07):
Okay.
Zoelle Egner (00:09:07):
We built an entire insane database, and then eventually custom software on top of that, to make the people who are making the phone calls more easily get the information in. It was a whole thing. Very cool to see, though, not just tech people get involved. We had, in our volunteer base, people from absolutely every walk of life, not just in California, globally. I remember there was a volunteer who said that he decided to join, he was based in Israel, and he had had no trouble getting the vaccine whatsoever, but seen something on Twitter about it, and just decided he wanted to make sure that people were able to get the vaccine as easily as he did. And he spent dozens of hours calling folks, even though he was in a totally different time zone. But really lovely to see all these different people, retired teachers. I think we had a bunch of 12 year olds who were helping out on the code, of all things, all who just really wanted to make sure that they could keep their community safe.
Lenny (00:10:02):
What happened with this organization? It's a nonprofit that now continues to run or what's happening?
Zoelle Egner (00:10:06):
No, we did something which is not common. We actually decided to shut it down after six months. Partially, that's because the existing system finally caught up. And frankly we didn't want to be in a place where we were pulling away resources that could be put towards other things that are going to be more impactful. We always saw ourselves as a stop gap, and once we got to the place where we felt like we weren't really being additive, we wanted to get people's time back, so they could work on other things. So it doesn't exist anymore. I think you can still go check out the archive. We found some researchers who are doing interesting research on it, because there's very fascinating data in there about the equitability of some of the distribution of the vaccine based on where it was available, but the organization is gone. We had that beautiful moment in time and have all moved on. Hoping we don't have to get the band back together, because hopefully it's not necessary anymore.
Lenny (00:10:58):
Oh, man. I'm watching The Last of Us right now about this-
Zoelle Egner (00:11:02):
Mushroom people.
Lenny (00:11:03):
... mushroom based disease, and that scares me now. 
Zoelle Egner (00:11:06):
Yep.
Lenny (00:11:06):
Anyway, on this podcast I try to get to things people learn from these experiences, and so I have to ask what you learn about forming something like this, just ad hoc, pulling a bunch of people together, and having them focus, and get things done, or just scaling it, or even shutting down. I guess what have you taken away from that experience that you maybe will bring to either future one-off things like this or even just your work in general?
Zoelle Egner (00:11:31):
Yeah, I'd say probably three things. One, the incredible power of a simple idea to bring people together. One of the reasons why VaccinateCA was so powerful and got so many people to help is everybody immediately understood why it would be useful and how they specifically could be making a difference. And combining those two things was an incredible way to bring a lot of people on board very quickly, because from a messaging perspective, messaging, something very important to me as a marketer, it was so concise. Like, "Pick up phone, help save lives." Really straightforward. People really, really got that. It allowed them to feel like they had agency in a time when everything felt really, really out of control. I think there's a lot of opportunities we have to activate our communities and give people that sense of control that are both going to be helpful more broadly for society, but also just for those individuals as well to make them feel a little bit more safe, a little bit more like they can actually have a difference in things. 
(00:12:34):
I think in tech we often don't jump into these problems. This was not sophisticated technology. It was phones, Discord, and Airtable mostly being used like a spreadsheet. It wasn't anything wild. Even that very simple infrastructure was enough to make a huge difference. And we have some evidence that we saved a lot of lives as a result of it, which is pretty special. I think part of it is also just saying, "We don't have to be hesitant to jump into these problems. It's important to engage with experts in the field, is not to say that tech solutionism is always the answer." And again, this is not super sophisticated technology, but because we were able to go in and talk to the people who are actually affected, get into the system that already existed, and make something really simple, really fast, it actually did have a huge difference and that's really exciting.
Lenny (00:13:24):
Just to double-click on that one, actually reminds me, some founders of companies I've invested in, I often hear how much easier it is for companies that have a mission that people are excited about for them to hire versus companies that don't. And so it's a really good reminder of just the power of having a mission and a vision that is really compelling to people versus some B2B software that people aren't [inaudible 00:13:47] excited about, even though there's a great reason to have great B2B software. Love B2Bs.
Zoelle Egner (00:13:50):
There are. I love great B2B software. I've spent most of my career on it. But I agree with you. I think if you have an authentic mission and people aren't just like, "Oh, sure, okay. You're connecting the world." But really it's some telephony startup. Like, "Okay."
Lenny (00:13:50):
Yeah. 
Zoelle Egner (00:14:05):
If people feel like it's genuinely authentic to what you're building, it can be incredibly meaningful.
Lenny (00:14:11):
Yeah. I just remember a founder who, he is a second company, because the first company did not have an amazing mission. The second one did. And like, "Wow. So much easier to hire for this new startup."
Zoelle Egner (00:14:20):
Yes. 
Lenny (00:14:20):
So totally get that. 
Zoelle Egner (00:14:20):
Absolutely. 
Lenny (00:14:22):
Okay, number two and three.
Zoelle Egner (00:14:23):
Number two and three, I'll try and be more brief. 
Lenny (00:14:25):
It's all good.
Zoelle Egner (00:14:26):
Number two, I would say just the importance of relentlessly repeating the exact same stuff over and over again, even if you feel like everyone definitely knows. This is something that I've seen play out in every single leadership role that I've had, but it was never more acute than here, particularly because we had this broad coalition of hundreds of people with very different backgrounds. Some people coming to the meeting, some people not, whatever else. I think I repeated the same three talking points about why what we were doing mattered 5,000 times. Cannot overemphasize how many times I said the same stuff, and so did every other member of the board. It really is important and people will fill in the blanks with totally wild things if you don't continuously have that discipline of repeating yourself. You just have to get used to saying the same stuff. And if you do it correctly, it's super motivating. Even if you're sitting there being like, oh my gosh, "I have to say it again." it's worth it.
Lenny (00:15:22):
This reminds me, I don't know where I saw this, it's just in my head right now, that the CEO and founder's job, their actual title is repeater in chief.
Zoelle Egner (00:15:22):
It absolutely should be.
Lenny (00:15:31):
It resonates. Yeah.
Zoelle Egner (00:15:31):
I've worked with some leaders who never wanted to. They're like, "No, this is going to be boring for people." And you just have to be like, "Honestly, most people are never listening as much as you think that they are."
Lenny (00:15:39):
Yeah.
Zoelle Egner (00:15:39):
"We wish that they would. But you have to say it 12 different ways in writing, and out loud, and all this other stuff. You're never as important as you think you are, unfortunately, when it comes to that." 
Lenny (00:15:48):
Oh, these are great lessons. Okay. What else do you tell? 
Zoelle Egner (00:15:51):
I think my last learning was really about the power of having a laughably small MVP for something. By the end of this, we were covering the entire United States. We had an API, we had custom software on the front end, this whole behemoth of stuff that we got to in four months or something. In the beginning it was truly, basically, a spreadsheet, and phones, and that was it. Even that, for the first few weeks while we were getting the rest of the infrastructure really going, not only had tremendous impact at one of the most important parts in the pandemic, but also gave us so much information about we actually needed to build that was going to be helpful. And I remember having all of these assumptions about what was going to be necessary to manage this coalition of people to make sure that we had really good data quality.
(00:16:41):
Because one of the most important things you can do if you're trying to be a trusted source of truth is actually have the correct information. Sounds trivial, it's not at all at that scale. And I was totally wrong about all my assumptions. I thought we were going to have to have totally different types of oversight. I thought we were going to have totally different tooling. And it turned out we could do something way lighter weight that would allow us to move much faster as the regulatory landscape kept changing, as all the rule making at individual places kept changing. And that agility, that willingness to do just the smallest possible thing is obviously a little bit of a trope in the industry. 
(00:17:15):
People talk about it a lot, but it's never been driven home to me so much, because we're talking about something that had incredibly high stakes as people's health, and we're still able to do it in that context. So if we could do it there, you can imagine that the applications of that in other industries are just tremendous. So yeah, if you're listening to this, and you were thinking maybe you needed to add more stuff, I bet you could prune.
Lenny (00:17:39):
And it's nice to have the forcing function where the world is changing so quickly and the team's probably small, where you are forced to build small. Which I think is why this reminder is so important. Oftentimes you have more resources, and you end up building more just because you can. And yeah, what you're saying is oftentimes, "It'll shoot you in the foot."
Zoelle Egner (00:17:55):
Yes.
Lenny (00:17:56):
Amazing. I didn't expect to get into this much detail with VaccinateCA and so I'm glad we did. Let's zoom out a little bit, and just fill in some gaps on your background, briefly. Can you just highlight some of the other wonderful things you've done in career? Airtable, we talked about, VaccinateCA, just broadly, what else have you been up to? 
Zoelle Egner (00:18:13):
Yeah, absolutely. Okay, so I'll try and be brief. I worked in tech for more than a decade, mostly marketing and customer success, a little bit of ops. Before I got into tech, I was a little bit of a dilettante, so some non-profit, healthcare, dying big box retail, because I graduated right into the recession and I was certain no one would hire me. Turns out that was actually wrong. But on the plus side, now I know what dysfunction looks like at great scale, which is actually quite an education and very useful. But I always knew I wanted to get into tech, partially because I'm from the Bay area, and partially because I had been obsessively power mapping the industry, and looking at its flocking patterns, and who had what types of influence, because I'm a nerd. And I really wanted to see if I could get in, in the first place. Because- 
Lenny (00:18:59):
Wait, can you talk about this, which, what is it you did? What did you call, a flocking pattern?
Zoelle Egner (00:19:05):
Sure. You can imagine in any community, there are nodes of influence, people who know a lot of folks, they have money, whatever it might be. And they're able to direct how that community or that ecosystem evolves. In the tech industry, typically VCs will often play a role in this, but so will certain types of executives. And you can follow how they move between different companies, and who they worked with, and then see that influences who gets investment in the future. It influences the different partnerships that evolve. It influences the assumed wisdom in various different careers. And because I'm a big old nerd, I was literally drawing diagrams based on-
Lenny (00:19:48):
Whoa.
Zoelle Egner (00:19:48):
... reading people's blog posts of who was influential in what way? Because I was non-technical. I tried programming, and I hated it, frankly. And so I was like, "Okay, it's 2010, it's 2011. There's not clear ways to get into the industry as a non-technical person. I need to figure out how to do this with people. Because otherwise I'm not sure why someone would take a chance on me with what I have done historically. And that sounds a little insane, but it's very effective. And I ended up getting my start in tech basically by identifying a company where I thought I had a unique set of connections or understanding of the space that they were working in, where I thought I could maybe email the CEO and be helpful.
Lenny (00:20:29):
And did this connect to that diagram you drew? Did this help you point in that direction?
Zoelle Egner (00:20:34):
Yeah, absolutely. So I was closely tracking YCombinator and that whole ecosystem. So I knew I wanted to find a smaller company, where they maybe were having more difficulty hiring, because they were less well known or a little bit less, I don't know, sexy. But while they were still connected into that broader group, because it has with a pedigree that people would take you seriously if you had worked at a YC backed startup.
Lenny (00:20:55):
Right.
Zoelle Egner (00:20:55):
Anyway, I got really pointy hat strategic about this, but it was effective. 
Lenny (00:21:00):
Do you still-
Zoelle Egner (00:21:00):
And-
Lenny (00:21:00):
... have this diagram, by the way? It'd be so funny to look at it right now.
Zoelle Egner (00:21:03):
No, I don't think I have it anymore. I might be able to dig it up, but alas, I think it may have been lost in one of my many moves since then. 
Lenny (00:21:03):
All right.
Zoelle Egner (00:21:03):
It's been-
Lenny (00:21:03):
No problem.
Zoelle Egner (00:21:03):
... more than a decade. 
Lenny (00:21:18):
Okay. I imagine that was true. Okay, so I think I cut you off. You were talking about some of the things you've done in your career.
Zoelle Egner (00:21:20):
Yeah, ended up using my studies of the space to get into a role as employee one at a developer focus YC backed startup. And the funny story on that is that I got that role by cold emailing the CEO while I was still in college. And then he actually followed up with me almost immediately, because I'd offered to introduce him to some professors, which was useful for the type of business. And then I ignored him for two years because I got busy with my thesis, and got other jobs, and whatever, came back to it and wrote this ridiculous apology email, being like, "I promise I respond to emails faster. I see that you're hiring. Would you give me a second chance? Please, can I come work for you? I have no experience that's useful, but I work really hard." And I figured he would either laugh me off of the internet or give me a job, and very fortunately for me, he gave me a job. So thanks, Ryan. Appreciate that. That was how I got into tech.
Lenny (00:22:11):
Thanks, Ryan. 
Zoelle Egner (00:22:12):
Yes, we appreciate it. So that startup got acquired by Box. And when I went over to Box, they had never had paying developers before. So we were bringing over seven figure contracts. So I started developer success programs there. And then in a totally wild shift, I ended up moving over to run their social media editorial and internal comms, which doesn't sound related to developer success, but I had always been a writer, and I wrote this blog post about what it was like to be an early stage non-technical employee. There was a little spicy, talking about some of the challenges, and I didn't tell anyone I was going to do it. And I got this email from PR being like, "We need to have a meeting." And I was like, "Oh, they're going to fire me. I went too far." I thought I was being circumspect, that I went too far. And in the meeting they were like, "Hey, we really think you should apply for this job. We would love to have you run social media." Which is not the outcome I expected.
Lenny (00:23:05):
That's a cool learning, there. Just like, "Do stuff." You know? "Don't be afraid."
Zoelle Egner (00:23:08):
Yeah, it was definitely not the expected outcome, but one that was very exciting. So got to go run those programs for a couple years through the IPO, which is a whole education in and of itself, to see how comms changes when you become a public company. And then I was on Hacker News obsessively at the time, and I saw the beta for Airtable come out. Immediately signed up, and became obsessed with the product, and evangelizing it to everybody that I knew and ultimately ended up figuring out a way to finagle my way into that role as employee 11 there. 
(00:23:43):
And it sounds like we're going to talk about Airtable more, so I won't belabor that, but marketing and customer success stuff, ended up leaving for VaccinateCA, and then the last little bit here is just when that ended, I really thought I wanted to start my own company. So I gave myself a certain window in which to try out different ideas, and at the same time was advising and consulting. Ultimately didn't end up finding anything that I felt so much conviction that it was worth blowing up absolutely everything else about my life in order to go heads down on a company. So eventually decided to go in-house with one of the companies I've been advising, Block Party, and now I run marketing and growth there.
Lenny (00:24:19):
Can you just explain Block Party briefly? [inaudible 00:24:21]-
Zoelle Egner (00:24:21):
Absolutely. We're an online safety company. We help users have more control over their digital experience. And our first product is anti-harassment and anti-spam tools for Twitter.
Lenny (00:24:30):
So you've worked at Box, Airtable, now Block Party. You've advised a lot of companies around marketing product growth. I'm curious if there's a thread that has maintained through all of those experiences in terms of what works well for marketing, and growth, and things you've learned that just consistently- [inaudible 00:24:52]
Zoelle Egner (00:24:52):
A few pieces that go into how I choose companies that create that thread. And part of this is about me wanting to match what I think I'm really good at with what will have the greatest leverage for a company that I work at. I've mentioned I'm a writer, really care about telling stories, and helping people to understand new or novel things. I also really care about product quality. I'm a little bit of a product snob. And one of my strengths is enthusiasm. So if I can't genuinely go to a customer and tell them, "This product is going to solve a real problem for you and it's going to be amazing." I can't do my job. So all of the companies that I've chosen to go to have had this foundation of an incredible product experience that maybe people didn't fully understand, and where I could come in and help connect the dots between that amazing product that's going to be really, really helpful and the opportunities for a much wider range of people to benefit from that.
(00:25:46):
So in practice, what that means is I often end up working at companies that are in a position to really punch above their weight from a brand perspective. They're typically much lower headcount than you would ever expect. They're typically way earlier stage than you would expect, but I've been able to put together a brand or an experience that allows people to invest themselves into the company with a high level of trust, I guess. 
(00:26:13):
I'll be more specific because that's really ambiguous. Airtable, it manages mission critical workflows, highly sensitive data. It's super important. You only use tools you can trust for that type of thing. The same thing is true at Block Party, online safety. You have to trust the company that you're entrusting your safety to. And in my experience, people, and especially founders really underestimate how much every single touchpoint a customer has from word of mouth or the ad that brings them in the door, landing pages, signup flows, customer service experiences. Every single one of those moments is building a brand that is adding or removing trust.
(00:26:48):
So for me in the early days, that means thinking about like, "What are the signals that I can provide to future customers that say, 'We understand you specifically, and our solution is designed for a person like you.' And two, that will say, 'Hey, we're actually operating on a much higher level than you might expect for a company of our size or our stage. We take this really seriously. We have all the things in place to take care of you. So you shouldn't be afraid to spend six figures or put your safety in our hands because we've got your back. We're doing this the right way.'" Has tremendous dividends when you're in a business that is often driven by word of mouth. Because if you take care of people and you follow up that brand experience with a product experience that is really powerful and actually does the things that says it's going to do, then your word of mouth can become a huge driver of growth for the company.
(00:27:40):
Of course, the outcome of this in practice is really funny. So I remember really distinctly having to invite customers to go out to lunch with us when they would come to San Francisco back in the Airtable days, because we had 15 people in a teeny tiny office. It's not that I wanted to mislead anyone, but I didn't need to reinforce the fact that they were spending six figures with us when we had 15 people. If they had gone to look on LinkedIn, they could have figured that out, but we didn't need to remind them that we were so small, and they were running some of their most important processes with our product. I think I was on the phone with Slack at one point. And they were like, "Oh, well you guys are probably about the same size company as we are, right?" And I was like, "Not quite. A little smaller, just an entire order of magnitude, no big deal, it's totally fine. We're all smooth. We'll take care of you. It's going to great." But it-
Lenny (00:27:40):
Amazing.
Zoelle Egner (00:28:27):
... really makes a difference, all of those little things.
Lenny (00:28:31):
That reminds me, I heard stories of very early Airbnb days where they had to take meetings in a bathroom, or in the hallway, and they did interviews, I think in the hallway because there was no space.
Zoelle Egner (00:28:41):
We did a lot of calling from the hallway at Airtable, also from this weird internal patio you could only get to through climbing through a window. The window kept breaking. And so I, at one point, remember someone getting stuck outside trying to interview someone with the windows closed. Utter, utter ridiculous nonsense. But you know, that's all the fun things that happened in the early days before you become bigger.
Lenny (00:29:06):
Yeah, I love those early day stories. 
Zoelle Egner (00:29:08):
Yeah.
Lenny (00:29:09):
I really love the concept of punching above your weight as a startup. What else did you do at Air Table or other places that help you do that? One is just don't let them see how small you are, necessarily. Are there any other technical things you recall that like, "Oh, here's things that really worked really well for punching above our weight as a small company at that point."
Zoelle Egner (00:29:29):
A couple of these things are very unsexy, but very useful. One, make sure that your landing pages, and your emails, and other things have a level of polish that makes them feel a little bit more done. I think there is sometimes a recommendation or an instinct just like, "Ship things super, super quickly and get them out there." And I'm not saying don't move fast. Obviously you need to move fast in the early days, but make sure someone rereads your email so that it sounds good. Invest in having a decent photo or a decent illustration. If you have sample content, this is actually a big one, sample content for your productivity app as an example. Take the time to not have it be like Jane Doe 12 times in the name list. Have it be references to your industry so that people are like, "Oh, hey. That's a joke about Steve Jobs. I'm a designer. This person is thinking about me."
(00:30:20):
It's small stuff, but it tells that person, like, "The people who worked on this were thinking about me as a customer, they built it with me in mind, and that means that it is more likely that this is going to fit my needs than something generic." And that builds up both the brand trust that we've talked about, but also the personality of the company, and makes people want to root for you. And frankly, when you are small, you need everyone rooting for you that you can possibly get.
(00:30:45):
So those little bits of polish that don't take a ton of time are absolutely worth it. The last thing I would say is making sure that in your public communications launches, if you ever talk to press, which some companies can and some companies can't, having more of a point of view than just about your product, you can try and say, like, "We are part of something bigger. Here's the broader circle or movement that we are a part of." It makes it feel more inevitable and more like you're not just self servingly talking about your tiny corner of the world, but that it's actually part of this much bigger trend. It will be more compelling and it feels like you're operating at a different level of sophistication that can be really helpful.
Lenny (00:31:28):
I love that. On the first point, basically, it's attention to detail and obsession with quality is what I'm hearing. 
Zoelle Egner (00:31:34):
Yes. 
Lenny (00:31:34):
Just to make it clear, this isn't just a tiny team just pushing the stuff out. I imagine most founders would be like, "Yes, I would love, we are going to focus on quality. We'll make sure everything looks great." In reality it always is this trade off against other things they could be doing. 
Zoelle Egner (00:31:50):
Yep. 
Lenny (00:31:50):
What do you think folks can do to help keep that level of quality high? Is it just one person being obsessed and just reviewing everything like a founder? Is having someone like you that's just very detail oriented, just review everything? How do you actually execute that when you have 1,000 things to do?
Zoelle Egner (00:32:05):
100%. I'd say there's one of two approaches and you articulated them here. One is you can have the founder that is the avatar of quality, who is just relentlessly being like, "Hey, we're going to do the 15 minute check. Yes, we're going through it. Yes, I'm going to send you a copy of this email, and someone else going to click every link in it, and make sure they're not broken." Or, you can have someone else be the avatar of that who is in the company. I would say in many of the companies I have worked at, that has been me, because I've been the marketing human who cares. But it doesn't have to be a marketing person, it can be someone on product. It can be, honestly, even someone on customer success if you're willing to let them provide their feedback on the way that you're showing up in the world, which you should because they have fantastic insight. There just needs to be someone. 
(00:32:50):
And I think building that into how you interview can be very helpful, as well. So finding people who understand those trade-offs and that balance, and who are willing to put in the extra 15 minutes, but aren't going to spend an extra week trying to obsessively QA everything. You don't want to go that far. Just who has that bent towards detail can be very helpful. Also, just make yourself a checklist. It doesn't have to be complicated. "Every time we put out a blog post, these are the three things we're going to do. Every time we send out an email, it needs to be seen by at least one other person." None of this is rocket science. You just need to make a little process for yourself, and then it can be very fast and lightweight, but the dividends are worth it, I think.
Lenny (00:33:31):
I like how simple this is, just to look like a bigger company, is just pay attention and focus on the little things. It's not a big, whole thing. [inaudible 00:33:39]
Zoelle Egner (00:33:39):
There are some bigger things you can do if you really need to. My favorite silly example of this is Airtable, back in the day, got roasted on Twitter for having billboards that were not super specific about a specific problem or whatever. They were just billboards that we had out. And everyone was like, "This makes no sense. Why are you doing this? We don't understand." They were actually super effective for us because we had a different goal than everyone thought that we did. 
(00:34:03):
For us, it was all about signaling to some very large companies that we were a legitimate and large enough company that they could trust, and we had geographical concentration in specific areas, because we were in the fashion industry, the media industry in New York, we knew exactly where all of their offices were and we knew if they saw our billboards, walking to work, and then got the request to IT for the budget in order to pay six figures for Airtable, they were more likely to be like, "Oh, it's not just some weird startup we never heard of." Like, "Oh, I've seen that billboard, they must be legitimate." And that sounds really silly, but it wasn't actually that expensive.
(00:34:40):
We got mostly remnant inventory, which is at the end of a particular buying cycle. Sometimes they haven't fully sold everything, and you can get the slightly less good ones that are still maybe where you want them for really cheap. And everyone thinks that you only buy billboards if you're huge. So that small signaling thing was a way for us to make sure that we remove some of the risk of not being able to close deals because we were so small. So you can get creative about it. Most of the time you're not going to do that. Most of the time it's like, "Reread your emails." But you could also push it even further if you need to.
Lenny (00:35:12):
What is that full rough cost of billboards like? Because I think people think about billboards and it's hard to even know what they cost. What's a number?
Zoelle Egner (00:35:20):
It really, really depends, so I'm hesitant to give you a number because which metro you're in, it ranges vastly. I would say you can expect that some of that inventory is in the low thousands of dollars, which is way lower than you might expect.
Lenny (00:35:34):
For one billboard.
Zoelle Egner (00:35:36):
Yeah. So you don't need to get a million. And I'm not suggesting you go get one on 101. Good luck to you on that. That's expensive. But you can get one in a reasonable neighborhood in New York for way less money than you might expect, if you're willing to do remnant.
Lenny (00:35:52):
Are you hiring? Or on the flip side, are you looking for a new opportunity? Well, either way, check out lennysjobs.com/talent. If you're a hiring manager, you can sign up and get access to hundreds of hand curated people who are open to new opportunities. Thousands of people apply to join this collective, and I personally review and accept just about 10% of them. You won't find a better place to hire product managers and growth leaders. Join almost 100 other companies who are actively hiring through this collective. 
(00:36:22):
And if you're looking around for a newer opportunity actively or passively join the collective, it's free. You can be anonymous and you can even hide yourself from specific companies. You can also leave any time and you'll only hear from companies that you want to hear from. Check out lennysjobs.com/talent. 
(00:36:41):
Following this thread a bit, my next question is, and this may be the answer, is when you think about Airtable's growth strategy, growth tactics over time, what would you say are one, or two, or three of the most impactful marketing or growth tactics that work best over time? And maybe billboards are one of them.
Zoelle Egner (00:37:02):
I wouldn't say they were the highest ROI, but they're certainly one of the more interesting things that we did. They were useful, don't get me wrong. But I think maybe some other ones are more interesting. The boring answer that I will caveat this with is that one of the pieces of our acquisition playbook, it was very standard, that did work quite well, was some unconventionally targeted Facebook ads. That era is over. So don't expect that that is going to work for your B2B business now because that that's totally changed.
Lenny (00:37:29):
And when you say unconventional, what do you mean?
Zoelle Egner (00:37:31):
We spent a lot of time thinking about a psychographic profile for our users. So the challenge of Airtable is that you can use it for anything. It can be used in every department within an organization. It can be used for personal stuff, you name it, it has a use, because you're functionally building your own software and you can build software for anything. Unfortunately, if you go out to the market with a message of, like, "Build your own software." The vast majority of people are like, "I want to do that. That sounds hard. That sounds stupid. No." 
(00:38:01):
And so we couldn't really use super generic messaging, but to go really specific into verticals, which we did end up ultimately doing, didn't give us the broad coverage to go find new opportunities. You go really deep into one particular vertical or two particular verticals at a time with a small team, but then we weren't surfacing new opportunities that might be even more important. So we tried to balance that vertical specific work that we did with also trying to find this type of person who we had discovered was going to be the best champion for us. 
(00:38:33):
And this is a tinkerer persona, someone who likes new technology, they like putting together the Lego building blocks of things, and you couldn't really find Tinkerer's Magazine. There's not like a place those people hang out. They don't just have one title. It's a psychographic profile as a type of person that could have many, many different roles. And so instead-
Lenny (00:38:56):
And Facebook doesn't let you do that anymore, right?
Zoelle Egner (00:38:59):
No. You can't target based on-
Lenny (00:39:01):
[inaudible 00:39:01] go.
Zoelle Egner (00:39:02):
... like, "They have a tinkerer mentality," unfortunately. 
Lenny (00:39:04):
Okay, got it.
Zoelle Egner (00:39:05):
It's so sad. 
Lenny (00:39:05):
Okay. I see-
Zoelle Egner (00:39:05):
But-
Lenny (00:39:05):
... that it's not possible. 
Zoelle Egner (00:39:07):
Yeah. But what you can do is you can say, "That type of person often likes these types of media. We've heard that they often are really into these podcasts, so they're really into reading about this type of personal development." And often that is associated with people who have these broad set of roles but have this typical mentality. So we would find clusters of interests that people might have, that often were shared by those people, and do targeting around that. And then when that worked, they'll look alike based on it.
Lenny (00:39:38):
Did not expect Facebook ads as one of these answers. So that's interesting. 
Zoelle Egner (00:39:42):
No, and it's not a good idea anymore. Don't do it now. 
Lenny (00:39:44):
Disclaimer.
Zoelle Egner (00:39:44):
Back in the day, it was great. Now I would not recommend. But I have some unconventional ones that I can suggest that are- 
Lenny (00:39:44):
Get into it.
Zoelle Egner (00:39:52):
... not Facebook. There's a few different things, but I want to give some context first for people who are not as familiar with Airtable's business, because I do think these are really helpful pieces of context. The first is because of the types of industries that we are often very successful in, had a very similar network effect that we would see, where basically it was within specific professions, we would see people who, in order to distinguish themselves in that job market, would build a brand around the tools that they used, essentially. We found different ways to accelerate their process of identifying those roles, where it was really, really helpful to build a brand for yourself so that you could hop around to different jobs more quickly, accelerate your process, et cetera, and thus bring along a tool with you and evangelize for it a lot. So that's one set of things we were trying to achieve.
(00:40:46):
The second set of things we were trying to achieve that's also useful context here, is although industry virality was really important for us, even more important was inside of company virality, that was the real superpower of Airtable. We'd go from 10 people to 1,000 people a year. And so we were always looking for ways to make that happen within companies in more and more efficient ways.
(00:41:08):
And then the third piece here is no one had a good generic explanation of Airtable that worked for everybody. This is perhaps partially my fault as marketing, but it's also the fault of the fact that the market was not ready for the good, generic explanation to mean anything, like I mentioned before, people just did not care about the generic explanation. And the magic of Airtable was always seen in its specificity. 
(00:41:32):
So we knew if we can get to the right people and we can connect the dots to them to the correct use case, so they want to go and evangelize to improve their careers, they will do that both externally and within their companies, and more importantly within the companies, they'll be able to go to their friends and say, "Hey, I'm using Airtable as a content calendar, but you have a UX research problem. And I understand Airtable enough that I can help you build a system. And now I'm a superhero internally because I helped you build this whole new thing. Look at me, I'm amazing." And they suddenly have fully done a sales pitch for Airtable without us having to do any work or understand their use case, which is great and very necessary when you are as horizontal as we are. So we had to figure out essentially, "How do we catalyze that word of mouth and build champions at scale?"
(00:42:21):
All of that is to say the two interesting things that we did were all around that. In the very early days, what that meant in practice was we literally had a Slack integration that we pulled in a whole bunch of information about anyone who signed up for Airtable, including their title, the company that they worked at, et cetera. And literally would sit there and had a little button in each of the records that came in that would allow us to email them immediately if we had decided that they might be someone we want to talk to. And we set up this whole automated system so that it would take two seconds to reach out to a ton of different people, being like, "Hey, we'd really love to get your feedback and help make sure you're as successful as possible on Airtable." 
(00:43:02):
This is not scalable in the long term because there's a whole bunch of sending emails and doing meetings. But what it meant is that we were able to start building our mental model for what these champions looked like in practice by finding the patterns across them. And building the foundation is what ultimately became our customer success motion very early. And then we were able to say, "Okay, we found five people who have a content calendar use case with this type of title. And now we'll be able to go run an ad campaign based on that. We can build a bunch of templates based on that. Here's all these different hooks we can use, because we know this is what a champion can look like," in a way that was not going to be obvious if we hadn't talked to a ton of people. So it seems really unobvious as an investment, per se, but tremendous number of human hours going into just having an efficient way to talk to as many people as possible to build those mental models. That's number one.
Lenny (00:43:57):
That is fascinating. Essentially, you weren't even sure who would be excited about Airtable. Part of this is like, "Figure out the personas and groups of people that we believe are the right target to encourage and help support." And then part of that is, "Get it spreading within a company once you figure out these folks within a company." It's such a cool idea to just have a feed of ... I imagine the squad had certain attributes of the person, like, "Here's the company they work. Here's how big it is." And then they talk about, there's a mention of what they're using it for. Is that part of this?
Zoelle Egner (00:44:31):
Ideally. Though we were always very privacy minded, so we couldn't actually get much information about what they were doing in Airtable. We could never see their data, because that would be a tremendous failure of trust, to go back to what we were talking about before. So a lot of this, we would have guesses, and maybe we could see that they'd use certain templates but we didn't otherwise really know. And that was part of the reason why we wanted to talk to them in the first place. 
(00:44:54):
The second reason is that if we could talk to them early, we could help them build their first space, and from there, if they were successful, they would have the tools to go and help other people within their organization. So if we catch them at the beginning, make sure one person was successful by over investing in them, then they essentially became support for everybody else. I should also clarify, these were not necessarily people who were going to be the buyers. The buyers and the champions here look very, very different for Airtable, which is a really an interesting dynamic that many companies do not have. But for us, the person who is going to sit down with a glass of wine on a Friday and build an Airtable base was not the person who had the budget who was going to pay for this thing. 
(00:45:36):
And so we weren't initially looking for buyers, we were looking for champions, in part so that we could then go to IT six months down the line and be like, "Look, you have 500 people using this product, it's been very useful for them. It is time for you to pay now." Not sure IT loved those conversations, but they were really effective for us and meant that it was very, very easy to sell.
Lenny (00:45:57):
Fascinating. It makes me think a lot about the product led sales movement and how this is essentially that, but even earlier, because it's people just signed up and they're just helping them be successful, versus like, "This company's got 14 people using it. You should go try to sell them on an enterprise contract." Essentially this was a tool to help you figure out how to, basically scaling customer success and helping you prioritize who to go after, and being very hands-on with the strongest potential future big buyers.
Zoelle Egner (00:46:24):
Exactly. And I think what's interesting here is it helped us bootstrap two things. One was, to your point, building out the personas, and champions, and so on. And ultimately there's more scalable ways to reach those people in the long run. But secondarily, it also helped us deal with a real product education problem that we had in the early days. Because it was really complicated. Airtable, unfortunately, has two education issues that it needs to solve. It's not just, "How do I put the Lego blocks together?" It is also, "How do I design a piece of software and a workflow?"
(00:47:01):
And unfortunately if you're selling to content marketing manager or a UX researcher, there's no guarantee that they know how to make a workflow. Most software is opinionated, and it does that work for you, and you're like, "It either works for you or it doesn't." And maybe you're frustrated about what it forces you to do in order to work, but you can't really control it, which means when suddenly, you have the ability to create whatever workflow that you want, there's actually some education that needs to go into it in order to be able to make that successful. 
(00:47:28):
It's not enough to just make an Airtable base that's pretty or that functions. You can't get your team to use it effectively if it doesn't fit into the broader context of the organization. It's still going to fail. And so a lot of this was us figuring out, like, "Okay, how do we help these people not only use our product but build something that is going to be durable, so that we do see that growth, so they don't see it as a failure, so it doesn't fail at that second order moment when it starts to get spread out to more people?"
Lenny (00:47:53):
It's a really good tactic for any SaaS product that just is hard to understand and needs, Airtable had both problems. Like, "I don't know what this is for and I don't know exactly how it's going to fit into my workflow." Imagine most-
Zoelle Egner (00:48:05):
But-
Lenny (00:48:05):
... companies still have to deal with both those problems. 
Zoelle Egner (00:48:07):
No, hopefully not. Hopefully not. 
Lenny (00:48:07):
Yeah.
Zoelle Egner (00:48:08):
But once you actually get in with folks, it's very difficult to remove it. So suddenly your retention rates are incredible, your word of mouth is incredible, if you're willing to do that initial work. A lot of people think that Airtable was a pure product led growth company, and missed that huge customer success component that was always very, very important in the early days. And that helped us ultimately move more towards that PLG motion for a while, but was essential to getting it set up in the first place.
Lenny (00:48:35):
Fascinating.
Zoelle Egner (00:48:36):
The other one that we did related to this champions at scale was we spent a hilarious amount of money on really fancy swag. I know this sounds silly, but branded AirPods level of fancy swag. Admittedly more people were in the office back then. Now they are more remote and this would not work as well. But back in the day, if you gave people something really good, not a pen or a sticker, really good, they would show it off to absolutely everyone that they talked to, because they were so excited they got branded AirPods. People would ask about it, walking by their desks. It sounds so like trivial. But for that couple hundred bucks that we spent knowing like, "Hey, this person's already a champion and if someone asks them, they're going to give a really good pitch." Totally worth it. Sometimes better to not skimp on swag. Hard to measure, very effective.
Lenny (00:49:27):
That's a great tip. And it connects to the general idea of find your champions and just do a lot to make sure they're successful, excited, want to evangelize, and an AirPod here and there feel like a really good ROI investment.
Zoelle Egner (00:49:40):
Was for us.
Lenny (00:49:41):
Anything else along those lines?
Zoelle Egner (00:49:42):
I think those are the big ones that I would highlight. The only other small note I would make from a process perspective is if you are going to overinvest in customer success, which I recommend, make sure that you have also set up a process to take the insights that your customer success people are coming up with and turn them into as much content as you can. Because that's where you're going to find scale in the long run. So for us, what that meant was we would talk to a bunch of customers and then customer success would have helped them build bases, and then we would create templates. So were not exact copies, because we're not trying to steal their intellectual property. We would say, "What is the fundamental workflow here, that other companies might have? How do we make a template that is useful from this?" And some blog posts that explain it, whatever else, that we can then put out into the market. 
(00:50:25):
And the next time a smaller company that's not a Fortune 500 wants this sort of thing, someone can just email them that template and we don't have to go through this whole build process, they have something to start with. If you can find those insights and put them genuinely into use as a little conveyor belt, it will be much easier to scale. It will be much easier to come up with genuinely compelling content because it's coming from your customers, so they already care about it. You have strong signal that's going to be valuable if you already built it for them. Use that to your advantage, make that into a little machine. And it makes all of the go-to market that you need to do later easier.
Lenny (00:50:57):
I know that you have the strong opinion that customer success and marketing are basically the same thing and should be maybe one team. Can you speak to that?
Zoelle Egner (00:51:05):
Yeah. This is my spicy opinion, but both of them have to do the same things. They have to identify customer needs. They have to help the customers see your product as a solution to those needs. They need to remove friction from the process of getting value. They are hopefully both encouraging those customers to share with other people, and both of them should be engaged in translating insights from those individuals into resources that can help everybody. 
(00:51:31):
They use different tactics. Marketing is going to use more scalable tactics. Customer success is going to be in the weeds, really talking to individual people, but all of the things they care about are actually the same thing. They just use different ways to do it. And if you, as a marketer, are not pretty confident in being able to say, like, "What I'm doing is getting the right people to get genuine value from this product," so much so that they want to tell other people about it because it's going to make them look good, then maybe figure out if there's ways to bring more of that to your process, because it will make what you are doing more effective.
(00:52:05):
And frankly, there's not a better evangelist than a person whose career you have materially helped to improve based on matching the right person to the solution so that they can have more impact at their company. So much said, one of my unofficial metrics for both marketing and customer success at Airtable, unofficial, was how many people we'd gotten promoted for using the product. I had a running tally of those people, and I knew if we were getting those at the major accounts we were trying to win, something good was happening and we were going to be successful with really large deals.
Lenny (00:52:36):
So curious how you tracked that. I guess you just check in with them occasionally?
Zoelle Egner (00:52:40):
No, I had my CSMs literally, they had really strong relationships. We were actually tracking it. It was a little embarrassing, but it worked really well.
Lenny (00:52:47):
I love it, with the great KPI. It's like dating apps and how many people get married, I guess.
Zoelle Egner (00:52:52):
Exactly. 
Lenny (00:52:53):
Zooming out a little bit, you advise a lot of companies on marketing, customer success, growth, and things like that. Maybe there's a two part question, and see where you want to take it. 
Zoelle Egner (00:53:03):
Yeah.
Lenny (00:53:03):
One is just what are activities that marketing, and growth, and customer success teams often do that are impactful and consistently impactful, things that you think startups should invest in that maybe they aren't, or they already aren't and they should definitely keep doing this. And on the flip side, things that don't work, things that maybe they should avoid. So maybe let's start there and there's going to be a followup. 
Zoelle Egner (00:53:26):
Cool. Okay. I'm going to start with things to avoid, because I try and not to make too many blanket statements on this, but I have a couple that I am willing to make. So this is all with the caveat that channel market fit is really real, and sometimes these things might work for you. Don't discount just because I say that they don't work for me. There are certain types of flashy event marketing and sponsorships that you will get relentlessly invited to do, that will seem like they're going to be really great for signaling purposes, or for leads, or whatever. 
(00:53:55):
And they're almost always a waste of your time, unless you are in an industry where you desperately need to get to a trade show, because that's where everyone hangs out. At that point, yeah, of course you're going to have to go do that. But if you're in more standard B2B SaaS, or that's not really a thing, there are better ways to get in front of those people than having your logo out there. That doesn't tell them anything. Maybe you get a branded session at the conference or whatever, but who's going to go to that branded session? Probably not that many people. And then you will have spent so much money and gotten nothing for it. Go to the event, do not fund your money on the sponsorship. It's stupid. And then the second one, which is definitely a very spicy opinion, but I'm going to go there. 
Lenny (00:54:40):
Go there. 
Zoelle Egner (00:54:41):
A lot of people think that the epitome of product marketing is creating your own category. And while I agree that it is useful to have strong differentiators, because it is, I think creating a category, getting a new thing in Gartner or whatever, is often a waste of your time. It is a huge lift, absolutely enormous, particularly in B2B SaaS, and I'm not always sure that it's helpful to have your super teeny tiny, little niche over here where you're like, "Oh, we have no competitors." That's not actually how buyers work. It's not really worth it. 
(00:55:21):
That said, there are things you can do that feel like category creation that are actually effective, and that I do think make more sense. And specifically if you can elevate a profession instead of a category, that can make way more sense. So the great example of this is that Gainsight creating customer success or many companies altogether carving out DevOps, or rebranding DevOps, to be a thing that was suddenly a sexy job to have. 
(00:55:47):
And I think that's valuable because a job is an identity and people will fight for an identity. A category of software is a line item on your budget. No one is excited about that. But people are very excited about their job being meaningful, and their job being important, and being taken seriously. And so if you could hold up either an existing or a brand new job and say, "This is really important for much broader business metrics, whatever else. We're going to create community for those people to come together and it's all about the job," and not about you. That can be very powerful and they'll take them with you. You become part of the identity of that career. Amazing. Do that, for sure. But like the Gartner Square, there's some opportunities for that where it makes sense. A lot of the times it doesn't. Don't do that.
Lenny (00:56:34):
Amazing. I love that. Is there more you wanted to add, there?
Zoelle Egner (00:56:34):
No. 
Lenny (00:56:34):
Okay.
Zoelle Egner (00:56:39):
I think that's enough on not to do.
Lenny (00:56:40):
What this reminds me of broadly is just, "Stay focused on the customer and their problems. Don't obsess with who you are, who are you selling to and how will you make their life better." Reminds me of this old idea from Kathy Sierra. Does that ring a bell? 
Zoelle Egner (00:56:55):
Yeah.
Lenny (00:56:55):
Where-
Zoelle Egner (00:56:55):
Oh totally. 
Lenny (00:56:56):
... you make your customer a superhero, you want them to feel like a superhero. And if they-
Zoelle Egner (00:56:56):
It works-
Lenny (00:56:59):
... feel like a superhero. And yeah, that sounds like that's essentially what you did with Airtable, a lot of these companies you worked with.
Zoelle Egner (00:57:05):
That that is always the goal. Like, "How can you make them the hero of the story and not you? Because no one cares about your company, what they care about is themselves, frankly."
Lenny (00:57:12):
Are there any products or companies you think of off the top of your head that are really good at this, that are just like they nailed this?
Zoelle Egner (00:57:18):
Yeah, that's a good question. Certainly the two that I mentioned, that helped rebrand some of the professions, so like the Gainsights of the world. I'm blanking a little bit on the ones that have done this for DevOps really effectively, but there's certainly some that have.
Lenny (00:57:32):
Maybe Datadog?
Zoelle Egner (00:57:33):
Yeah, Datadog has done a pretty good job of that. I think where I get excited is when the companies do this in a way that feels less self-serving, or less obviously self-serving. And that means that sometimes you have to be willing to invest in things that will not have super obviously immediate ROI for you, but they will for the community, and for building the community. Oh, actually one really good example, I think Notion has actually done a pretty good job of this. People are really, really invested in the templates that they create, because it feels like you're not pushing Notion, you're pushing the beautiful creation that you have to solve a problem. I think they've done a really nice job on that process, and several of their competitors, I think have done a pretty decent job as well, but they certainly come to mind.
Lenny (00:58:18):
Thinking of templates, I know Airtable, known for templates, and you've mentioned this being a big part of the success, and I imagine a lot of companies now are just creating templates left, because they imagine that's the core, what helped a lot of these companies, Notion being an example. What is your take on the power and importance of templates for software?
Zoelle Egner (00:58:38):
I think they can be tremendously helpful if you are horizontal because they help to narrow the surface area for a user, so they understand how to connect the dots between their problem and your product. And if it is not obvious to someone how they can solve a specific problem, they're going to be like, "Oh, hey, that seems really cool. When I think of something I'll definitely come back." And then you have lost them. And so if you can be like, "Here are three templates that a person you might be excited about." That can be really helpful. Where people sometimes get confused about templates, or have the wrong expectations about templates, is when they think that templates are going to be an acquisition mechanism, and they don't build in the foundation that is necessary for that to be true. So a lot of people think that templates were what drove Airtable's top of funnel. That is not the case. 
(00:59:27):
I was having a conversation with someone who worked a lot on SEO at Airtable in the much later days, and laughing over the fact that people thought that was a big source of traffic, because it was not. We did not optimize them for that. Good luck finding them in search most of the time. Not at all useful. Where they were helpful, narrowing that surface area, helping with matching patterns, helping people understand how the product worked, super helpful. Expansion within companies, tremendously useful. 
(00:59:55):
But they were not a top of funnel mechanism for us, because we didn't put the work in to do that. We did not have an SEO engine. We weren't Zapier. Zapier has done a great job with that. They get a ton of traffic because they built it as a programmatic SEO play, but you have to be clear about what your goals are and what problem they're solving, because otherwise it is very easy to be like, "I'll just build a bunch of templates, and then all of the leads will appear," And that's not going to happen unless you invest in a lot more than at least Airtable did. So it can be useful to build them, know what you're doing it for, and how you're going to measure it, or otherwise you'll waste your time.
Lenny (01:00:29):
Do you think Airtable could have taken advantage of that top of funnel approach if they invested from an SEO perspective or do you think it wasn't an opportunity that worked?
Zoelle Egner (01:00:37):
I think it could have been. We would've needed to hire more humans. Airtable was an incredibly lean team for a very, very long time. From 2015, when I joined, until 2017 or 2018, we had barely 50 people. It was small for many, many years and so we had to make really difficult choices about what to prioritize and what not to prioritize. Should we have hired more people and done more things? I would argue in retrospect, absolutely, yes, there were opportunities that were left on the table, but in early days you leave good opportunities because you have to focus on other things.
Lenny (01:01:13):
Got it. And so a takeaway here is templates could be really useful for customer success versus SEO top of funnel. Right? That's-
Zoelle Egner (01:01:13):
Yeah.
Lenny (01:01:20):
... where they became powerful. 
Zoelle Egner (01:01:21):
Still maybe helpful. Maybe for you, it makes sense to do the SEO play, just know that that is not a small play. It is an investment. It is not and not just like, "Have some people make some templates." You got to do way more than just that. It's not going to be sufficient.
Lenny (01:01:35):
Final potential question, depending on where this goes, and I'm curious how spicy this answer gets, and-
Zoelle Egner (01:01:35):
Oh boy.
Lenny (01:01:40):
It's around launches and PR. You work with a lot of startups, I imagine founders are always trying to plan a launch, get PR. I'm curious your take on the value of investing a bunch of resources in a big launch, the value of just getting PR as an early stage startup.
Zoelle Egner (01:01:56):
Yeah, just getting PR is not a good goal. I know that's been well stated in the market, but just to reiterate it, most of the time PR is not going to get you leads or users, it's just not. And you have to think about when you are creating a launch or doing a piece of PR, what are the breadcrumbs that bring someone back to something that can actually convert? If you have your big tech crunch piece and it's super exciting, it says all these great things about you, and it maybe links to you once, somewhere in the 12th paragraph or whatever, how many people are actually going to click on that link? Not that many people. How many people are going to read that and remember to go Google it? Not as many as you want. Okay? There's going to be so much coming out of the funnel, it is not a useful acquisition mechanism.
(01:02:43):
What it is good for is credibility. And that's where, if you have really clear goals, and you know how you are ready to leverage the asset of a piece of PR coverage, then it can be helpful to you. So the two goals I always recommend to founders when thinking about using PR, are either hiring or maybe improving the response rate for your cold outbound. Those are the two that I think make the most sense, because in both cases they have a different distribution mechanism. In hiring, you're going to include that in an email that you're sending to a candidate. And so it's going to increase the likelihood that they take you seriously, and get excited about the company, and maybe actually end up ultimately joining your team. 
(01:03:22):
Cold outbound, you're using it as credibility to say, "Hey, we're a real company you can trust." Great. Both of those things are all emails that you are proactively sending. You know exactly who they're going to, and you know that asset is going to have, hopefully, the impact that you're looking for, and you can measure whether it makes a difference or not. But just getting a piece of PR, to get a piece of PR is like it'll help with your internal morale, but I'm not sure it's going to do much help for you. So have really clear goals and have realistic goals, or you will be disappointed.
(01:03:51):
Launches however, do not need to just be about PR. In fact, in many cases PR is a distraction, and instead you can have not just one big launch but a series of launches that allow you to stay top of mind, to create momentum with your users, and to show up in lots of different places because audiences respond to novelty, it gives them a reason to care about your company. And so have your big, annual launch or whatever, but also have one two months from then, and another one, and another one. Find ways to use that novelty to your advantage and to get into communities that you think are going to be good fits for your company.
Lenny (01:04:26):
I love that advice. Any final thoughts before we get to our very exciting lightning round?
Zoelle Egner (01:04:34):
Mostly just all of this is easier if you talk to your customers more. Build a system for yourself that will allow you to have those touchpoints. That's not just making everyone answer customer support tickets, though I do think that is a great idea, because it gives so much empathy and it's really helpful. You as a founder, if you're a founder, or a product manager, or whatever else, should find a way to get that on your calendar weekly or monthly. Go talk to people, it makes it better. You will have a better mental model. The other thing is strongly consider investing in customer success if you are a B2B company, early. Airtable had it before sales, which is a very unconventional approach, but early is worth it. It has huge dividends if you actually listen to them. If you're not going to listen to them, though, don't hire them, because that's sad.
Lenny (01:05:22):
I have followup questions on the customer success piece, say someone wants to invest in customer success, is there a resource, or person, or anything that you could point folks to, to understand and think about how to do this well?
Zoelle Egner (01:05:36):
There's a lot for people within that profession. There's not as much for founders out there right now, unfortunately. This is an area that I very eagerly am looking for more resources to share with people. Minimally. I'll say, if you care about this, send me a message. I will give you some advice. All of our industry will be better if there are more people working on customer success. So I will help you. Send me a note. Otherwise, I'll try and dig out some other things and maybe you can share them, but there's not a ton. So people in customer success, please share your learnings more with founders. All of us-
Lenny (01:05:36):
Have-
Zoelle Egner (01:05:36):
... would like to see it.
Lenny (01:06:09):
Yeah, I've actually been looking for someone to write a guest post in the newsletter, about just how to set up a customer success team. And so if you're listening, you think you could be that person. Let me-
Zoelle Egner (01:06:21):
Yeah, I have some people that I will not put on the spot right now, that I will send your way that I think- [inaudible 01:06:26]
Lenny (01:06:26):
Amazing. [inaudible 01:06:27]. Let's make this happen.
Zoelle Egner (01:06:28):
Yeah.
Lenny (01:06:29):
And then I wanted to ask you a question on the first piece of advice, which is, "Founders talk to the customers more often." Is there one tactical piece of advice you could recommend for how to do that?
Zoelle Egner (01:06:37):
Yeah.
Lenny (01:06:37):
How to find a customer, how to set it up consistently?
Zoelle Egner (01:06:40):
Totally. The simplest way to do this is to write a template email for yourself that you can send out very easily, that essentially says like, "Hey, thank you so much for using the product. I would really love to hear about your experience so far and get your feedback. Do you have 10 minutes to talk on the phone?" I know it is important that it's on the phone and not a survey because you get way more instinct from unstructured conversation than you're going to get from sending them three things in a Google survey.
(01:07:05):
Set it up, come up with a hypothesis of the type of person that you want to talk to and then run a query against your database, find someone and send three of those emails a week. And it's not exciting, but you can automate most of it and it will be helpful. None of this stuff has to be complicated. You just got to have a system.
Lenny (01:07:23):
Great advice. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. 
Zoelle Egner (01:07:27):
Yes.
Lenny (01:07:27):
I've got six questions for you. I'm going to go through them pretty quick. Whatever comes to mind, let's see where it goes. 
Zoelle Egner (01:07:34):
Okay.
Lenny (01:07:34):
Question number one. What are two or three books that you recommend most to other people?
Zoelle Egner (01:07:40):
Okay, I hate this question because I take pride in making highly targeted recommendations, but I will do it anyway. I'm pretty sure you mostly talk to product and growth people. Right now, obviously, AI is a big topic of conversation, so here are two books that will enrich your mental model for artificial intelligence and encourage you to think about it from different perspectives. The first one, a little bit academic, highly recommend it, though. It's a book called Computing Taste by Nick Seaver. 
(01:08:09):
He's a professor of anthropology and he did this study of people and companies who build music recognition algorithms. And it's a really interesting book for a bunch of reasons, including that it's a academic take on both tech culture, and more specifically, the unspoken and underlying assumptions that many workers who are building in this space have. It can be a little spicy and uncomfortable for a person in tech to read, but I think it is a fascinating perspective and very relevant to the stuff that's going on in AI right now. So go check it out. Computing Taste by Nick Seaver.
(01:08:42):
The second is a fiction book, but the Ancillary Justice series by Anne Leckie, about a spaceship AI that ends up separated from its ship and trapped in a body. I'm going to leave it at that. Worth reading for a different way of thinking about AI.
Lenny (01:08:56):
I think we need a Zoelle full episode on book recommendations. These are amazing. Let's keep going.
Zoelle Egner (01:08:56):
So fair.
Lenny (01:09:02):
What other podcast of yours that you love to listen to other than this podcast?
Zoelle Egner (01:09:07):
Probably either Happiness Lab or Gastropod. I love food and also psychology, one of those two.
Lenny (01:09:13):
Interesting. Okay, we'll keep going. Favorite recent movie or TV show?
Zoelle Egner (01:09:17):
Movie, Everything Everywhere All at Once. And TV show, there's a Korean drama called Extraordinary Attorney Woo. That, I really enjoyed.
Lenny (01:09:26):
Favorite interview question that you like to ask?
Zoelle Egner (01:09:29):
Yeah. Okay, so this one is related to customer success. It's my favorite question of all. People hate it, sorry. But I like to ask anyone who's going to be in a customer facing role, who needs to be able to keep their cool, and also learn stuff on the fly, and respond to customers, to solve an unfamiliar problem using Zapier. And they can use the internet to look things up, whatever, but I basically lay out for them a problem that I, as the customer want to solve, and have them build it for me live. This both is surprising for most people, so you get to see how they respond to an unfamiliar situation, which every client will give you at some point, and it shows how they learn things in a very concrete way, which is really interesting. So check it out. It works really well for customer success.
Lenny (01:10:10):
I've not heard that one before. Fascinating. Top five SaaS products that you enjoy and an Airtable cannot be one?
Zoelle Egner (01:10:18):
Ugh. Okay, then I'll try and avoid any company that I have worked for. I really like using Figma. It's nice when designers let me play with things. I've been really enjoying working with Webflow, also means that I can do stuff on my own. This is maybe spicy, but I actually love Google Docs. I'm not a Notion's fan stand, sorry.
Lenny (01:10:18):
Hey.
Zoelle Egner (01:10:36):
But Google Docs-
Lenny (01:10:37):
Can't [inaudible 01:10:37] them all.
Zoelle Egner (01:10:36):
... is like my best friend.
Lenny (01:10:37):
Google Docs is great.
Zoelle Egner (01:10:38):
Yeah. And then there is a personal CRM company that I invested in, so sorry, maybe this is not allowed, but called Clay, and it is the only way I've ever been able to keep track of my-
Lenny (01:10:47):
Wow. [inaudible 01:10:47]-
Zoelle Egner (01:10:47):
... relationships in a real way.
Lenny (01:10:48):
Clay's great product.
Zoelle Egner (01:10:49):
They're the best. And then I don't know if I love it, but I use Zoom so much that I feel like I must say it, because I spend so much of my time on it and it's categorically better than Google Meet.
Lenny (01:11:01):
Final question, favorite book, course, article, any resource on marketing that non marketers can learn from?
Zoelle Egner (01:11:10):
Okay, it's a newsletter. Does that work?
Lenny (01:11:12):
Absolutely.
Zoelle Egner (01:11:13):
Amazing. Okay, so there is a specialist VC firm called MKT1. It's run by Emily Kramer and Kathleen Estreich, sorry if I pronounced your last name, there, wrong, Kathleen. It's all about marketing. They are marketing experts and operators who now invest, but they make the best frameworks that you can immediately apply. And there's templates and all sorts of super, super tactical stuff, which a lot of tactical marketing content is terrible because it's actually content marketing for some bad platform. Theirs is not. It is genuinely good. Go check it out. 
Lenny (01:11:43):
A huge fan. Emily has been on the podcast. 
Zoelle Egner (01:11:45):
Oh, [inaudible 01:11:47].
Lenny (01:11:47):
Yeah. And I look at that newsletter as the Lenny's newsletter of marketing, and it's exactly how you described.
Zoelle Egner (01:11:53):
It's the best.
Lenny (01:11:53):
Huge fan. Great recommendation. With that, Zoelle, thank you so much for being here. This was a lot of fun. And we got through a lot of stuff, which makes me really happy. Two final questions, where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, learn more, and how can listeners be useful to you?
Zoelle Egner (01:12:09):
I am on Twitter @Zoelle. I'm also on LinkedIn, so I live there, come find me there. Otherwise, how can you be useful to me? Mostly like go forth and believe in customer success, and talk to your users, number one, because I am an avid user of technology, and I want it all to be better. Number two, no, that's all I got. Just go do those things and I will be so happy. Also, if you want to talk about customer success, anytime, hit me up. I'm here.
Lenny (01:12:35):
I'm going to add a couple more things, which you mentioned to me offline, that you're hiring at Block Party.
Zoelle Egner (01:12:39):
Yes.
Lenny (01:12:39):
You're hiring growth people, PMs, engineers, and then you're also advising on the side with marketing customer success. Anything else you want to add, there?
Zoelle Egner (01:12:48):
Yeah, absolutely. Love advising early stage companies. I'm especially helpful for pre seed and seed, usually, anything PLG, positioning, messaging, figuring out your channels, experimentation, all that early, fun stuff. I love it. Happy to help anytime. And we are hiring across all of the teams, but especially mine. So if you would like to come and do all sorts of fun experimentation, and also help keep people online safe, come look up, Block Party. I'd love to have you on my team. 
Lenny (01:13:18):
Blockparty.com, or where do folks- [inaudible 01:13:19]
Zoelle Egner (01:13:18):
Blockpartyapp.com. Did not-
Lenny (01:13:18):
App.com
Zoelle Egner (01:13:19):
... get blockparty.com. 
Lenny (01:13:19):
You didn't. Zoelle, thank you. Very good.
Zoelle Egner (01:13:23):
Thank you. 
Lenny (01:13:28):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.
