Madhavan Ramanujam (00:00:00):
The good founders need to be able to dominate both market share and wallet share. It is not a choice. You need to get better at both.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:07):
It feels like every company wants to be an AI company these days. How is AI pricing different?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:00:11):
The winners in AI will need to master monetization from day one. If you're bringing a lot of value to the table and you start at training your customers to expect $20 a month and you anchored yourself on a low price point, you're in trouble. 20% of what you build drives 80% of the willingness to pay. But the irony is that that 20% is the easiest thing to build often.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:30):
What would you say is the biggest lesson you want founders to take away?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:00:33):
If you think about market share and wallet share, let's think about it as a two-by-two. The quadrant that you really want to be in is the outcome-based pricing model, the top-right quadrant where you have great autonomy and great attribution. About 5% of companies are probably in a true outcome-based pricing model. If you want to win in AI, figure out a way to get to that quadrant.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:54):
Do you feel like the popular IDE startups, they're going to be in trouble down the road?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:00:58):
Some of them, yes, without naming names.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:02):
Today my guest is Madhavan Ramanujam. Madhavan is the smartest person I know on pricing and monetization strategy. As managing partner at Simon-Kucher, he's worked with over 250 companies, including 30 unicorns, to help them figure out how to price, package, and grow their products.

(00:01:18):
He's also the author of the book on pricing called Monetizing Innovation. And now he's back with a new book, a sequel, called Scaling Innovation, which teaches you how to architect your business for long-term profitable growth and also how to avoid the common traps that teams fall into that keep them from building real, durable, sustainable businesses.

(00:01:36):
Bill Gurley wrote the foreword. I had a chance to read an early copy. I absolutely loved it. It's a book that every founder needs to read. And in this episode, Madhavan shares many of the biggest lessons from the book, including how pricing strategy is very different for AI companies, why you need to get your pricing model right from the start in today's market, a very simple two-by-two to help you pick your pricing model, how to gain pricing power, a ton of tactical advice for negotiating more effectively, the most common traps founders fall into, and so much more.

(00:02:05):
If you order five copies of the book, Madhavan is offering a chance to win a free conversation with him, a signed copy of the book, an invite to the book launch, a t-shirt, and more. Just send a copy of your purchase receipt to promo@49palmsvc.com.

(00:02:19):
And some more good news, Madhavan is now more accessible. He left Simon-Kucher. He's now investing full-time with his own fund. He focuses on early-stage AI companies. If you want to work with them, check him out at 49palmsvc.com.

(00:02:32):
If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. With that, I bring you Madhavan Ramanujam.

(00:02:40):
This episode is brought to you by Enterpret. Enterpret is a customer intelligence platform used by a leading CXN product orgs like Canva, Notion, Perplexity, Strava, Hinge and Linear. To leverage the voice of the customer and build best-in-class products. Enterpret unifies all customer conversations in real-time, from Gong recordings to Zendesk tickets to Twitter threads, and makes it available for your team for analysis and for action.

(00:03:05):
What makes Enterpret unique is its ability to build and update a customer-specific knowledge graph that provides the most granular and accurate categorization of all customer feedback and connects that customer feedback to critical metrics like revenue and CSAT. If modernizing your voice-of-customer program to a generational upgrade is a 2025 priority, like customer-centric industry leaders like Canva, Notion, Perplexity, and Linear, reach out to the team at enterpret.com/lenny. That's E-N-T-E-R-P-R-E-T .com/lenny.

(00:03:40):
Today's episode is brought to you by DX. If you're an engineering leader or on a platform team, at some point your CO will inevitably ask you for productivity metrics. But measuring engineering organizations is hard, and we can all agree that simple metrics, like the number of PRs or commits, doesn't tell the full story. That's where DX comes in.

(00:04:00):
DX is an engineering intelligence solution designed by leading researchers, including those behind the DORA and SPACE frameworks. It combines quantitative data from developer tools with qualitative feedback from developers to give you a complete view of engineering productivity and the factors affecting it.

(00:04:17):
Learn why some of the world's most iconic companies, like Etsy, Dropbox, Twilio, Vercel, and Webflow rely on DX. Visit DX's website at getdx.com/lenny.

(00:04:34):
Madhavan, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:04:37):
It's exciting to be back, Lenny. Thanks so much for hosting me again.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:41):
This is a very rare second visit to the podcast. You've got a new book coming out. I've got a very early copy right here. If you're watching on YouTube, here's the copy you sent me. It's like 200 pages. Did you print this out on your printer, by the way?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:04:54):
Yes, I think I ran out of printer ink after that, I guess.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:58):
I appreciate the early copy. It's amazing. What we're going to be doing with this conversation is going through some of the biggest lessons that you shared in this book to give people a sense of many of the things that you share, many things you've learned since writing the first book.

(00:05:11):
Let me start with this question. Why'd you decide to write another book? And what is the difference between Scaling Innovation, which is the name of this book, and Monetizing Innovation, is the name of the first book?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:05:21):
So Monetizing Innovation, we actually wrote it eight years ago. Time Flies. And the core thesis of that book was, how do you build products that are not just cool but are products that people need, value, and are actually willing to pay for? And I think that took a life of its own.

(00:05:36):
And over the years, we kept getting another question from entrepreneurs that, "Hey, we built a great product, we know there is willingness to pay, but how do we build a great business? How do we scale this?" And the brutal truth is that even if you have a great product, you might actually not figure out a way to grow fast and grow profitably. So we wrote Scaling Innovation in an effort to actually solve that puzzle.

(00:05:55):
So you can think of this as a sequel to Monetizing Innovation. And Monetizing Innovation. Talked about how to build great products. Scaling Innovation talks about how to build a great business. And writing a book is... There needs to be a purpose for this. For me, the reason for writing books is about giving a bit back based on what I know to founders. And book writing is hard. Writing a good book is even harder.

(00:06:19):
And just like Monetizing Innovation, Scaling Innovation is not marketing fluff. It actually has real actionable stuff packed in that you can go on Monday morning and start implementing. And we wrote this book to give back a bit of what we know and to help companies scale and architect towards profitable growth.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:38):
I love people like you that do the work for, I don't know, decades at this point, learn from real life experiences over and over and over, and then just share all this stuff with people. This is the most... the highest ROI way to learn, is letting you do all this work to learn all these things and then you share all your answers with us. So that's why I love these books.

(00:07:00):
If you had to boil down the thesis of this book into just a simple thought so that we can just start to plant this in founders's heads, what would that be?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:07:08):
So if I have to boil down the core thesis of the book, it is basically that if you want to build an enduring business, you need to be able to architect towards profitable growth. What that means is you need to be able to master two engines: market share and wallet share.

(00:07:26):
It sounds simple on the surface, but it's actually quite complex. Because if you unpack that, for gaining market share and wallet share, you need to be good at acquisition, monetization, and retention, as in get customers, make an initial money on them, but also make money on an ongoing basis and have your customers actually refer more customers.

(00:07:46):
Many companies, actually, what they do is they focus on a single engine strategy. So they focus on one of those two topics and pretty much exclude the other one. That leads to all kinds of situations. You see companies saying, "I'll grow at all costs and postpone monetization." You see some who would say, "I'm going to monetize earlier on," but they might miss out on acquisition opportunities. Or yet others who are so focused on a small set of loyal customer base that they're neither monetizing nor are they actually acquiring.

(00:08:17):
So the good founders need to be able to dominate both market share and wallet share. It is not a choice. You need to get better at both. But this does not mean that you're putting equal effort on market share and wallet share at all given points in time, but it means you're putting equal attention on both those topics and being thoughtful about the trade-offs and saying, "How can I actually look at these two topics together so that I'm architecting towards profitable growth?" That's the core thesis of the book.

(00:08:47):
We actually showcase nine strategies that actually allow companies to architect towards profitable growth. And every chapter ends with how this particular strategy circumvents a single-engine problem and helps you focus on market share and wallet share at the same time. And there's also CEO questions and leadership questions that people should reflect on when they architect towards profitable growth and are they on the right track? I mean, think about this ways. If you're flying a aircraft, you don't want to flight on one engine. Why do you actually want to do that for your business?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:21):
Okay. So I imagine many founders or people thinking about starting a company are not feeling like they're in one bucket or another. Intuitively, you're not like, "Oh, Of course. We're going to just focus on growth forever, and that's all that matters."

(00:09:36):
You had these kind of traps that founders fall into that you referenced a bit. Can you just talk again about just the common traps you find founders fall into that people may recognize like, "Shit, that's what I'm doing probably"?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:09:47):
So let's unpack the traps that are correlated to the archetypes. If you're a disruptor archetype, you might fall into one of two traps. The first one is you might land, but you might not expand. As in your eagerness for acquiring, you might have actually given away a lot at less and you have given the farm away, but you don't have anything to expand to. That's the first trap you're likely to fall into.

(00:10:12):
The second trap that you actually fall into is you start... A market share that won, is different from a market share that is actually held. If you're so acquisition focused, you're actually focused on getting more and more customers, but you're not spending enough time with customers that you actually got to keep them, upsell them, keep them happy, et cetera. So you might fall into that trap.

(00:10:34):
If you're a moneymaker, you fall into one of two traps. The first one is you might nickel and dime your customers to death. Because you're focused on monetization, you might come up with a very differentiated pricing model, different levels, hidden fees, things to charge for many different things and come across as just trying to nickel and dime your customer.

(00:10:53):
The second trap that a moneymaker actually falls into is that you fall into the price premium paradox where you think that pricing high actually indicates value, but your price is so high that you actually start hurting your acquisition, so it just becomes irrelevant for most people.

(00:11:13):
If you're in the community builder, you actually fall into two common traps. The first one is you're focused so much on the foundation that you actually miss the frontier, which is you're so focused on your loyal customer base that you forget to attract different types of customers and you're not acquiring.

(00:11:30):
And the second trap that you fall into if you're a community builder is you train your customers to expect more for less. Because you're so eager to satisfy your loyal base, you start giving them more and more, and you're training your best customer base to expect more for less.

(00:11:46):
So these six traps are very common across these archetypes. Being a profitable growth architect means that you're avoiding these traps. In other words, you're simultaneously being a disruptor, a moneymaker, and a community builder all at the same time. And how do you actually have that archetype and the right strategies to actually go about your business?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:07):
Okay. So this is what you want to not do. You mentioned you have nine strategies for how you actually want to approach pricing, monetization, scaling, monetization, and innovation. Can you share a couple of these strategies, maybe two or three, maybe some of your favorites?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:12:21):
Sure. So I will unpack a couple of strategies. Maybe the first one I would take is what we call as beautifully simple pricing. So in your early days it is by far more important to have pricing that is really simple and it's not creating too much friction in the sales conversation. I mean, the asset test that you probably should go back on Monday morning and do is take some of your early prospects or customers and ask them to articulate the pricing strategy back to you, right? If they were to actually sell on your behalf, how would they describe the pricing strategy? And if they cannot contextualize that in a simple manner and actually explain, you don't have a simple pricing strategy. It's as simple as that.

(00:13:02):
And having a simple pricing strategy also means that your pricing needs to be able to tell a value story, as in you need to contextualize your price based on the value that you actually bring to the table.

(00:13:15):
A great example here is Superhuman. When they started, they were actually competing with free email products and they were coming up with a premium email experience. And how do you actually price that? And I thought the team at Superhuman with Rahul and others did a pretty good job. They came up with a $30 price point per month, which was pretty simple. But the way they kind of told the story was that you pay a dollar a day for actually getting four hours of productivity back in the week, and then suddenly the pricing doesn't look too off. I mean, it's like the price for a latte in a week to actually get four hours back. Why wouldn't I actually do that, right?

(00:13:50):
And pricing contextualization and value story doesn't need to just apply for premium products. If you take another example, like the Subway $5 footlong is a different way to say a story with pricing that, oh, for $5, you get a lot of value actually back. So beautifully simple pricing really means coming up with a simple pricing strategy that your customers immediately get and your pricing is actually telling a value story and how do you actually get that. So in the book, we have a checklist of 10 different things that you actually need to look at to make sure that your pricing is beautifully simple.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:25):
As we go through these strategies, is your advice try all these things, like you should do as many of these strategies as you can, or is it maybe pick a few that work for you or just one is enough?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:14:34):
So there are nine strategies. We have organized that into strategies that apply during your startup phase, like just when you get started, and strategies that apply to you in your scale-up phase. So there are four strategies that you need to do in your startup and five in the scale-up, so it's quite manageable. I would argue that all four apply in the startup and all five actually apply in the scale-up phase, but it's not like you need to start focusing on nine things from day one.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:59):
So this first one was the startup phase?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:15:01):
Yeah. The beautifully simple pricing is the startup. Exactly. And so in the scale-up phase, I think one of the most important strategies is to master negotiations and really get better at acing negotiations, especially if you're in a B2B situation. And how do you actually do that? Because you need to be able to talk about the value and contextualize your price based on those kind of conversations.

(00:15:25):
So to master negotiations, it comes down to actually three things. Mastering gives and gets, being good at value selling, and third, having the right negotiation strategies. So let's unpack that each at a time.

(00:15:39):
So giving and getting, why is that important? Because in a negotiation, typically you're giving. I mean, you're giving concessions. People are asking. If you don't get anything back, you're basically indicating to the other person that they can keep beating you up and you need to keep giving. But if you're giving something but you ask for something in exchange, then you're basically bringing authenticity into the negotiation because it actually means something to you to give, so you're asking something back. It actually makes the negotiation way more effective.

(00:16:10):
And in the book we actually talk about the top 10 gets in B2B and the top 10 gets in B2C. One of my favorite gets in the B2B situation is what I call as conducting a value audit. So what this means is if you're giving a concession, ask for a value audit in exchange where every six months a team internally from your customers would be commissioned to actually conduct a value assessment of your products so that it becomes their business case and you co-create it with them saying how much value is actually produced. And this is great because if they actually engage in that, that gives you tremendous pricing power for renegotiations because it is their business case, they're championed it internally, and you're pretty much making your products pretty sticky. So it's a pretty harmless get, but it could be very powerful for future negotiations. So being good at-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:00):
That's really smart.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:17:01):
... gives and gets is... Thank you. Being good at gives and gets is really critical.

(00:17:07):
The second thing in mastering negotiations is being good at value selling. And for being good at value selling, you need to do three things. First, you need to be able to create the needs. Second, you need to be able to create affirmation loops. And the third one is creating a good ROI model. And let's talk about each of those. So creating needs is very important because many founders show up and try to understand what are the needs of the customers. That's one way to look at it. But you need to be able to create needs rather than just discover them.

(00:17:38):
So for instance, if you're a marketing automation AI product and you save, let's say, three weeks of work that actually needs to be done to actually get stuff in a dashboard that can be analyzed by marketing managers, the way you create the need is ask about existing processes and say, "Okay, so just so I understand, all of this stuff actually takes you three weeks to put data together to actually have meaningful dashboards for your marketing managers to take action. What if that was available to you instantaneously?" Oh, you have now just created a need, right? So being in that mindset of creating a need as opposed to just discovering them.

(00:18:17):
The second thing is creating affirmation loops. And this is really important. I've seen a lot of founders get into negotiations. They're so eager to talk about their products. They keep talking about the products without any affirmation from the other side. You need to pause and create affirmation loops, things like, for instance, "Okay, so far, you've seen all of this. How does this actually play out in your company? Do you see it as valuable? What about this dashboard do you actually like?"

(00:18:44):
So when you ask these kind of questions and your customers are playing back the value that they actually see in your product, you're creating affirmation loops, which become tremendously useful when you start selling the product finally. Because if they've agreed that there's value that is being produced, then you also have a better commercial discussion.

(00:19:03):
And the third one is creating a good ROI model. And I see a lot of founders work on a POC. And after the POC's over, they'll show up with an ROI model and try to defend a price. You've already lost the battle. I mean, no one is going to believe an ROI model that you just cooked up. Everyone is going to challenge you on assumptions.

(00:19:22):
The right way to think about an ROI model is to actually co-create it with your customers from day one, which means agree and validate on the assumptions and the inputs. So like, "Hey, how long does this process take today? How many engineers are there?" So you create ask questions that are all inputs to an ROI model. And if you have done that process and the customer agrees on all the inputs, they're very unlikely to push back on the output of an ROI model. So a POC needs to be framed as the purpose of a POC is to build a business case, and we are going to co-create an ROI model with the customer as opposed to it being a tech and product functionality feature test and you show up with an ROI model.

(00:20:06):
And when you're building an ROI model, there are many buckets to focus on, but there are three that are very critical. The first one is, what are the incremental gains that you actually bring to the table based on KPIs and metrics that your customer is tracking? So this could be things like incremental revenue, reduction in churn. These are the immediate, tangible, clear impact to the business line based on the products that you actually bring to the table.

(00:20:33):
The second bucket is cost savings. Are you reducing headcount? Are you reducing license costs? What are the tangible cost savings?

(00:20:41):
And the third one, which is often overlooked, is opportunity cost. For instance, if you save 10 hours of time for a team, what do they actually do with that 10 hours? That can also be quantified. So when you put all of these three things together, you start building a proper ROI model that you can actually use in your value selling to defend the right price.

(00:21:02):
So we talked about three steps in mastering negotiations. The first one was gives and gets. The second one was getting better at value selling. The third one is actually getting better at even negotiations and what strategies would you actually use. And there are a couple of strategies that we have found to be really productive.

(00:21:20):
The first one is to show up with options. Many founders rush with one product and one price and say, "Okay, this is a hundred K product, and that's what we are trying to sell." Inevitably, what will happen is the immediate focus of the conversation will be on the price, and you're only talking about price.

(00:21:39):
But if you have options on the table, let's say if you have a good, better, best, if you're a hundred K product, a 200K and a 300K option, then you're not just talking price, you're talking value. Because if your customer is budget conscious, they'll say, "Hey, I like the hundred K price point, but I actually like the functionality in your 200K product." Then your immediate question is, what in the functionality do you actually like? Why is that beneficial for you? So you switch the conversation back to value as opposed to just talking about price. And we have seen that with these kind of conversations, you're by far more better off to actually land in a much better place than just showcasing one product and one price.

(00:22:18):
And showcasing options doesn't need to be just different products. It could even be a pricing model choice. And I'd probably give a simple hack that people can try on Monday morning. I was talking to this founder who said, "Hey, I think the budget is about 100K. That's what I believe from the key stakeholder, but my product really brings crazy value. I could even charge, let's say, a 500K for this product, but I don't have the courage to actually go and ask for a 500K price because I kind of know a hundred K is the budget. What should I do?" So for those kind of situations, actually show up with options in your pricing model.

(00:22:58):
So we coached him to go in with a hundred K, plus 10% on any incremental value that you bring, or it's a 500K fixed. So now this is actually a great situation in negotiation. Because if you're price sensitive, you're focused on the hundred K. It's a small fee to actually get started. But the conversation will gravitate towards, "What is that 10%? How do you measure value?" That's a great conversation to have because now you're talking about, "How you add value? Where's the value generation? What portion would you take?"

(00:23:28):
And you see one of two situations. Either the customer say, "That's great. You're putting skin in the game. Let's go with a hundred K and 10%," or, 80% of the situations, you might actually want to avoid the outcome-based pricing as a buyer, but you're not really fixated on the 500K at that point. It is the premium that you're actually paying for the certainty. So no one is focusing on the 5K because of the hundred K option on the table, and you just put a 500K and got the courage to do that. And in this specific situation, that 500K got negotiated to 400K, and they just 4X the deal compared to where they would be. So having options on the table when you negotiate is critical.

(00:24:05):
And there's also some tactics that we showcase in the book, like anchoring is important. If you start high, you'll also end up higher. And also tapering concessions. How do you give concessions? I mean, the worst negotiators will start by giving a small concession and then give a bit more when someone asks like... You might give a 5% discount, and the procurement guy says, "That's not enough." "Okay, I'll give you 10% more." "Okay, that's not enough." "I'll give you 15." What are you indicating to the other person? You're just basically indicating that I can keep beating you up and I can get more discounts.

(00:24:35):
The best negotiators who taper the concessions. So they would say, "I can give you 15%." "Okay, I need more." "I'll give you five." "I need more." "I'll give you two." So you're automatically indicating to the other person that the negotiation's actually ending. So how do you taper concessions also become important.

(00:24:51):
So when you put all of these three things together, if you master your gives and gets, you get better at value selling, and you use the right negotiation strategy, you can extract full value from every deal. That's probably way more important when you're at the scale-up phase.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:05):
This is such great advice. I love that this is just one small chapter of your book. This could make or break your company. It's interesting that you have a whole thing on negotiation in a book about scaling innovation and growing your company. Is the assumption here that your pricing and monetization is so impacted by how well you negotiate because that changes your entire pricing structure and how much you're making? Is that why you put so much effort into this part?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:25:31):
Exactly. I mean, in a B2B situation, you can set all the pricing you want, come up with great pricing models. But at least even today, it's a human having a human conversation trying to negotiate. So if you cannot contextualize what you put on the table, how do you negotiate around value, how do you contextualize your price, you're leaving a lot of money on the table.

(00:25:49):
So to us, negotiations is yet another monetization topic where you're thinking about it as extracting full value from every deal. And this is not just negotiation tactics, like keep your boss at home and just negotiate and things like that. This is actual negotiation strategies that are rooted on value selling, gives and gets, and focusing on extracting full value from every deal.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:14):
So useful. This idea of throwing out a third higher priced option, say 500K, it's so interesting. Because usually the advice I hear is like, "Just throw out twice the number you used to... " Just put it out there just in case, which is really scary to ask for like, "What about $50,000?" And this is like a much less scary way of doing that. "Okay, but we also have this 500K option. Here's what you get." And then they may be like, "Oh, that's exactly what we want." And you're like, "Oh, wow. It worked."

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:26:40):
Exactly. It's a very simple hack to get your courage.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:43):
That is so cool.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:26:44):
Put a good price point.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:45):
Wow, this is awesome. This is just like a golden nugget within golden nuggets of advice. Okay. So you have nine strategies. We've covered two. Let's not get into them, but just what are a few more just so people know what else they might be able to learn?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:26:59):
Sure. We talk about how to land and expand, as in how to design your best free product in such a way that you are landing, but also expanding. We talk about things like how to have the right packaging strategy, how to stop churn before it happens, how to do price increases effectively. Because at some point in your scale-up journey, you need to increase price, but how do you do that meaningful fashion?

(00:27:24):
So we have various strategies that apply both for the startup and the scale-up phase. But in combination, all of those things help you articulate and architect towards profitable growth.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:35):
Awesome. Okay. Let's talk about AI for a bit. A lot of your book is about how AI pricing is very different from other previous traditional pricing strategies. And it feels like every company wants to be an AI company these days, so I think this is going to apply to a lot of people. How is AI pricing different?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:27:51):
Yeah, AI pricing is very different from the previous vintage of companies. Why is that so? Because AI founders need to tackle monetization from the very early days, like day one in their seed stage pre-seed kind of thing, which was not probably the focus for the previous SaaS companies. Why is that? So because of two reasons.

(00:28:11):
One, for the first time there's cost dynamics to actually navigate. So you need to think about monetization from day one. But there's also a more critical reason, which is value capture. Because with AI products, you're actually bringing a lot of value to the table. And if you don't capture that from day one, then you're training your customers to expect more for less.

(00:28:31):
So for instance, think about this. If you're building a agentic AI product that taps into labor budgets, labor budgets are 10X compared to software budgets. So if you use all the old playbooks, then you're under monetizing, again, from day one and training your customers to expect more for less. So how do you come up with foundational models that actually allow you to capture the value that you bring to the table?

(00:28:55):
And why has this become critical? Because with AI, finally, founders can really solve the attribution problem. In the previous vintages... For instance, if you take Slack, you can say that the productivity went up, efficiency happened, but you cannot measure it, monitor it, attribute it to Slack. Okay, that's probably why they were in a seed-based pricing model.

(00:29:17):
But in today's situations, you see companies that say, "In a Fortune 100 company, I was able to improve throughput by 10%, reduce crap by 5%." And when you get into those kinds of situation where an AI is creating core value and it's attributable to the AI, you get a lot of pricing power.

(00:29:35):
So the two questions that we commonly hear from AI founders is, "How do I set the right pricing model?" as in, "How do I charge?" which becomes way more important than how much you charge. Because the underlining business model has changed. We have moved from software being a pay for access to now you're paying for work delivered. So the monetization model's become key. That is the first question that people actually ask us.

(00:30:05):
The second one is, "How do I navigate POCs, commercial discussions early?" Because the buyer on the other side also wants to see the value before they engage in a commercial discussion." So those two topics become very critical, and we have showcased a lot of this in the book.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:23):
This episode is brought to you by Persona, the adaptable identity platform that helps businesses fight fraud, meet compliance requirements, and build trust. While you're listening to this right now, how do you know that you're really listening to me, Lenny? These days, it's easier than ever for fraudsters to steal PII, faces, and identities. That's where Persona comes in.

(00:30:44):
Persona helps leading companies like LinkedIn, Etsy, and Twilio securely verify individuals and businesses across the world. What sets Persona apart is its configurability. Every company has different needs depending on its industry, use cases, risk tolerance, and user demographics. That's why Persona offers flexible building blocks that allow you to build tailored collection and verification flows that maximize conversion while minimizing risk. Plus, Persona's orchestration tools automate your identity process so that you can fight rapidly shifting fraud and meet new waves of regulation.

(00:31:19):
Whether you're a startup or an enterprise business, Persona has a plan for you. Learn more at withpersona.com/Lenny. Again, that's with P-E-R-S-O-N-A .com/Lenny.

(00:31:34):
Let's talk about this POC piece because I think this is something a lot of people deal with. And then I want to talk about this two-by-two that you have in the book. And I'll actually pull it up. So let's talk about POCs first.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:31:43):
So POCs, when we talk about POCs, many founders think about a POC as a proof of technical functionality, and is their product actually working in their customer environments. And they set up the expectation that we are saying, "Hey, we are going to put the product, and we're going to see if it actually works." And they would probably say, "Should I charge for a POC versus not?" And we'll unpack that in a bit, should you or should you not.

(00:32:10):
And that's actually a completely wrong way of framing it. The POC should be framed as the entire goal of the POC is to create a business case, period, full stop. It is not to demonstrate product functionality fit within your customer environment's ability to integrate. All of that stuff is a consequence of the business case.

(00:32:30):
So if you frame it this way is you can say, "Look, it is a 30-day pilot for co-creating an ROI model and building a business case along with their users. If we see value at the end of the 30 days based on the business case, we can get to commercial discussions." So that way you've actually not talked about your price. You're only focused on co-creating a business case with the customer. And based on the business case, you can actually come up with a proper commercial agreement. And if they see value, they're going to pay you for it. So thinking about the POCs in that kind of manner.

(00:33:03):
And the question that I often get asked is, "Should I charge for a POC?" And the answer is yes, but smartly. Let's talk about why it's important to charge. The reason you need to charge for a POC is you start isolating people who are just tire kickers versus serious buyers. It becomes a lead qualification mechanism. If you didn't have that, you're going to attract all of these curious buyers who are just curious about AI. They just want to see if it works or not. They will say, "Yes, I'll engage with the POC." They will take 30, 60, 90 days with you. They will burn a lot of resources, never buy. You've just wasted your time. Time is of the essence. So having a price tag to your POC actually indicates that there is seriousness on both sides, so you should charge.

(00:33:48):
But how do you actually charge for it? You need to charge for it smartly. What this means is that you need to make sure that your POC pricing is not a reflection of your actual commercial deal. Because let's say if you just say it's a 10K POC for a 30-day pilot. If you don't talk about the fact that it is not the same as your commercial discussion, you have now set an anchor that, okay, it's 120K per year kind of deal if the POC works. So you have to be clear that the 10K is only for building a business case. Commercial discussions will follow after that. It is not an indication of the actual commercial discussion.

(00:34:28):
But your buyer on the other side might still push you saying, "That's all great, but I need a price or a budget, otherwise I won't move forward with it." So there are two ways to actually deflect those kind of questions. The first way is contextualize the price on the value. So you can say something like, if you're pushed for price, "Hey, for customers such as yours, we have been able to at least unlock 10 million in very similar situations. And our pricing is... One is to 10X when it comes to ROI."

(00:34:58):
So you basically said that you're a million dollars to actually get started, but you actually didn't say it. You just said, "It's a 10 million, and I'm taking one in 10 in exchange for it." So you've given the buyer an indication, but you've framed it in such a manner that actually is justifiable, right? A one in 10X ROI. So that's one way to do it.

(00:35:16):
They might still say, "Yeah, that's good, but I need a budget." So then rather than just give them a budget saying, "It could be a 200K option," don't do that. That's the worst thing you can actually say. Give them a range. You can say something like, "Look, the final pricing would be anywhere from 500K to a million. And based on the business case that we would co-create with you, we can pick a point in that range that justifies the value that we bring to the table." So you're giving budgetary ranges, right? So that's the other way to actually go about POCs.

(00:35:46):
So how you navigate your early wins, who you choose is very critical when you're building companies at scale and fast in AI because that actually dictates the destiny for the rest of your future. And picking those early wins is very, very critical. And having buyers who are serious, lead qualifying, having the right POC process, and thinking about POCs as, frankly, not just trying to see if your product actually works and delivers value, but it's a great chance to have a commercial test-and-learn experiment and have fun with it and try to see what you can bring to the table in terms of your value and what portion can you actually take.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:26):
So the core takeaway here is, for AI companies, you no longer can just grow and figure out monetization later. Your advice here is what you start with is what you're going to end up with, and it's very easy to under monetize because people aren't realizing that they're now helping with actual labor force savings versus just SaaS software that's making people a little bit more efficient.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:36:50):
Yeah, absolutely. I mean, I strongly believe that the winners in AI will need to master monetization, and they need to master it from day one. And when we talk to early-stage founders, it is a topic that keeps many people up at night, but that's also why we wrote Scaling Innovation and other assets so that they can get some more courage to think about pricing correctly from day one. And it's become very critical for AI companies to do that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:16):
Do you feel like the popular IDE startups, I won't name names, do you think they've under monetized and they're going to be in trouble down the road?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:37:24):
Some of them for sure have. I think they will probably run out of it because they might show a lot of, let's say, fast revenue growth, but is that enduring revenue? Are people actually going to stay? And is there going to be churn? And so there are a lot of aspects to marketing profitable growth. It's not just growing fast, but also growing profitably and having an enduring business. So some of them, yes, without naming names. But yeah, I think that's why it's important to be thoughtful about market share and wallet share.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:54):
Well, those are different. I think what you're saying here is the retention may not work for some of these companies. But on the other hand, they're really cheap. 20 bucks a month to help your engineer be 10 times more productive potentially, is that too good a deal? Do you think they should have priced a lot higher?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:38:11):
Yeah, for sure. I mean, if you're bringing a lot of value to the table and you started training your customers to expect $20 a month and you anchored yourself on a low price point, I think there are companies that have actually done that. And they try to undo it with having more sophisticated, let's say, products that are actually higher priced or much higher priced, et cetera. That's one way to undo that situation.

(00:38:32):
So it's really a trade-off between getting more customers and making money at the same time. That's the whole point of the book, market share and wallet share, and how do you dominate both. So if they're being thoughtful about both and have a vision to not just grow market share, but also have a clear strategy to land and expand and increase wallet share, those strategies might pan out for those types of companies. If you just threw out a $20 product hoping to just accelerate your market share, you're in trouble.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:59):
Okay. This is a great segue to this two-by-two, which goes much deeper into this. So it's easy to be like, "Here's what you shouldn't do." Here's your advice on what to actually do. So I'm going to pull up on my screen this two-by-two that you have in your book. So if you're watching YouTube, you'll be able to see it.

(00:39:13):
So talk about this. This is essentially how to figure out the best possible pricing model and where you have the most power.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:39:20):
So when you talk about AI companies and monetization models, we get asked this question. "Should I be usage-based? Should I be outcome? Should I be a copilot mode? Or how do I actually think about my pricing model?" So we came up with this framework, which is a relatively simple, straightforward framework, but very powerful.

(00:39:39):
So there are two axes here. One is attribution, and the other one is autonomy. And when you have high attribution and high autonomy, that is when you have high pricing power, and we'll come back to that in a bit, right?

(00:39:51):
So let's take the first bottom-left quadrant. That is the quadrant where your attribution is low and your autonomy is low. In that situation, the best pricing archetype that actually fits is it is actually a seed-based or a subscription model because there's not much to do about it because you're not being able to attribute a lot of value to what you bring, but you're in a copilot mode and you're not in an autonomous mode, so a seed-based pricing would actually make sense.

(00:40:18):
But if you're at that quadrant, the immediate thing to think about is, how do you actually build more attribution and move to the right so that you actually get more pricing power? So if you think about the bottom-right quadrant, those are companies that have actually done that. They can prove more attribution to what they actually bring to the table, but they are still not in a fully autonomous mode, as in there is still humans in the loop.

(00:40:43):
If you take Cursor, for instance, it definitely improves productivity, can actually bring down the time to actually do code, the attribution is clear, but it's still in a copilot mode. In those kind of situations, a hybrid pricing model is the best option where you still have a seed-based model for the copilot kind of use case, but you also layer in a consumption model which actually says there are a certain number of AI credits or tokens that can layer in the usage aspects. So if you use more and more, then you're actually paying more on consumption. So it's a hybrid model that actually works there.

(00:41:18):
If you look at the top-left quadrant, those are products that are very autonomous but are not strong on attribution. So these tend to be mostly backend or infrastructure kind of products that are core critical to run businesses, can be autonomous, but they're not directly impacting the KPIs that businesses are tracking, and hence cannot prove attribution very effectively. So in that situation, you need to be on a pay-for-what-you-consume and a usage-based model. A seed-based model would not make sense because it's autonomous. There's no human in the loop. But that's why you're also in a usage-based model, saying the more you use it, the more you're actually charged. And usage becomes a proxy for the value that you bring to the table.

(00:42:07):
The quadrant that you really want to be in is the golden quadrant, which is the top-right one. That's the outcome-based pricing model where you have great autonomy and great attribution. And here is where I think AI can be really magical. So this means you're not only charging for work delivered, but you're charging for work delivered that was delivered by AI without no humans in the loop. So that becomes more of an outcome-based model situation.

(00:42:35):
So a classic example here is Intercom for Fin. What they actually do is they charge based on an AI resolution. So if an AI is able to resolve the ticket completely independently without a human in the loop, then they charge for it. If a human intervention is needed, they don't charge for it. So they're more on an outcome-based model. Or companies like Charge Flow would charge up to 25% on a charge bag that they're able to actually recover, because these are core savings that you actually bring to the table based on your AI. It is highly attributable, highly autonomous so you can start moving towards an outcome-based pricing model.

(00:43:14):
If you look at the state of where AI is today, as of the day of recording this podcast, now, the most popular model is right now a hybrid pricing model. So because this is also expected, because the previous SaaS playbook was usually on the seat-based model, but they've all now moved on to at least a hybrid to actually incorporate AI credits and usage, et cetera, about 5% of companies are probably in a true outcome-based pricing model as of today. But those companies, some of the best ones are able to recover 25 to 50% of the value that they actually bring to the table.

(00:43:54):
In the classic SaaS situation, we used to say if you can charge 10 to 20% of the value, that's actually great. But in AI, you can actually charge 25 to 50% because it is autonomous, you're doing it with the AI. There's no humans in the loop. You are creating incremental value to the business metrics. You are producing hard-cost savings. There's opportunity costs. You can justify all of that. It's attributable. So you can actually take 25 to 50% of what you bring to the table.

(00:44:22):
In a lot of benchmarks and studies that actually show, and this is also my belief, that in the next three years that 5% number will move to 25%. So what this really means is if you want to win in AI, figure out a way to get to that quadrant because that's a magic quadrant. If you can truly price based on outcomes, you've achieved and unlock tremendous value.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:49):
Wow. Okay. I'm just going to pause again. This is amazing. Madhavan, thank you so much for it. I love, again, that you just spent years, decades studying this stuff, come here, tell us all the answers of what we should be doing. This is incredible.

(00:45:01):
Let me ask you this. By the way, for folks not watching on YouTube, the companies you have in the golden quadrant, outcome-based pricing, Sierra, Fin, and Chargeflow. We've got the founder of Sierra and Fin coming on the podcast soon, so we'll talk about all this with those guys.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:45:16):
Awesome.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:18):
So is the way to use this two-by-two figuring out your model? Is it like, "Okay, I'm like Cursor. I'm going to go in this quadrant," or is it, "How do I get to outcome-based no matter what? That's where I need to be"?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:45:32):
Yeah, so that's a great question. The first one is to actually figure out what is your right archetype based on where you are today. I think that is most important. If you try to rush into an outcome-based pricing model but cannot prove attribution, you will fail. So it is really coming up with what is the right archetype based on what I'm doing today, but also use this two-by-two to say, "How do I paint a vision to actually get to outcome based? And can I get close to that? Or can I be purely an outcome-based model? How do I evolve into that?"

(00:46:05):
What that would mean is, how do I build functionality in the products to actually show attribution, how do I build more agentic workforces to take the human out of the loop and be more autonomous, and being thoughtful about your vision and strategy so that you will orient yourself towards more outcome-based pricing models. So when you think about increasing attribution, that means, first of all, understanding what are the KPIs of your customers. How do they track their business performance? Can you impact it? Can you productize things in your product that showcase that you are actually affecting those KPIs in a positive manner? Can you build dashboards to show value attribution? Can you do those value audits that we talked about on an ongoing basis to actually show that you're bringing a lot of value to the table and is attributable to you? So how do you create these kind of attribution mechanisms become important and also autonomous based on building more agentic workforces that can actually be on an autonomous mold?

(00:47:04):
So pick the right archetype and plan to get to as close as you can to the outcome-based pricing model. That's how I would use the two-by-two. And you actually kind of see this happening with certain industries, right? If you think about coding as a overall category... Like back in the day with GitHub, everyone, they started with a seed-based model. They've now moved to the hybrid-based pricing model with Cursors and everyone else, but the natural move would be more towards a outcome-based pricing model where a AI agent can probably code everything at the same time, debug it, and you're kind of almost hiring a AI developer or AI QA person. And that actually becomes more closer to a outcome-based model because it's attributable and autonomous. So that is picking the right archetype and then figuring out your pathway is the key way to interpret this two-by-two.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:56):
This explains why everyone's pulling agents. That's where the money's at, what you're telling us here.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:48:00):
Yeah. It's going to be the age of The Matrix. Too many agents.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:04):
Agent Smiths everywhere. They didn't turn out too great. So what I'm hearing is if I were Canva... So Canva here in your model is bottom right. They're in a hybrid pricing model. They have a base fee and consumption fee. What you would do if you were helping Canva is what can you build that creates more autonomy, an autonomous version of Canva? And it's not like you need to do this. It's just you have more pricing power if you figure something out there.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:48:31):
Exactly. And a good case for that is the Fin product from Intercom. Because traditionally, all of those kind of companies used to price based on an agent basis. How many customer service agents are actually using the product? It used to be seed based, but they built out Fin, which is a completely AI resolution for those kind of support tickets. And then that actually enables them to move to the outcome-based pricing model quadrant.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:56):
Amazing. So say you're an AI founder today. You're thinking about your pricing strategy, your monetization strategy long term. Your advice is work with design partners, create these POCs where you work on this ROI model with them to ideally find some outcome-based pricing strategy. Is that a good way to summarize it? What would you add to that?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:49:17):
Yes. I mean, at least be able to contextualize the business case. Even if you're not moving to an outcome-based pricing model, be clear on the outcome that you're actually creating for your customers through that business case, which actually will enable you to charge a fair price in exchange for that outcome. And if your customers agree with the business case, then you can actually take a portion of that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:43):
Fin, actually, they're a new sponsor of the podcast, and I learned... I didn't know this. It costs 99 cents for every support ticket they solve [inaudible 00:49:51].

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:49:51):
Through AI.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:52):
Through AI.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:49:53):
Exactly. If it needs a human intervention, then they don't charge for it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:56):
Yeah. And it's just like, what? That's such a simple story. Your agent costs 20 bucks. This thing costs 99 cents

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:50:03):
Yeah. That is two chapters in one beautifully simple pricing and an outcome-based pricing model.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:09):
And interestingly, they were the most hated pricing model initially. I did a survey on Twitter ones, like, "What products do you pay the most for?" and it was always Intercom. And everyone hated their pricing, and they found a solution.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:50:21):
I think they found a great solution.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:23):
Okay. So is there anything else along these lines that you think companies, especially AI companies, should be thinking when they're thinking about pricing that you'd want to share before we move on to other stuff?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:50:34):
I think we've covered most of the topics. Like we said, it's being thoughtful about POCs, choosing the right pricing archetype or the pricing models. Those things become very critical in the early stages. But when you start scaling and, let's say, you become a multi-product company, then you need to start focusing on, "What kind of packaging strategy should I have? Is it a platform plus add-ons? Should I have versions of the products like good, better, best? Should I tackle different use cases because now my AI can solve an insurance use case and a healthcare use case? Should I productize to different use cases? Is that my packaging strategy? Or should I keep it completely modularized for people to pick and choose?"

(00:51:17):
So these kind of questions become more critical, and that's why the chapter on blowing up your packaging from your early days and coming up with your packaging strategy for your scale-up phase become very critical. So I think that's the next thing that founders would be hit with, as in when they build multiple products, they need to think about the whole packaging, cross-selling, up-selling motion.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:37):
This touches on something I was about to ask, which is a change in your pricing strategy. How often is it a success to change the way you price? I know we're talking about you need to get it right from the beginning if you're an AI company. In your experience, how often... What does it take to successfully shift the way you price down the road if people are listening to this and are like, "Shit, we already have this pricing strategy"?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:52:00):
Back in the day, we used to say that you should revisit your pricing strategy, overall pricing model, how much you're charging at least once in two years. With AI, that's probably reduced in half because of the scale with which and the speed with which companies are built and competing.

(00:52:16):
So I would say that it is an ongoing journey. It is not like you just solve it in day one, fill it, and forget it. You have to be thoughtful from day one, but also be ready to pivot, iterate, and you're going to learn along your journey. So the whole point is to think about pricing as also a test-and-learn opportunity in your early days.

(00:52:38):
And there are things that you would change more often, and there are things that you probably don't want to change too often. Things like pricing model, unless you really changed your attribution autonomy, there is no need to shift your pricing model. Stay within that archetype. Don't confuse things.

(00:52:54):
But there are things like price points. Should I increase my price because it's been six months a year? Yeah, you should. Because in a year there's probably prices go up three to 5% for everything that you consume. But how can you actually increase your prices and be thoughtful about it? So that entire chapter on how to do price increases smartly become very important in the scale-up phase.

(00:53:16):
I think Warren Buffett summarized this really well. He said the true definition of a company is a pricing power. And if you have a prayer session for doing a 10% price increase, you have a terrible business. So you have to be able to increase prices over a bit of time. But how do you do it strategically that does not affect too much churn, but you're also able to pass on the increase as a value exchange, those things become critical.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:39):
Awesome. Zooming out a little bit, something that I love about your book is you structured it around these axioms. You have a bunch of these really clever axioms that get stuck in your head and help you think about pricing. Can you share some of your favorites, maybe two or three referred axioms from the book?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:53:55):
You talked about Sierra being in your park founders. I don't know if that's Clay, but here's a shout-out for Clay. So Clay actually read the entire book and gave me feedback, Scaling Innovation, the similar copy that he actually had. I called it Scaling Innovation Axioms throughout the book. And the whole point of the axioms was that at the end of the day, if you can just take all the axioms, put it in a printout next to your desk is the summary of the book. And it's like PT statements that you'll just remember what to do.

(00:54:26):
So he came up with this idea that, "Hey, rather than calling them just generic scaling innovation axioms, you need to brand each and every axiom." And I thought that was a brilliant idea. So I went about coming up with a unique... He even contributed to some of the names. We came up with some unique names for each axiom.

(00:54:45):
And here's the other fun fact. Probably I'm geeking out too much. But when I counted the number of axioms, there were 42 axioms. And I didn't try to make this up. And if you're a Hitchhiker's fan, then you know that's the answer to everything.

(00:54:58):
But jokes apart, let me unpack a few axioms. One of my first favorite axioms, what I call is the 20-80 axiom. Especially in tech companies, 20% of what you build drives 80% of the willingness to pay. But the irony is that the 20% is the easiest thing to build often. So what founders do is they take this 20%, build it, put it out in the market almost for free, and then they're chasing their tails to build 80% stuff that's only driving 20% willingness to pay. So if you have not been thoughtful about that, you've given the farm away unintentionally.

(00:55:37):
So truly understanding what drives willingness to pay in your product is critical. And I think people call it the MVP. I think we should change the definition of MVP. It shouldn't be minimum viable product, it should be the most valuable product. And be thoughtful about what are you actually giving out as your early products I think is key. That's the 20-80 axiom.

(00:55:58):
Probably my second one is the price paralysis axioms. So what that means is your reluctance to do a price increase is often internal and emotional and it's not external and logical. This goes back to the same prayer session to actually do a price increase. If you're holding hands, you have a terrible business. So it's mostly internal and emotional, and how do you be thoughtful about price increases become important.

(00:56:29):
Probably my third favorite one is stopping churn before it happens, so stopping churn axiom. So to stop churn, you need to attract customers who won't leave. That sounds counterintuitive, but that's the best way to actually stop churn. What does this actually mean? Most companies will try to stop churn when someone actually says, "I want to go." It is too late, and you're being reactive. At the most, you'll throw some offers. They will stay for another six months, and they will leave. They've already made that determination.

(00:56:59):
The way to stop churn is to start acquiring customers who won't leave. And that is the most important thing. So if you look back at your data and say, "Who are the types of customers who actually tend to stay longer? What are their characteristics? How can I focus my acquisition dollars in getting more of those?" then you stop churn before it happens. And that's the key.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:22):
That's interesting. I'm surprised you didn't say what was my favorite, which is... I think it's like, "If you land, make sure to expand."

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:57:28):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:29):
That one really stuck with me.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:57:29):
That's a good one, too.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:29):
Maybe talk about that one. Yeah.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:57:32):
Sure. I mean, so if you land, you need to also make sure you're expanding, in the sense that if you give the farm away in your entry-level product, you don't have much to actually monetize later. So being thoughtful about what is the fence between your land product. Is it a free experience? What is the getting? And the getting is typically based on are you getting based on features? Are you also getting on usage? And how do you be thoughtful about that? So you leave stuff for the expansion.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:02):
Okay. So zooming out even further, to kind of wrap up, what would you say is the biggest lesson you want founders to take away that they think they understand but they probably don't?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:58:14):
Yeah, I think this comes back to what you started with. I think intuitively people get it that they need to think about market share and wallet share if they're growing. And even if you ask them, they'll say like, "Yeah, yeah, I'm thinking about wallet share," but have they really thought about it equally and paid equal attention? Have they postponed one of them? Are they operating in a single-engine strategy consciously or subconsciously? I think that's the key takeaway I have.

(00:58:40):
So the contrarian take is not to put equal effort on both the engines at the same time. In certain stages of your company, you might need to be more market share dominating. In certain stages you might need to be wallet share dominating. It's not equal effort, but it's equal attention and really developing that mindset of being a true profitable growth architect. And that is the main takeaway that I have for people. And if you are not in that mindset already, there's a book for you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:12):
I'll point them to it. So just so folks know what to do when they're like, "Okay, I need to focus on wallet share more," is the main focus figure out a pricing model that aligns well with pricing power, what's in the bucket of work to do to invest more in wallet-share thinking?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:59:28):
So it's actually all of those. Market share, wallet share, acquisition, monetization, retention are all kind of correlated. You can't think about them in isolation. So I wouldn't say only for wallet share what do you need to do. If you want to grow on both the market share and wallet share... Let's say, for instance, you need to have the right land-and-expand strategy. The land helps you with acquisition. The expansion helps you with wallet share.

(00:59:54):
If you have a pricing model, then you need to have a pricing model that lets you acquire faster because it's intuitive, but it should also help you recover value, which is like your monetization. And if people understand your pricing model, they're actually going to stay. So it's all sort of goes hand in hand. So I wouldn't isolate thinking one way or the other. That's why the nine strategies actually are very powerful. Because if you follow those strategies, you are not going to fall into the single-engine strap. These are tried and tested strategies of how to build businesses in such a way that you're being thoughtful and paying equal attention to both market share and wallet share.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:34):
All right. That is a very reasonable answer. Madhavan, is there anything else you wanted to share or leave listeners with before we get to a very exciting lightning round?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:00:41):
Read the two books in sequence, Monetizing Innovation and Scaling Innovation. Because it's one thing to build a great product, it's yet another thing to build a great business. You cannot build a great business with a not-so-great product, and you cannot do it the other way around either. So I think it's thinking about pricing early, especially for AI companies, being thoughtful about it, price before product, and then thinking about how to actually scale, developing a profitable growth mindset. All of these things become critical. And I'm looking forward to the feedback from the audience.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:16):
I feel like your books are in the staple of founder reading. There's all these things you just don't know what you're doing. And there's a few of these books that are like, "Okay, here's all this advice that'll answer so many questions and save you so much heartache." And so I'm really excited you're adding something to that bookshelf. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:01:16):
Okay. Let's go.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:36):
Let's go. What are two or three books that you find yourself recommending most to other people?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:01:41):
The first one that comes to mind is Business Model Canvas by Alex Osterwalder. It's a classic and one of my favorite books. I recommend a lot of people to read that because I think it nicely ties a lot of what we are also seeing from a more strategic business model angle.

(01:01:57):
I like this book, Thinking Fast, Thinking Slow. I think that's also a classic because, again, there's always a human element to things. And understanding the customer psychology is important whether you're in B2C or in B2B. Because if you're in a B2B situation, it's humans having a human conversation. So it's as much behavioral as it's actually numbers. So I love that book, and there's a lot of nuggets in there, so I recommend a lot.

(01:02:20):
And probably the third one that I recommend is a book called Contagious by Jonah Berger. I love that. He was in the PhD program at Stanford in marketing, and he actually wrote this book on how to make messages viral. And he's actually seen the best viral messages and boiled it down to a framework. And if you follow that, then you can make those messages viral. And I've tried to use some of those in my own outreaches and things of that nature, so I think it's a fantastic read.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:51):
Wow.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:02:52):
Have you read it?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:53):
Got to check this out. I have not. I haven't even heard of it. All right. We're going to go viral because we got the playbook.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:02:57):
Contagious. That's the name of the book.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:58):
Contagious. Okay. We'll link to that. Is there a recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:03:04):
I guess a movie. Sure, let's pick a movie. Definitely enjoyed Mission Impossible, the final one, eighth in the sequence. I think I find that a whole... I love those, the entire genre, one through eight. But what I kind of like about it is my willingness to pay has constantly increased over a period of time. They could have charged me whatever they wanted for the eighth movie. I would've probably gone and seen it, when I wanted to. So I thought that's an interesting example of a durable brand where your monetization power actually increase over a period of time. So I think I enjoyed the movie. It was great. Yeah.

(01:03:43):
Hey, by the way, I just realized MI stands for Monetizing Innovation and also Mission Impossible. Maybe subconsciously that's why I liked it, too.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:52):
And you're the Tom Cruise character.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:03:53):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:55):
I love how you're the only person in the world that thinks of Mission Impossible through a monetization, willingness-to-pay lens.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:04:00):
Exactly. I think there's too many of these dinner conversations also gravitate towards pricing and monetization. I think it's become my life.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:09):
Oh, man. We need a version of this movie, like a Mission Possible of Madhavan.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:04:14):
Sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:14):
I'd pay anything for that. All right. Next question. Do you have a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:04:22):
I would probably talk about two products. The first one is Delphi, the Digital Mind representation. There's a Lennybot that you actually, I think, put out. I find that product fascinating, and I also love the founders, Dara and Sam there. I truly believe that that is going to be the future for thought leadership and how thoughts are consumed by consumers.

(01:04:46):
And I've used your Lennybot. I really enjoy it, like if I can co-create some thought leadership piece with talking to you, but it's not you, your AI, and it's actually living and breathing your brain. How cool is that? And I think that I really love the product category. There's a lot of different use cases, longevity, extension, use cases, things of that nature. I'm excited about the product. I think it's been great. I plan to, taking inspiration from you, plan to create a Delphi of myself-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:15):
Okay. I was going to ask.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:05:15):
... at some point.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:15):
Okay.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:05:16):
I think it should be [inaudible 01:05:17]-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:16):
So that one would... Yeah.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:05:18):
... the book maybe. I'll try to. That's the promise. Try to keep it ready. So I think if you want to talk more about the book or things of that nature and talk pricing, you can talk to my AI, too, right? I mean, I find the product fascinating.

(01:05:31):
The second one I would probably say that's been super useful in terms of just productivity is Granola. We love that product. I think just the ability to take notes and during all the meetings and organize it and being able to query things, et cetera. I think it's been a great product that we recently started trying and we've been really liking it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:51):
Cool. That's been the most mentioned product recently. How cool is that? Love Granola. Get a year free of Granola if you're a paid subscriber to my newsletter, lennysnewsletter.com. Click bundle, one year free for not just you, your whole team. What an offer they offered. It's crazy.

(01:06:05):
On Delphi, what's interesting about LennyBot is it's not just my knowledge, it's every single podcast guest's insights and lessons also fed into it. What an oracle of knowledge this thing's become. And it's free at this point, completely free. Lennybot.com. No, I get nothing from it. It's just out there.

(01:06:24):
Okay, next question. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to and find useful in work or in life?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:06:32):
Create value in everything and anything that you touch. Everything else will follow. That's my life motto.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:40):
That resonates deeply. Okay, last question. You recently moved into investing. So what's cool is it used to be very expensive to work with at Simon-Kucher, I think it was called. Very expensive. A lot of big company stuff. Now a lot of more founders have access to you because you're investing in startups. So just talk about that. Talk about what you're doing these days.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:07:00):
Sure. I mean, at Simon-Kucher, I got to work with over 250 companies. And my co-GP now, Josh Bloom, he also had an opportunity to work with our 250 companies. So combined, we worked with our 500 companies, more than 50-plus unicorns. It was a great ride.

(01:07:16):
And often, we were actually working with them in much later stages when series D or pre-IPO, post-IPO, private equity companies, et cetera. But the two of us actually now started a venture firm with an explicit goal of working with early-stage AI founders. And it goes back to the topic that we started with. AI companies needs to deal with monetization from day one. But for those kind of companies, fee-for-service transaction model doesn't necessarily work. And that's also why we pivoted to venture.

(01:07:51):
So our business model is pretty standard right now. You get access in the cap table. We roll up our sleeves and work with the founders in all things monetization. So we are invested in their success and we will partake in the value creation. There's no fee for service, no friction on those kind of manners. But on the flip side, we get to concentrate our efforts in fund one and probably 20 to 25 companies, and that's where we will be spending our time.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:16):
What a deal. Madhavan, two final questions. Where can folks find you if they want to reach out and talk about this offer? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:08:25):
Ways to find out, I think just google for Monetizing Innovation and Scaling Innovation. You'll probably land in a lot of pages. You can also go to Amazon, I think, if you want to purchase the books. Actually, Scaling Innovation is now available in pre-order. I think we'll have the pod released before the book is actually out. The book is going to be out on August 5th. So there's an opportunity to pre-order.

(01:08:48):
And maybe I will take an inspiration from your master bundle, which I really think is the world's best bundle, and come up with my own bundle for getting users to pre-order. So if you love Monetizing Innovation, I can tell you you would really love Scaling Innovation. So go buy it for your teams. Buy it for yourself.

(01:09:06):
And here's the offer. So for anyone who's able to buy more than five copies, send us a screenshot of your purchase pre-order, right? Send us a screenshot of your purchase to promo@49palmsvc.com. So that's promo, as in promotion, @49 P-A-L-M-S-V-C .com.

(01:09:30):
And here's the bundle offer that I have. 10 people will get access to bundles as a raffle, and the bundle is going to include a signed copy of Scaling Innovation, a 30-minute ask-me-anything session, an exclusive invite for a Scaling Innovation book launch, and also a Scaling Innovation t-shirt. So that's my coming up with a bundle. I didn't get Granola and others to put in for me just yet, but I think this hopefully suffices and is exciting for folks to buy.

(01:10:01):
And, yeah. I mean if you like the book, please do leave a review on Amazon. That always is helpful. Because if more people review it, the book takes a life of its own. And I'm really thankful for also the support that I got over the years from founder community, from the venture community for Monetizing Innovation. I think there's been, over the last eight years, thousands and thousands of fans of the books. They've done a whole lot talking about it, writing reviews, posting on LinkedIn, and making things like price before product or product market price fit and things as a part of founder vocabulary. So I'm very passionate that people actually did that and very thankful for them. So there's also probably an equal measure. If you're excited about Scaling Innovation, I would love for you to talk about the book.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:55):
Amazing. And I think the reason people do that is because you give away so much for free. You just shared so much wisdom for free that is going to help so many people, so it all comes back to you.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:11:05):
I just tried to plan my give and get right there.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:06):
There we go. Oh my God. A good callback. Madhavan, this was incredible. Thank you so much for being here.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:11:13):
Thank you so much, Lenny. Was a pleasure.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:15):
Same. Bye, everyone.

(01:11:18):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:00:00):
When we talk about pricing, many people quickly gravitate to dollar figures. That's just a price point, that's a dollar figure. But when we think about price, we think about it as a measure. Like liter is a measure of volume, price is a measure of value. And when you think of it this way, it really stands for, do people actually want your product and would they actually buy it? And that is their whole willingness to pay conversation. And entrepreneurs and companies need to do this much earlier so that they can understand, are they on the right track?

Lenny (00:00:31):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast. I'm Lenny and my goal here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. Today my guest is Madhavan Ramanujam. Madhavan is the author of Monetizing Innovation, the most widely read book on pricing strategy. He's also Senior Partner at Simon-Kucher & Partners, which is the premier consulting agency for companies looking to get help with their pricing. And unsurprisingly, when I asked people on Twitter, who the smartest person on pricing is, Madhavan was by far the most mentioned. In this episode, we get deep into all manner of pricing strategy, specially focusing on five lessons for product teams on thinking about pricing. Enough talking. Let's get into it. I bring you Madhavan Ramanujam after a short word from our wonderful sponsors.

(00:01:18):
This episode is brought to you by lemon.io. You've achieved product market fit. You're able to activate, engage, and retain your customers, but you don't have the engineers that you need to move as fast as you want to, because it's hard to find great engineers quickly, especially if you're trying to protect your burden rate. Meet lemon.io. Lemon.io will quickly match you with skilled senior developers who are all vetted, results oriented and ready to help you grow and all that at competitive rates. Startups choose lemon.io because they offer only handpicked developers with three or more years of experience and strong proven portfolios. Only 1% of candidates who apply get in, so you can be sure that they offer you only high quality talent. And if something ever goes wrong, lemon.io offers you a swift replacement so that you're hiring with a warranty.

(00:02:06):
To learn more, just go to lemon.io/lenny and find your perfect developer or tech team in 48 hours or less. And if you start the process now, you can claim a special discount exclusively for Lenny's Podcast listeners. 15% off your first four weeks of working with your new software developer. Grow faster with an extra pair of hands. Visit lemon.io/ lenny.

(00:02:31):
This episode is brought to you by Mixpanel, offering powerful self-serve product analytics. If you listen to this podcast, you know that it's really hard to build great product without making compromises. And when it comes to using data, a lot of teams think that they only have two choices. Make quick decisions based on gut feelings or make data driven decisions at a snail's pace. But that's a false choice. You shouldn't have to compromise on speed to get product answers that you can trust. With Mixpanel there are no trade- offs. Get deep insights at the speed of thought at a fair price that scales as you grow. Mixpanel builds powerful and intuitive product analytics that everyone can trust, use and afford. Explore plans for teams of every size and see what Mixpanel can do for you at mixpanel.com. And while you're at it, they're hiring. Check out mixpanel.com to learn more.

(00:03:24):
Madhavan, welcome to the podcast.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:03:27):
Thanks Lenny, pleasure to be here.

Lenny (00:03:28):
I am really excited to be chatting. You're known as the smartest, maybe most experienced person on pricing strategy in the world. You literally wrote the book on pricing strategy that everyone seems to read and share and talk about. And so I'm really honored to have you on the podcast.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:03:44):
Thanks for the nice words. I'm excited to be here.

Lenny (00:03:47):
To help folks fully grasp the level of experience that you have around pricing and pricing strategy, could you just talk about, how many companies you worked with, maybe name some companies you can share, maybe how many people bought the book? Anything that you can share about just the level of experience you have in pricing would be helpful.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:04:05):
Sure. So I work as a Senior Partner in a consulting company called Simon-Kucher. We are the world's largest pricing strategy consulting firm. We have about 2000 employees worldwide, in our 43 offices. So I work in our Bay Area offices and I've been here for the last 15 years. So I work primarily with tech companies here in the Bay Area, so that's software, internet marketplace companies, et cetera. So I work with over 250 companies, more than 20 unicorns on everything to do with pricing, monetization, profitable growth and these kind of topics. So companies such as Uber, Asana, DoorDash, LinkedIn, many come to mind. I think you asked about the book Monetizing Innovation that I wrote a number of copies, et cetera. Look, when we first launched the book, I used to track some of these copy sales and everything else.

(00:04:56):
And I quickly realized that the book is only good if it actually creates impact. And that's also why we wrote the book. So the way I measure impact for Monetizing Innovation, literally there's probably someone reaching out on a daily basis saying, hey, I read the book, we could make some impact around pricing monetization in our companies. And to me that's real impact. And that's what keeps me going, because when we wrote the book, we didn't want to write any marketing fluffy crap. We wanted to write something that was more actionable. And to see that people find it actionable and can use it Monday morning to actually make changes, I think that's real impact. But of course the book has done well. It is still in top 10 categories in many categories in Amazon, for instance. It's been six years since we wrote the book.

Lenny (00:05:46):
Wow.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:05:46):
Need a second edition soon.

Lenny (00:05:49):
That's incredible for a software tech oriented book, where they often get really out of date really quickly. I was just reading it and it's amazing how many things still are very true.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:05:59):
The topic is one that is relevant in even years to come. So I think hopefully it's robust that way.

Lenny (00:06:07):
And you talked about the company Simon-Kucher, I'll just add that any smart product leader, growth person that I talk to, they're always talking about how they've worked with you, to figure out their pricing strategies. It's like the company that everyone goes to work with.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:06:20):
The Company. I like that. Maybe we should rebrand ourselves as The Company.

Lenny (00:06:24):
The Company. Let's do it. Let's talk about rebranding next. How did you get into pricing and pricing strategy? How'd you first get into the world and focused your career around it?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:06:36):
I actually happened to stumble in it. It's classic fashion. I was at Stanford Graduate School, both Graduate School of Business and the Engineering School. And we had a lot of startup discussions thinking of creating startup, very classic. And I was this guy who was actually in charge of coming up with the pricing monetization strategy in our teams when we were actually pitching to VCs. And I remember going and pitching our ideas and the VC asked me, how do you know you'll actually make money on this innovation? And I pulled up a spreadsheet, I showed him all the assumptions and I said, so I'm going to do it. And I still remember this, he said, you've labeled them correct those assumptions. How do you truly know? And I was like, oh, I actually don't. I just made stuff up. And within that same week I got a call from the then managing partner of Simon-Kucher, Matt Johnson.

(00:07:27):
And he said, hey, we're starting a pricing and growth strategy consulting firm. You want to come join us? We're looking for Stanford grads and I was like, whoa, I didn't even know you existed. I joined because I actually wanted to get to understand the science behind pricing, not just the art. And that's what I've been focusing on in the last 15 years. And also my education in Stanford was in quantitative marketing. So many of those, let's say theoretical models I could bring back into a practical industry in a relevant sense. So it's been a great journey.

Lenny (00:08:02):
When I think about books that people find most useful and sustain or books that are based on people's real experience doing a thing for a decade, and your book is a great example that, what made you decide to actually write a book? Because I know how hard that is from my wife's experience.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:08:18):
Yeah, I think it probably started with some mini frustration, because we used to get calls from companies saying, hey, we need a pricing strategy, we need a price plan. And they would've invested years probably making the innovation. And then we'd ask them, how long do we have? And they're like, we need it yesterday. So time and again, we witnessed this spray and pray approach. And then we used to ask this simple question, how do you truly know that people will actually pay for your innovation, when you built it? Did you do any studies? Did you actually understand whether there's a product market pricing fit? And usually the answer was no. And then it had to change. When we benchmarked 72% of innovations actually fail from a monetization or commercial perspective, simply because entrepreneurs or companies did not do the check earlier on. Had they done it, they could have probably pivoted the product, built things in a different way and built something that was more meaningful.

(00:09:17):
So we wrote Monetizing Innovation because increasingly we were working with companies more early stage in helping them design the right innovations that customers need and what are they willing to pay for, as opposed to just building a product and slapping on a price. So it was crossing that chasm between knowing and hoping that you would, monetize knowing that you truly will. And that was the motivation for writing Monetizing Innovation.

Lenny (00:09:43):
Awesome. We're going to dive into a lot of these things that you've shared in the book and things you've learned. One more context setting question before we get into it all, which part of the org do you believe pricing strategies should sit in? Is it product sales, finance, marketing, something else?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:09:58):
Pricing by discipline is a cross-functional discipline. You can't talk pricing in isolation of product, finance, sales, et cetera. There's always touch points. So it's extremely cross-functional. Back in the day, probably a decade ago, I used to say pricing needs to sit in finance, because my view was finance would be the counterbalance to sales, especially if you have sales coming up with pricing in a B2B situation, you can set all the pricing you want, it's human having a human conversation. So how do you put checks and balance in some of that? And my view was pricing should sit in finance and it has to report on ultimately to the CFO. I have, over the last decade, I've been actually advocating that they should sit in the product side.

(00:10:40):
And there was also the genesis of Monetizing Innovation because if we truly believe that we need to build products that are simply products that customers need, they love, they value, they're willing to pay for, it is a product function, because you need to be able to design the product around this information, around what customers need, what they value, and what they're willing to pay for, in short, around the price. If you look at Monetizing Innovation, the subtitle of the book is, How Smart Companies Design Their Products Around the Price. So if you take that viewpoint, then pricing needs to sit in the product function or the founder product and report onto this. This is my strong-held belief, one that probably won't change now.

Lenny (00:11:22):
Awesome. That's a great segue to the meat of our conversation. So most of the listeners of this podcast are product builders and people that grow, product managers, founders, people that work on cross-functional product teams. And I was reading a book and I picked five topics that I thought would be especially useful to product leaders to dig into.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:11:44):
Sure.

Lenny (00:11:44):
And the first is the, willingness to pay, conversations. Which I know is foundational to the way that you think about pricing strategy and the advice that you share with people of how to think about pricing. So can you just talk about, just what is willingness to pay as a concept? And then when should founders focus on these conversations to figure out the willingness to pay?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:12:06):
Yeah, absolutely. So I think, look, most of your listeners, most product folks, they probably understand language like product market fit, especially made famous from lead startup and other literature, which is awesome. I think that the issue is, it's not just about product market fit, it is about achieving a product market pricing fit. For instance, if someone comes and asks me, do you like the headset that you're using for this podcast? I'll say, I like it. Do you like it at $200? The whole conversation is different. So if you didn't put pricing as part of your product market fit validation, you're often hearing what you want to hear. It is truly about understanding whether customers are willing to pay for your innovation and willingness to pay is a proxy for, do people actually value your product? And how badly do they actually want the product?

(00:12:56):
And this even comes back to understanding what pricing really is. When we talk about pricing, many people quickly gravitate to dollar figures. That's just a price point, that's a dollar figure. But when we think about price, we think about it as a measure. Like liter is a measure of volume, price is a measure of value. And when you think of it this way, it really stands for, do people actually want your product and would they actually buy it? And that is their whole, willingness to pay conversation. And entrepreneurs and companies need to do this much earlier, so that they can understand, are they on the right track? Think of it this way, if I have the same sales and marketing conversation that I would have with the customer six months before launch of the product, pitch the whole value, and then ask them a simple question, would you pay for this innovation? And if someone says no, chances are you can put all the [inaudible 00:13:47] you want in the next six months, they're going to say the same thing.

(00:13:49):
And if they do say no, the most important question to ask is why. And you start hearing all kinds of information that you can use to design your product and maybe even pivot your product strategy accordingly. So it is literally the litmus test of whether people like your product.

Lenny (00:14:05):
And so if I were to summarize your main point, the ideas, have these conversations right as you're thinking about designing the product. Don't try to just launch it, see how people like it, build a huge audience and then figure out pricing. Your advice is start having those conversations early, right?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:14:22):
Exactly. And the folks that first round summarized this in four words, I thought when they wrote a blog article on this, and they call it, price before product, period. So I think that probably succinct, but really it's really that. Because frankly, Lenny, as an entrepreneur, a company, you actually don't have a choice whether you'll have a pricing conversation with your customer. The only thing in your control is when you will have it. You can build the most awesome innovation, you think is awesome, obsess over the engineering, the product and everything else, and then slap on a price [inaudible 00:14:55] in the market and hope to monetize or have this conversation much earlier, pitch the same sales and marketing pitches, and then try to understand whether people will actually pay for it and then design around this information. And you actually know that you will. So you're maximizing your chances for success. It's simply testing and learning. Everyone in your probably listener base knows tests and learn. We are talking about testing and learning pricing and willingness to pay. Why wouldn't you do that? And why would you postpone that to the very end?

Lenny (00:15:24):
Do you have any examples of products or companies where they have these conversations either way too early, way too late, or even just nailed it?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:15:31):
Here's the thing, there's nothing way too early for this conversation. I even tell people who are early C-stage or just thinking about an idea, I would say, hey, go check, so if someone would actually pay for this idea. And there's some high level ways to actually check for this. And of course there's not about nailing the pricing strategy from get-go, three years before a product is launched, et cetera. It's about understanding whether there is a willingness to pay and then repeating this exercise as you go along so that you can refine and when you're ready to launch the product, you have a much more refined view on what is the willingness to pay. And of course then you're launching the product with a lot more enthusiasm, because you know this is actually going to have a product market pricing fit. So it's about iterating and learning and refining.

(00:16:15):
So there's never too early. Too late, I think is more so the companies, this is why we wrote Monetizing Innovation. Like I told you. 72% of innovations fail and we also categorize them into why they fail. There are only four failure types and I have written about that in the book, so I can leave that for readers to actually go and see it. But all of those failure types happen because the conversation was just too late and pricing was an afterthought. Companies that did it well, maybe one or two examples that I can probably take just to motivate the concept, we talk about in the first chapter a tale of two cars and about how Porsche actually did this. And the example is something like this relevant, Porsche was really looking for launching a new innovation. They came up with an idea. They said, okay, should we launch an SUV?

(00:17:05):
And even before a blueprint was drawn, they basically went and checked with the market, is there a need for an SUV? Would people value it from Porsche? Are they willing to pay for it? And to their surprise, they actually found that. And then what they did next was more fascinating. Every single feature that actually went into the car or the benefit that people had, was battle-tested with customers and no amount of convincing from product or engineering was enough. It had to be battle-tested with customers. Things like, for instance, big cup holder was inside because people loved it, needed an SUV would pay for it. Things like six feet manual transmission. People didn't need an SUVs out of the window. They literally used to bring cars in what is called as car clinics. And they would test for this and they would put people through prototypes before anything is even productized, anything is in the factory floor, where people would actually even drive around the Porsche and say, okay, did they like it? Would they pay for it? Et cetera.

(00:18:05):
And then they would fine tune everything as thing that goes on. So the innovation process is very different from the classic spray and pray, build something, slap on a price, throw it out. It was really designing the product around customer feedback, around willingness to pay. The outcome of the process could also couldn't have been more different than the traditional approach of spray and pray. And this was when they launched this SUV, it was called Cayenne, which we all know now, and it accounts for more than half of Porsche's profit and literally one of the best rolling successes in automotive history. There's just an automotive example, but if I switch gears to more of a tech example or a software example for your audience, there was this company which, think of this as a two-sided marketplace, and I'll just keep it a bit abstract, but I'll tell you the details.

(00:18:56):
Two-sided marketplace, think of this as they were already monetizing on the sell side and the CEO said, okay, let's go and build a product for the buy side that people will buy. So the buy side monetization product strategy. So in classic fashion, all the product folks, product managers, et cetera, they went offsite, generated thousands of post-it notes, design thinking, yada yada, everything. And then they said, okay, we can't take all of these so many ideas to the CEO, let's prioritize it somehow. And they prioritized it to 40 ideas and they took it to the CEO and said, this is what we want to build. And the CEO asked a simple question, how do you truly know you would monetize? It's the same question the VC asked me, back in the day, and they simply didn't know. They were just guessing. So what happened next was they took wire frames, blueprints, they took product concepts and they started testing this with their customers and prospects.

(00:19:55):
So stuff that they actually thought was exciting, often was way down in the list of priorities. And if they didn't do these kind of tests, they would've probably built the product around this. To give you an example, one of the features that they were building was called, or the number one feature that the internal team thought was awesome, they called it Highlight Connections from Facebook. And everyone in the company thought that people would pay for this. It's an awesome feature, they need it, they love it. And the thesis was something like this. As a buyer, if I'm buying the product from the same seller and someone in my Facebook connection has already bought that product from that seller, that's credible information in lieu of reviews and everything else, and people would find it acceptable and pay for this. When they went and tested this and pitched the idea, they got all kinds of reactions.

(00:20:47):
So there was one customer group I remember which said, so yeah, you're telling me I can't pull 200 of reviews and make my own determination? That's unacceptable. That spoils the fun out of actually doing research on products. There was another group of customers who said, do you like it? Yeah, I like it. Would you pay for it? Hell no. And then there was another group which even said, I don't even want anyone in my Facebook circle to know that I'm buying this product. Because there was some, let's say, premiumness associated with this and everything else. They could not find a single set of customers or a segment of customers who said, I love this feature, I would pay for it. If they hadn't done this exercise, they would've built the entire product around this and it would've been a disaster. But because they actually did this, they could prioritize what they were building.

(00:21:36):
Literally, for your product folks, the number one lesson, and I hope this is the biggest takeaway for your audience, you cannot prioritize a product roadmap without having a willingness to pay conversation. If you're just prioritizing based on what you think or what you feel or technical resources, you're getting it wrong. Literally, you can prioritize what you are building based on what customers need, what they value, and what they're willing to pay for. And you can actually do this test and say, what should you be building? The funny thing that I've actually always seen, always, across these hundreds of companies that I've worked, 20% of what you build drives 80% of the willingness to pay, is a classic burrito. And if you don't know this, you're probably all indexing on one or the other. It's much better to find out what is this 20% so that you can focus on it, nail it, and focus on all of the usability around it and make an awesome product as opposed to not knowing what drives the willingness to pay and just trying to put everything out there.

(00:22:38):
And at the worst form, often what happens then is this 20% is the easiest thing to build. And what companies do is they will build it, they will throw it out and they'll say, there's an MVP, give it for free. And then they're trying to chase their tails, building 80% of stuff that is driving 20% of value. So you all already lost the battle. So as a product person or a product builder, you need to prioritize your R&D roadmap based on willingness to pay conversations, exactly like what the two-sided marketplace did, exactly like what Porsche did. And this is the crux of everything that we are talking about.

Lenny (00:23:16):
Amazing. What's interesting about the second example versus the first is in the Porsche example, they started with, we want to charge this much. Let's build a car that we can sell for that much. And the second case, they had a product they were trying to build, and then they figured out which things to build. So it's interesting that this can come along the journey at different places, but the main takeaway is do it early and earlier than you think.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:23:41):
Correct. Either productize to a price point and the willingness to pay, or at least use willingness to pay as an access to prioritize what you're building. Either way, you'll get it right.

Lenny (00:23:50):
Okay, so let's actually talk about how to have these conversations. I imagine that's what a lot of people are wondering right now. It's like, yes, I'm convinced I will have these conversations, but then the classic issue with customers, you ask them what they all do and you can't trust their stories of what they'll actually do. So what advice do you have for folks when they have these conversations? What questions should they ask? What words should they use? I know you have a few frameworks that you suggest, you can talk about that.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:24:15):
Yeah, we can go deep into this and you can pull me back or ask me to go deeper, whatever. It doesn't matter. So I've written an entire chapter in the book, chapter four, it's called How to Have the Willingness to Pay Conversation. If there's one chapter, just read that. It's quite detailed and goes into how to actually do this. But look, if you go and ask someone, how much should I charge for this product? You're actually going to get garbage back. That's your job. No one is supposed to tell you how much to charge, and that's the worst way to have the conversation. There are some really interesting and nuanced ways of having the conversation where you still tease out what people are willing to pay for without directly confronting someone as to what you should be charging. So let me go into a few methods and I can pause to see if you have any questions. So the first one is, what we say is frame.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:25:00):
The first one is, what we say is, "Frame the question in a more relative manner", because, and sometimes I say tongue in cheek, that, "People are absolutely meaningless, relatively super smart." What I mean by that is, if you go and ask someone, "How much should I charge?" You'll get a meaningless answer. But if you actually ask it in a relative way, people actually give responses that are meaningful. So for instance, if you're a B2B SaaS company, and you're trying to see if your product actually has willingness to pay, one way to have that conversation is to say, "Okay. Hey, do your customers, do you use products like Salesforce in your install base?" "Yeah, I do use." "Okay, Salesforce was indexed at 100 in value. Where do you think we are in terms of the value that we bring to your, let's say, day to day business operations?" That people can answer all day long.

(00:25:49):
They might say, "80", they might say, "120", depending on whether you're more or less compared to, let's say, what a Salesforce can do, which is an established [inaudible 00:25:56]. And then if you say, "Okay, if Salesforce was indexed at a 100 in pricing, where do you think we should be?" That also people can say, okay, if they say 110, what they're saying is, you can be more premium than that and we would still pay for it. At least you've gotten some information that is meaningful at a very basic level. So this is some relative ways of asking these questions are the most basic ways of actually doing it.

(00:26:18):
Then we have questions where there's some methods where we actually want to understand, are there some psychological thresholds or budgets when it comes to willingness to pay? So the way to do this is let's take your product that you're going to launch, pitch the value to your customers, have that exact sales and marketing conversation that you'd have after you launch the product, but before. And then you ask them, "What do you think is an acceptable price for this innovation?" Look, everyone would like to low ball, they'll negotiate with themselves. Let them give an answer, clock it, then ask them, "What do you think is an expensive price?" And then follow that with, "What do you think is a prohibitively expensive price?" And across thousands of projects that we have done, what we have come to realize is, acceptable price is the price where people not only love the product, but they also love the price. If you're in true growth mode, maybe you can put it there as a no-brainer price, no friction, et cetera. The expensive price tends to be the price that is value priced, as in, they don't love you, they don't hate you, they would pay you, but that's a neutral reaction. Prohibitively expensive tends to be the price that they'll laugh you out the room. And if you do this at scale, what you'll start seeing is that there are some cliffs in these demand curves, where suddenly, when you cross from let's say 99 to 101, 20 or 30% might say, "It is expensive," or, "Hey, it's prohibitively expensive."

(00:27:42):
And that's what we look for to see if there are some psychological thresholds that if you actually cross, you have a perception of being expensive. So hiding behind some of these psychological thresholds become important. Rahul Vohra from Superhuman actually read the book, and he talked about this in an a16z podcast. He actually used this method to come up with his $30 price point for the Superhuman app. And I think that's a quick and dirty way to actually get to, what is a willingness to pay, and what's a psychological threshold? So I think that's a interesting method that you can do Monday morning.

(00:28:16):
But the key here is to not just ask the question, "What would you pay?" But have that sales and marketing conversation. Tell people where they actually might get the benefits. Basically, exactly everything you would do after launching the product to create awareness and showcase the benefits, do it, and then ask these questions, so that you're priming them to the value that your product gets and you're not just having a random conversation. There are other techniques that go more and more, let's say, rigorous. For instance, purchase probability questions. So if you ask someone, "Okay, would you buy this product?" That's a meaningless question. At least if you ground them on a scale and say, "On a scale of one to five, would you buy it?" One is, "I'm not at all interested", five is, "Most likely I would buy it," or, "I would buy it for certain." And four is, "Most likely", for instance, and three is, "I'm neutral."

(00:29:06):
What we are actually seeing is, even if people say, "Five", they are probably only 30 to 50% sure about whether they would buy, so you can start, and if they say, "Four", it's 10 to 20%. If they say, "Three and below", they're never going to buy it.

(00:29:20):
So if you do this at scale, you can start coming up with, let's say a demand curve. And then say, "Where is the price optimal?" et cetera. So you can understand purchase probabilities. And if someone says, let's say, three, for a certain price point, then you can lower the price and say, okay, would they actually move their ratings to a four or five. So I think these are some simple ways to understand purchase probabilities and elasticities. Two more, if I may, I think, another one is what we call is most and least questions. And the thesis behind this is, if you go and ask people, "Okay, I give them a list of 10 features", let's say. And I say, "Rank them one to 10", most people will find that exercise painful, horrible, because there's always this messy middle where everything is gray. They all look the same.

(00:30:06):
There's a lot of psychological theory that people are very adept at identifying the extremes. When it gets in the between, that's when things become tougher. So what we do is, if we have a list of 10 features that we want to understand whether people have willingness to pay for, when we are prioritizing the R&D roadmap for our clients, we would take a subset of, let's say six or so features out of those 10. And then they say, "In this set of features, identify the most important for you, and the least important." And the most important is defined as, "Must have, I will pay for it." Least important is, "I don't need it. I won't pay for it", connotation. This, people can do all day long, because they're just picking the two. And then we will change the set of six, another combination from the 10, and ask that same question.

(00:30:49):
So if you do this a few times, you will be able to prioritize the entire feature set in a relative fashion, and truly understand what drives willingness to pay. The last method, which gets into more advanced methodology, is what we call is more trade-off exercises. So here, what we do is we put people through actual buying patterns, or actual buying scenarios and say, "Okay, if you had this packaging and pricing, for instance, for your software product, what would you do?" Which is akin to a real life question. You [inaudible 00:31:19] the features, all the price, the number of plans, et cetera.

(00:31:21):
Then we would change that and say, "Okay. If you change the features and the price, how would you react? Would you buy any of these products? Or would you say, I won't choose any of these?" These are more like shopping scenarios for your products, but it's realistic, and it's akin to real life. Based on how they choose these products, what we are trying to reveal is the mental models and rules that people use to make decisions. So for instance, if I add certain amount of features and increase the price, people say, "You know what? I'm not going to buy anything more."

(00:31:50):
What that actually tells you is the addition of those features, people are not willing to pay the addition in terms of price, so they would actually opt out of the lineup that you actually have for your customers. So these kind of things, if you do these kind of exercise, you can get more precise on things like price elasticity, build some simulation models, try to understand how the market would react, et cetera. And different methods are actually applicable at different stages of a product and different stages of a company. If you're very early stage, let's say just an idea, just have the conversation. Just even asking, would you pay for it, is a good question because if someone says no, then ask why.

(00:32:29):
Then you'll hear a lot of good information. If someone says yes, ask them, why would you pay for it, they would articulate back the value that they understood, and that should be in your value messaging. So that's just the simple questions. If you are somewhere in middle, then maybe some of these, if you're in the [inaudible 00:32:44] seat stage, maybe some of the purchase property questions, all of these things can actually be a quick and dirty way to at least get to an answer and a point of view. Or if you're launching a product and it's in late stage or late stage in the product or the company lifecycle, and you need to get more precise in terms of your pricing and packaging strategy, then some of the methods are around trade off exercises, most, least, all of these things become incredibly relevant. Sorry, it was a long answer, but there are so many methods. It's all summarized in chapter four. So just one chapter to read in the book.

Lenny (00:33:15):
That was perfect. Thank you. Amazing. You mentioned that you want to ask why a lot, and that's something you talk about in your book a bunch. I think something like 50% of your questions should be why, after they answer these questions. Is that right?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:33:29):
That's absolutely right. Yeah.

Lenny (00:33:31):
Cool.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:33:31):
I was tempted to ask you why, but that would've not been very relevant.

Lenny (00:33:35):
Nope, not on this question. I might take care of that later. Can you talk about, logistically, how are you asking these? Is this a meeting specifically you set up with a potential customer to talk about pricing? Does it come at the end of, here, I'm pitching you on this product, or I'm trying to get desirability research feedback? What is that meeting set up for on behalf of the customer?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:33:56):
It's usually either a one-on-one conversation with a customer, much early stage, you're a founder and you're having a conversation. It's basically, you're pitching the idea and trying to understand not just product market fit, but a product market pricing fit. Let's say, if you're a bit more late stage and you have a cross-functional team, this could be a conversation that the sales teams could actually be having along with the product teams to actually understand this. That's also what happens in companies like LinkedIn for instance, when they launch a new innovation. The team has to book in a credit card or lock in a budget from a customer for pilot POCs and everything else, and if they don't, they don't necessarily go down the route of productizing it because there was no final verdict on whether people would actually pay for these innovations.

(00:34:38):
That's how I see it. So it depends. If it's early stage, more like founder led early conversations, if it's more late stage, then a cross-functional conversation, but usually, it's a one-on-one with, one-on-one as in with the company, it could be more multiple decision makers. Increasingly, in B2B SaaS for instance, it's not just one person deciding on a software budget, it's a team. So it's usually done with the team having that kind of conversation. It can also be done in terms of focus groups where you bring in a set of customers and then you mediate and moderate answers and trying to get to what is the right thing to do. And often, we also do a quantitative version of this where we are doing more test and learn through either AB testing or, most importantly, through controlled surveys that we would actually have, invite participants to actually participate and then they would give their opinions on these various concepts that we are actually testing. And then we try to understand what is the willingness to pay in the market based on those responses. So from a basic qualitative one-on-one validation all the way to more quantitative testing using other instruments.

Lenny (00:35:45):
So this is usually a part of a larger customer development product market fit discussion, here's a product we're thinking, here's classic user research.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:35:54):
Yes.

Lenny (00:35:54):
Desirability discussion, and at the end you talk about willingness to pay stuff. Is that-

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:35:58):
Yeah, exactly. I would think of it as... I wouldn't say necessarily user research. It's a bit before that. User research probably gets more into usability and how people would actually use it. This is a one step before conversation where you're trying to understand testing and learning, whether people buy into your idea, do they see the value, is there an ROI, and frankly, what needs are you actually solving in the market. This, people can articulate all day long/ what is their jobs to be done or what is their needs paying point. What product to build is your job in some way as a product person. But when you showcase the product and say, okay, this is the product that I'm building which will actually meet this need, you want to see if people's eyes slide up. And that's also when you need to have the willingness to pay conversation because it's not just about saying but actually meaning what you say. And that can only be bought in if you actually use willingness to pay in the conversation. Otherwise, it's a bit of an empty self fulfilling conversation often, so. And then when you actually do this more and more, like I said, [inaudible 00:37:00] or refining things, then you can bring this into other pieces of the conversation and gets more smarter before you launch the product.

Lenny (00:37:09):
Do you have a rule of thumb of how many people you should talk to, at least, to get a pretty good sense of maybe we've gotten some-

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:37:16):
Yeah, I get this question all the time, and I say, please talk to one person. [inaudible 00:37:21] because most companies are not even doing that, in terms of willingness to [inaudible 00:37:25] conversations. But if you're, let's say a B2C company, of course you have scale in terms of reaching customers. You might have hundred thousands and millions of customers, consumers. In those situations, more of a quantitative validation might be easier to run. So if you get even 1,000, 2,000 responses that could be statistically significant and easy to do and pull off. If you're a B2B SaaS company and you're focusing on let's say 20 to 30 accounts leading 80 to 90% of your business, try to talk to as many of those as possible. So at least in the 20 to 30 ballpark. And often in these conversations after a point, you start hearing stuff repeatedly. If 20 people tell you the idea is horrible, it is horrible. You can test it all you want. So when you start hearing these things, then you pivot.

Lenny (00:38:13):
And then once you have your initial thought on what pricing should be, how often do you suggest folks iterate on their pricing strategy?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:38:21):
Yeah. Usually we say at least every six months pause, and think whether you should revisit it. Within 12 to 18 months, probably there is time to revisit, especially given market dynamics in most industry verticals that people are in today. And also, there are some pivot points where it'll make sense to think about this, like you're introducing a new plan or you're introducing some new features. All of those moments in time from a product journey standpoint would necessitate having this conversation.

Lenny (00:38:51):
Got it. Final question on this topic, which we've spent I think half an hour on, which is awesome, because it's probably the most important to start with, but this is going to be a deep episode. What's the first thing that a founder or PM should do to go down the route of willingness to pay, if they were to start something on Monday?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:39:06):
First of all, start educating yourself that there is a science on this topic. It's not just an art. Get confidence that people have done this before. Not only just startups, but companies like Borsch, and then read chapter four and do it.

Lenny (00:39:19):
Okay. Topic two, which I know is really a big deal to you and a core part of the way you think about it in addition to willingness to pay, and it's segmentation. Thinking about how to segment your customers and product. So can you just talk about, broadly, why is this so important to think about segmentation when you're thinking about pricing?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:39:38):
Look, segmentation is a topic, again, just product market fit is a well understood term for many of your listeners. When we go and ask companies, do you have a segmentation strategy, roughly about 60% would say, yeah, we have it. And then when we check it, probably 10% of them actually have a meaningful segmentation strategy. What I mean by this is, most people think of segmentation as a demographic or persona exercise or how do I position this product to different personas and things and they get it horribly wrong. Tongue in cheek, I'll give you this example. If you think about a person who's 70 plus years old, lives in a castle, incredibly wealthy in the United Kingdom, you probably think about Charles, but that also fits Ozzy Osbourne. And I would probably measure that both of them have dramatically different tastes, need different things, value things differently, and are willing to pay for things differently.

(00:40:28):
If you just base things on persona, you often get it wrong. Segmentation needs to be based on what customers need, what they value, and what are they willing to pay for, and how do you productize package to different segments. So the key lesson that I want your listeners to take away is, you need to be able to productize to segments. If you're trying to build a product and try to position it to different segments, you already lost the battle, because segmentation comes down to needs and understanding needs and building products based on those needs and willingness to pay. Show that you can treat your customers differently.

(00:41:03):
Because if you build the same product and want to treat everyone similarly and say you have a segmentation strategy, you actually don't have it. Take a simple example. If you think about the water that we drink in a fountain, it's free. In a bottle, it's $2. You put gas in it, it's $2.50. Throw it in a mini bar, it's $5. It's the same water, but it's packaged, productized differently because people have different needs.

(00:41:27):
I'm price conscious, I want it in a fountain, I want it to carry it around. I probably take in the bottle, I like the taste, I take gas in it, or I'm just simply ultimately lazy and I would pay the $5 to get it out of the mini bar and not go down the hotel lobby and get it for free because that's my need. If you don't understand these needs, you'll never be able to productize to those needs. So you'll just build one product and try to position it to the different needs based segments and you won't get it right for anyone.

(00:41:55):
And we work with all kinds of industry verticals. We have not found a single vertical where our customer, where their clients' needs are homogenous. It is heterogeneous whether you want to accept it or not. And if you accept it, then you would start getting into the heart of segmentation and say, where is that heterogeneity? How do the needs differ in the market? How does a willingness to pay differ in the market and what can I productize to different needs and willingness to pay segments, so productizing to segments, as opposed to building one and positioning it to different segments. Usually, when I walk into these companies, they'll say, "We are building a one size fits all," I would quickly correct them and say, "One size fits none." So it's a bit of that. That's why this topic is deep, because people get the definition of segmentation wrong.

Lenny (00:42:42):
So segments are something that people hear often and I think, like you said, understand, and to your point, they think they've done segmentation. But again, to your point, a lot of times they do it wrong. You have this framework that is really interesting, this one phrase they use, "You can act differently to help you think about whether a segment makes sense and how to think about segmentation." So can you just talk about what's a sign your segmentation is correct versus not, and maybe how to think about the framework?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:43:12):
So the three most important words in what you said is, "You act differently," so you as in your product teams, your sales teams, your marketing teams, your finance teams, act as in, come up with new products, build a business case, come up with a product marketing messages, sales strategies, differently, as in there's no point in doing segmentation and having the same reaction or treatment to everyone. You need to be able to act differently. So what that means is, if I know what you need, what you're willing to pay for and what you value, then my conversation with you will be different than someone else who needs something else and is willing to pay something else. I productize something for Lenny, and I productize something else for the others.

(00:43:53):
And the key here is to understand if there is a significant, let's say, total available market or size of the market, where the needs are similar, and they're willing to pay, as in, let's try to find all the people who would want to drink water in the fountain. Let's find the people who want to bring it in a bottle. Let's find the people who want to have gas, would they pay for it. And then when you understand these segments, then you can say, "Okay, what do I build for these different segments?" And then focus on that segment when you launch the product. Have the marketing message for that segment and target that segment, as opposed to just building one thing and hoping that somehow these four groups will sort themselves out into your product. And that's the key thing.

Lenny (00:44:33):
When should early stage founders think about segmentation? Do you suggest it's right from the beginning, the first product should have multiple segments, or does it come later?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:44:40):
This is also an often asked question in the sense that as a startup, as an early stage founder, often the excuse is, "Hey, we don't have time. We're actually pulling stuff out of the wall. We need to get something out there." It's like, "Time is of the essence, so we need to build a product." And usually they would say, "Let's build just a product, which is every awesome thing that we are working on, and then we come back and revisit whether we want to build other versions, et cetera, and we don't have resources to even build multiple products." Well, that logic makes sense when you don't understand the concept of segmentation.

(00:45:14):
If you truly understand the concept of segmentation, you would say, you know what, as a first conversation, when you're having that willingness to pay conversation based on your idea, you would say, "Who's actually willing to pay for this innovation? What do they need? How many of them are there? Can we productize to this first compared to the others? "Then you'll start prioritizing not only your R&D roadmap, but you're resourcing to say, "Which segment should I start with? And then what segments would I actually add?"

(00:45:40):
And then your value messaging would be tailored to that segment. People will understand the benefits. They will say, "Your product will be launched and people will get it and they would actually go for it." So having done this exercise early will tell you how many segments are there, what is the size of these segments, how to prioritize them, which one to pick first and which product to build first for that segment, and then productize to the other segments later. If you're lazy and sloppy, you'll build a product, you'll slap on a price, you'll throw it in the market and say, "I will attract everyone." You'll attract no one.

Lenny (00:46:14):
Amazing. So basically understand the segments right from the beginning. Don't necessarily launch products for every segment.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:46:21):
Exactly. That's totally acceptable because it's not like everyone has resourcing to launch five products, five segments, everything else. Complexity, and plus, you don't probably want to be too complex when you're launching your products, but focus on the right segment, and launch it for that first.

Lenny (00:46:38):
Today's episode is brought to you by Miro. Creating a product, especially one that your users can't live without is damn hard. But it's made easier by working closely with your colleagues to capture ideas, get feedback, and being able to iterate quickly. That's where Miro comes in. Miro is an online visual whiteboard that's designed specifically for teams like yours. I actually use Miro to come up with a plan for this very ad. With Miro, you can build out your product strategy by brainstorming with sticky notes, comments, live reactions, loading tools, even a timer to keep your team on track.

(00:47:12):
You can also bring your whole distributed team together around wire frames, where anyone can draw their own ideas with the pen tool or put their own images or mockups right into the Miro board. And with one of Miro's ready made templates, you can go from discovery and research to product roadmaps, customer journey flows, to final [inaudible 00:47:31]. Want to see how I use Miro? Head on over to my Miro board at miro.com/lenny to see my most popular podcast episodes, my favorite Miro templates, you can also leave feedback on this podcast episode and more. That's M-I-R-O . com/lenny. Are there any examples? You shared this water example, which I love, that's really clear. by the way, you forgot to mention Liquid Death, which I think is $8 water in a can that just looks really cool.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:48:00):
Yeah, keep getting these tweets from Peter. Yes, I love the product actually. It's water packaged as an $8 product, so it's great. That's a segment of customers that love that and-

Lenny (00:48:13):
Oh, I love that. The VC wants you to include that as an example, as you talk about water.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:48:17):
Exactly. Will do from next time. Liquid Death, eight bucks.

Lenny (00:48:21):
Yeah. Any other examples as the premise of my question?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:48:24):
I would probably start with a few obvious and famous examples so that just remember the point in some way, and then we can drill down further if needed. But if you look at, for instance, Apple. Let's assume the conversation in Apple was something like this, "Hey, we need to just build one product, one iPhone, because we need to maximize our market share and we will throw it out and slap on a price and hope to get the market." They wouldn't be the most profitable company in the planet today. What did they actually do? There is an iPhone for 299, 399, 499, all the way to 1499. They have built products to different segments.

(00:49:01):
I remember walking into the Apple store when iPhone X was launched. I didn't want to part with a thousand bucks. I was checking the phone out ,and I looked at the features. I really didn't want the retina features and all these benefits. And then I saw that there was a phone without that for 799 and I picked the 8S and I walked out. So I belonged to that segment. I was not belonging to the iPhone X, but that's a product that has been productized for different needs, segments. And if you look deeply, Apple has not just priced their iPhones, they have productized to different price points and willingness to pay, and that's where it gets actually fascinating. So I think that's a great example of understanding differentiation and then productized to different needs. And I think that's a good example. Another one that comes to mind, where we worked with, this was in the pre-IPO days, Eventbrite, which is a B2B SaaS company. They used to have one product that was actually-

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:50:00):
A SaaS company, they used to have one product that was actually servicing all of their customers. And then we went through an exercise of understanding who are their customer segments and how do we productize to different segment needs. And if you look at what they have today, they have three plans, because there are segments behind this. And if you look at the plans, there are plans, for instance, the entry level plan has something like, you can only launch an event with one ticket type, like a general admission. And then if you take the middle plan, it has unlimited entry type. So you can have a general admission, a VIP admission, whatever, when you're actually having events. It actually makes sense, because if you're, let's say, hosting your local wine club meetup, whatever, event, you probably just need the general admission and that's it. But if you actually are a bit more professional and you needed multiple event types and you're having a event of that nature, then there's another product that actually appeals.

(00:50:57):
But because of doing this, the one that has only one event type, that product is cheaper than the other one. So there's an essential product and there's a professional product and they have enterprise product. So this comes down to truly understanding what customers need, what they value, and what they're willing to pay for, and how can we productize towards that. Maybe another example that is obvious and in front of us, when we use our apps, like Uber is a great example of also segmentation.Because you have different car types. If they just had one car type, then okay, then that's a very different company, very different strategy. There's an Uber Black, Uber X. We used to even have the Uber pool pre pandemic. I don't know if it's back now.

Lenny (00:51:35):
I think it's back.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:51:36):
It's back? Great. And they also launched this thing called comfort, which is a bit between Black and Uber X in terms of both price and also the types of cars.

(00:51:46):
But it comes with certain features. For instance, you can say quiet preferred on a Comfort or a Black. And that's literally why I take one of these, because I'm probably working on my Uber ride over and I like to just have the quiet and just work on things, and I'm willing to pay for that and I belong in a different segment. But of course if I'm using, let's say Uber for my everyday commute, sometime maybe I do pool. So depending on even my point in time or depending on my situation, I might actually belong to different segments, and understanding this and then productizing towards that becomes key.

(00:52:24):
So the topic that we have been focused with many companies nowadays is not just doing a static view of segmentation, but truly understanding dynamic segmentation and how to offer product and services around the fact that people switch segments. So if I'm ordering on a Friday night on a food delivery platform, maybe I'm thinking pizza. Tuesday afternoon during my office time, maybe I'm thinking of a different type of cuisine. So if I know all of these things, healthy choices versus not, when can I productize what, then you actually start getting a dynamic views of segmentation. And the technology around us actually allows us to take a very dynamic view of segments and that's very fascinating. So the [inaudible 00:53:09] there are multiple steps. First do the segmentation, that's the basic. [inaudible 00:53:14] a static view. Maybe if it's relevant, even a dynamic view of this is the next frontier.

Lenny (00:53:19):
Which you shared just now reminded me of another really interesting framework in your book, around pricing strategy. And you talk a lot about just how important it is, one to just write down your strategy and why you think this is the right strategy. But specifically, you have these concepts of either you want to be maximizing, you want to be penetrating or you want to be skimming. And I thought this would be a good time to chat a little bit about that. Can you just talk about what these three strategies are?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:53:42):
Sure. When we talk about pricing strategies, we hear many buzzwords, and it's irrelevant. So when we take a step back and look at it, there's literally only three types of pricing strategies. And if you know this, then you can follow one of these and [inaudible 00:53:57] to success products. The first one is skimming strategy, which is your Apple iPhone. They launch at a particular price and the next generation is probably at a higher price, but the previous generation actually goes down, so they launch at a higher price and then they start lowering the price. So they're skimming the market. And connotation of these products is also, it's a premium product. Price is a signal of quality, et cetera, et cetera.

(00:54:20):
If you take penetration that's probably made famous by Amazon. And Amazon, they're probably operating at much thinner margins, but they're playing the volume game. Much more harder game to play because you need to have all of your costs in order, supply chain, everything else, and you're fine tuning towards the volume game. Often, I see entrepreneurs who say, "Let's just price load to gain growth." That's a fallacy. If you don't have a business model that actually supports this compared to Amazon, then you probably shouldn't be in a penetration strategy. And even in a company like Amazon and AWS has a very different strategy compared to the e-commerce marketplace. So within even business units, you can actually have different pricing strategies.

(00:55:01):
And the third one is just maximization, which is you're neither on these two extremes but a bit in between, and you're saying, "Okay, what can I maximize in the next couple of years?" In my opinion at least Microsoft will probably belong in that category. And if I look at Apple, Microsoft, Amazon, companies that reached trillion valuations in our lifetime, probably the only three in some way, shape or form, they have dramatically different pricing strategies. The point is not about picking, just picking one, but it's about executing the one that you actually pick. And that's also what we write about in the book, how to pick one and not just pick one, but how to build your products around this executed live and breathe your business model strategy, which leads to your pricing strategy.

Lenny (00:55:44):
Amazing. I just want to say I love how deep we're getting into all these topics. This is amazing.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:55:48):
Cool.

Lenny (00:55:49):
One final question on this topic and then we'll get to the next and the rest will be quicker. We're spending a lot of time on each, which I love. You talk a lot about the importance of packaging and bundling and how that alone can help you win a segment, versus even the price of the segment. Can you talk about how to think about the importance of that?

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:56:06):
The way to unlock your segmentation is to think about bundling and packaging, as in you're configuring your product, based on what customers need, what they value and what they're willing to pay for. Either you put a bunch of benefits that people like and call it packaging and put that out, or you're taking multiple products and calling it bundling and putting that out. So it's a question of, hey, that's the way you unlock segments. Your productizing. It's like the iPhone X versus the iPhone A test, different products, different features, different packages, et cetera.

(00:56:36):
The quick framework to think about packaging, bundling, we call it the leaders, fillers and killers, exercise of framework. So if you think about the classic, let's say bundle, like a Big Mac or a Happy Meal, the Big Mac is the leader product, that's in the Happy Meal, and that's what people go for when they go to McDonald's. When you look at french fries and Coke, those are the fillers. You can put a burger along with french fries and coke, call it a happy meal, and most people wouldn't have bought a french fry or Coke, but if you just say for a dollar or two more, you know can actually get this, they would say, "Let's get the happy Meal." So you're actually bundling it in such a way that with marginal increase in price, you're also able to sell multiple products, which they wouldn't have if you didn't have it.

(00:57:22):
The killer is the one where if you put it in the product, it just kills the bundle for everyone. So for instance, if you put coffee along with french fries and a coke and a burger, that's just going to kill the bundle. No one needs a double dose of caffeine when they're having a burger. But there are people like me, Lenny, who love to have coffee with their burgers. So these are great candidates for selling them as add-ons, because if I actually, I would pay for the add-on because I actually want the coffee. So I would take the burgers standalone, and I would take the coffee standalone and that's why it's actually listed separately in the menus.

(00:57:56):
If you bundle it, what happens is it just depreciates the willingness to pay across the entire customer base to the point where no one actually wants it. So you need to find pockets of customers who want it and then maybe only sell it to them. So the rule of thumb that I usually say is, if 10 to 20% of your customers want something and they really want it badly, that's usually an add-on. That's not something that goes into a package unless you have a advanced package just for them, kind of thing. And if more than 50% of people want something, that's a leader product. So if you understand all these leaders, fillers and killers, then you can configure your product in such a way that your productizing to segments and you'll unlock maximum value.

Lenny (00:58:36):
Your example reminds me, I just went In-N-Out yesterday, and how I don't think they've changed their model ever. Somehow, it just works. They nailed it.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:58:45):
It somehow works. I think In-N-Out, that's a story for another day. I think it works for a different reason.

Lenny (00:58:51):
Some people. Yeah. All right. And then the other thought I had while you're talking is, understanding who the leaders are and the fillers and the killers, comes from [inaudible 00:58:58] conversations. I imagine the stuff that people stack rank at the top is most likely going to be your leaders.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:59:05):
Yes, exactly. So when you do those most and least questions and you stack rank them, the must haves will pay, or must have table stakes would be the leader products, or leader features or benefits. The ones that are nice to have and might consider paying or nice to have, those features are probably the fillers, and that don't need are the killers.

Lenny (00:59:27):
Awesome.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:59:28):
Don't need I will not pay.

Lenny (00:59:29):
Got it. Interesting. When I saw you right about killers, I always thought it was things that it needs to have that would kill the deal if they don't, but that makes a lot more sense that it kills the deal if it includes it. Interesting.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:59:38):
Includes it, exactly. Maybe we should change the language in the next sequence, monetizing innovation, but.

Lenny (00:59:44):
No, it's working, don't change anything.

Madhavan Ramanujam (00:59:45):
All right, good.

Lenny (00:59:47):
All right. Third topic, around your pricing model. This is something that you talk a lot about that people thinks too much about how much to charge and not enough about how to actually charge the pricing model. So could you just talk about maybe what that is and why people maybe don't think about it as much as they should?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:00:04):
We usually say how you charge is way more important than how much you charge. Take a quick example and then bring the point home and then we can talk about why this is actually essential. So taking a non SaaS or software example, if you think about Michelin, which is a tire company, probably one of the most price sensitive, let's say, markets because, think about it, you actually go into a tire store, you see all of these things look similar, but they're somehow priced differently. How are you supposed to make a decision? It's very hard when you need to understand what you're paying for.

(01:00:36):
And they came up with this new tire, which was supposed to last 20% longer, was a true innovation in the industry, and these are tires that were used for moving trucks from point A to point B. And when they thought about it, they said, okay, if we go and ask for a 20% premium, there's no chance they would get it, because it's a price sensitive market. If they don't ask it, the tires are going to overrun and they're going to cannibalize 20% of their business. So what they actually did was they changed their pricing model or monetization model and they said, "Okay, we are going to charge based on the number of miles that a person would drive."

(01:01:09):
The truckers actually love this model, not just because it was pay as you go and they could pay when they actually use the tires and how and everything else. That was the obvious reason. But then now they could also invoice their end customers and say, "Okay, my journey was 798 kilometers or miles, and that's the amount of tire costs," and they could pass it through because it became a variable cost and people love this kind of model.

(01:01:33):
And of course, the tires lasted long. Michelin [inaudible 01:01:37] that more, but more people jumped into the Michelin bandwagon, because now they could actually buy a tire that's on a pay as you go basis. Now, if a tire could be actually with... And the age old model for tires is on a per tire basis. If a tire could actually be sold on a pay as you go consumption model, then obviously most products can actually explore this route, especially in a software setting. But the key lesson here is how you charge was the most important question. It was not the how much. The how much came about because of the how you charge.

(01:02:09):
Another SaaS example that is probably top of mind for me is B2B SaaS's segment. This was before they went to Twilio. They used to price based on APIs. So the number of APIs that you actually have with Segment, that used to dictate which plan you would be and how much you would pay for it. But increasingly, they were also shifting gears towards selling to different personas within companies. And what is an API is a debate. Probably a marketing person does not necessarily understand exactly what an API is and the how you charge question became very critical.

(01:02:44):
And what they actually did was, we worked with them and we identified their monthly tracked users what was a much better metric into how customers perceive value, and that was the more fairer metric for customers. If you're tracking more users in Segment, you're probably willing to pay more compared if you're tracking less. So the packaging was changed to a monthly track user instead of APIs. This is literally exactly the same Michelin per mile models, on a B2B SaaS was number of monthly tracked users. So that was a different example. So the how you charge question is super important, way more important than how much. If you don't focus on it and just rush to one or the other, often you're sub optimizing like crazy.

Lenny (01:03:30):
It's interesting that both your examples are usage based models winning, and it feels like in general, the usage base is where people are trying to go more and more, or maybe not. So maybe two questions. Do you feel like that's the future of SaaS pricing generally? And roughly, do you feel like that should be a default way of approaching when you're building, say, a B2B SaaS company, or is it still seat based?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:03:52):
I would say it this way. It's most B2B SaaS companies follow what is actually in vogue at that present point in time. If subscription is in vogue, then they say, "Oh, subscription is the best strategy." If usage is made famous by Snowflake and others, they would say usage. So I think usage is obviously, let's say in vogue right now. I think it comes down to really understanding, based on your business situation, does subscription make sense or should you be usage or pay as you go if you're a SaaS company. There are different markers which actually identify this.

(01:04:25):
If customers demand, let's say predictable bills, or usage is very similar month over month as in if you're subscribing for tide pods for instance, it's not like you're going to wash more clothes one month versus the other. The usage is the same month over month, or when the usage is highly variable, which is changing quite a lot between month over month, then if you price based on pay as you go, then your bills are also going to be dramatically different month one versus month two versus month three so you're going to have a very tough conversation with your customers.

(01:04:53):
In all of these situation, a subscription actually makes a lot more sense. Or it could also be, usage is intermittent but the value delivered is ongoing. LifeLock is a great example. It's a product that you probably have to protect your identity theft production. The value is ongoing. The usage of the product is only episodic when your identity theft gets compromised. If they say, "Okay, I'm going to price base on usage," that would be dramatically wrong pricing model. So in those cases, subscription makes sense, or simplifying the pricing conversation is to your advantage. Let's say the Spotify was a good example.

(01:05:29):
If everyone wants to listen, everyone needs to listen on a per song basis, but having a subscription actually made sense. It simplified the pricing conversation. Same as Netflix, all of those situations. So don't just rush to something like usage just because understanding that is key. Usage makes sense when people want low commit or less friction. So making it easier to buy an AWS thing. You onboard people and then you grow the product and I think those situations make sense, or when customers would demand transparency and fairness. Please note that don't mix transparency and fairness with being predictable. Those are very different things.

(01:06:08):
Transparency and fairness just means that you charge for the product. For instance, if you don't use a subscription for a few months, is it fair that you're being charged for those months? That's fairness. That's nothing to do with being predictable. But if they're demanding fairness and transparency, often a usage based pricing model could make sense. Or alternatively, usage is intermittent and episodic, and the value delivered is also episodic and not ongoing, like you for instance, book the movie theater ticket or you book the flight. It's also intermittent usage, intermittent value, so the pay as you go makes sense.

(01:06:40):
Or maybe there's even some underlying cost that scales with usage, like an AWS pay you go can make sense or even probably lastly, if there's some... Most important thing for pays you go, Lenny, is you need to have clear metrics that you can actually track and identify and attribute value and your customers would agree to that value generation, then pay as you go would make sense. If you can't track what you are charging on, often it's a really bad idea.

(01:07:06):
And then, of course you can also be more hybrid sometimes and that's also a winning model. For instance, if you take HubSpot, it's a hybrid model between a pay as you go and a subscription, and it actually works well for them because there's a certain component on a fixed monthly basis. And then if you exceed those quotas and limits, then you actually get into a pay as you go model. So I would urge the readers not to rush into one versus the other based on what is in style at a given point in time, but give it a deep thought and say, what is your business, how are your customers, how are they situated? What are you servicing? And what makes sense between the two models?

Lenny (01:07:41):
Awesome. On the point of being able to even track usage, I've seen five startup decks of startups that help companies with this, because it's so complicated to know what to charge.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:07:41):
What is that?

Lenny (01:07:51):
What to charge on usage based models, where they basically plug into your systems to help you figure out how much every company owes you. Maybe a couple more questions on this topic. One is just, what's a simple way of thinking about the options? Say, a B2B SaaS company, there's seat based pricing, there's flat based annual contract pricing, there's usage based, you can lop on, freemium to make a free version of it. Is that the four? What's a way to think about your options

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:08:18):
For B2B SaaS, I think those are probably the options. You're either subscription, pay as you go, freemium, these things. And of course, the price metric that you actually pick, what measure are you charging on, and then how do you structure, the price structure that you pick is important. Because for instance, are you flat for a certain amount of time and then it becomes variable, that's a structure. Or for instance, can you be two dimensional in your structure on two metrics, so the more people actually use your product and take actions that benefit you, the better price you get.

(01:08:51):
This is something we call as a value matrix. For instance, in B2B SaaS companies that actually want to achieve wall to wall adoption. In many companies, it's still a pipe dream. It's just, yeah, you can talk product lead growth, but if your pricing model, it actually incentivizes product-led growth, that's a whole different conversation. So what we would do is, for instance, on one axis, you have seats, and on the other axis could be the number of departments that the product is being used at, departments is HR, legal, et cetera. And then the more users and the more departments, you get a better per user price. So you automatically build an incentive to actually say, if you want better price, sure, you drive the right behaviors.

(01:09:32):
[inaudible 01:09:32] get more people on the product and put it in the hands of more departments, so people can self-govern their pricing as opposed to just, you come up with a price and you're just negotiating. So when you think about pricing models, you have to think about first picking pay as you go subscription premium, then thinking about the metric, and then thinking about the price structure.

Lenny (01:09:51):
Awesome. And maybe one more example, say marketplaces. Basically, if you're taking a fee in almost every case, and it's a question of how much you take and then there's maybe a subscription piece on top of it, is that roughly right?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:10:04):
Yeah, absolutely. So you could take a rake on the transaction and there's probably a platform fee or a subscription fee. So that comes down to, again, a hybrid of a structure. So there is a portion that is predictable and then there's a portion that is the usage base. It's not a reg based model, but it's similar to the HubSpot modeling principle.

Lenny (01:10:22):
Okay, and one last question on this topic. Say you want to test different models, say you're, say seat based and you want to try usage base, or you're usage base, you want to go seat. Is that possible? If so, how do you do that?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:10:32):
It's definitely possible. There are ways to test this. It's a science. This is also what we do with many of our clients for a living, but maybe the easy Monday morning thing that I can actually ask your listeners to do is what we call as a break even exercises. So let's assume that for instance, let's take a marketplace. Let's say you're selling a dollar hundred item, as in your customer is selling it. If you ask them, what should the pricing model be, 3% transaction fee on a hundred dollar item, or one and a half percent transaction and dollar 50 cents, or 3 dollars, or are you indifferent?

(01:11:11):
This is a basic question because if you do the math, all of those numbers are the same. So an economic human being rational, everything that business school taught us would say, okay, people will pick the indifferent option. I've done this thousands of times. I've never seen the indifferent actually win. It's always people will pick one or the other. So then you actually start understanding what model might make sense. Same thing with B2B SaaS companies. You would say, let's say you have a hundred seats and I would charge you, let's say, a thousand dollars and 10 dollars per seat, or I would charge you 2,000 dollars flat or I would charge you 500 dollars, and the rest in the seat based amount that equals 1500. It's all the same. People would say, "I like the lower platform P and the variable," or they would say, "I like the fixed," so the indifferent never wins. That's the easy way to test pricing models, what makes sense.

Lenny (01:12:05):
Awesome. That brings us to our fourth topic, and I think this is something that everyone listening is going to be like, "Oh no, I got this, I'm doing this. Great, I don't need to learn about this." But your point is that it's almost always wrong, which is focusing on benefits versus features when you're talking about your product. So maybe as a first question, just what's a sign that you're probably focusing too much on the features of your product when you're pitching it versus the benefits, which is, to your point, much more powerful.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:12:32):
I think I see some tell tale markers or pattern recognition as to when people are talking more features as opposed to benefits. First of all, just to set the nomenclature, what you build as a product person is features. What people actually get out of it is the benefits, as what do the features actually do? And that's the benefit that a customer gets, and you need to pitch benefits. If you pitch features, you're not talking value. And if you're not talking value, no one is going to get it.

(01:12:58):
So if you are super excited about the product and passionate about every single thing that the product is doing, most likely you're talking features and not benefits, because you're showcasing how cool your product is and how the different bells and whistles actually work, as opposed to focusing on what is the actual benefit for the customer. There are probably also other signs, for instance, if you don't see market fraction for what you actually build, either what you built is off base, but the good outcome of this could be that people actually don't understand what they're getting. And then actually then changing the speak to being more benefits is key.

(01:13:38):
To take an example, for instance, SmugMug, which is a ridiculously awesome company, they used to actually publish their pricing plans, which was, you had to scroll literally three or four pages and then you would see the price. It's all the features. Everything else that the company did, they changed it to benefits based communication. So a very simple thing. For instance, the ability to sell photos online is a benefit. There are probably 15 features that is behind that [inaudible 01:14:04] actually enables that stuff. But then focusing on the benefits, they had a double digit improvement in revenue and no changes in products. We show the before and after also in monetizing innovation, if someone is interested, and it's what it was was what they actually did. So if you don't see enough traction, then that could be a marker, coming back to your question, or it could just be that if you're too passionate about your products, then your chances are, as a product person, you're talking features.

Lenny (01:14:30):
Is there any other examples of companies that you think do this super well, to make it even more concrete?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:14:34):
To take a, let's say a non SaaS example, my favorite, I'll come back to Porsche again, because their value communication is, to me, legendary. When they launched Taycan, which is their electric car, their value communication was something like this, I'm trying to remember it, but it was something like, "Taycan is not your most affordable electric vehicle, but that was never Porsche's goal. Porsche's goal was to actually build a car that was first and foremost a Porsche." That value save statement, what they actually built, totally resonates with those-

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:15:00):
... you know statement, what they actually build totally resonates with those, their audience. Taking a maybe SaaS example, Shopify is one of my favorites in terms of looking at the plans in terms of their benefit, like, what do they actually put out? All of the plans emphasize benefits and less features. Like for instance, the number of locations that you can track inventory is a benefit because if you actually have a more complicated supply chain, it's different from not, so there are plans which actually have different number of inventory locations, which is a benefit there. I mean, if I can track more or not, but behind this, that could be many features that actually enable this. So if you look at the plans that Shopify has, I think that's a great example. And also they have a lot of good value communication in there. I remember something like the tagline for Shopify Plus was, "Fair pricing, unfair advantage," and just things that actually make bloody sense, then you see it, what you're actually getting. So I think that's a great example that listeners can go into.

Lenny (01:16:02):
So maybe as a takeaway, folks should probably look at their website, browse through their pages and just look, or am I pitching features, or am I pitching benefits to the reader?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:16:02):
Correct.

Lenny (01:16:02):
Awesome.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:16:11):
Correct, exactly.

Lenny (01:16:13):
That brings us to our very final topic, which is behavioral pricing. You have all chapter on this concept of behavioral pricing, and it's super interesting. And it's interesting because you don't have to rethink your price, you could just sell at a higher rate by just thinking through this lens of behavioral pricing. So just to set context, what is behavioral pricing, and why is it important?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:16:34):
Behavioral pricing basically is tapping into the irrational modes of our decision making and not just rational. I think that when I talked about the break even exercise, if you take a very rational view, indifferent would always win. But like I said it, I have never seen it. So there's always an irrational side of our brain that actually makes decisions, and understanding this as a product person would lend yourself to building products, and also positioning or framing the product conversation in such a way that appeals to both sides of the brain. The Predictably Irrational was a great book from Dan Ariely, made the concept very famous. We build on top of that where we actually talk about product and pricing strategies that actually you need to take care of when you think about the irrational side, that's what we call as behavioral pricing. To take a concrete example, and maybe I remember walking into a company and they had three products, and I remember asking the CEO, "Why do you have three products?"

(01:17:35):
And he said, "I learned that good, better, best is a great strategy in business school." So I'm like, "Okay, that sounds great." But when you actually look at what was going on, they were giving the farm away on their entry level product. So they had three products, 49, 79, and 149, that was the price points. And what they actually were doing is they gave a lot of features for the 49. So they were giving the farm away, so 60 to 70% of people were taking the $49 product. Not many are actually opting to the others. What they did was actually super interesting, they just reframed the argument and they found out that between 79 to 99, the pricing was inelastic and there's a threshold at 99, not at 79. It is the same exercise that I talked about in the acceptable and expensive price, et cetera.

(01:18:18):
So they moved the price from 79 to 99, and they moved the price of the 149 to like 199 because of the same kind of reasoning. And then what they actually did is they built another product at 299, which was simply a decoy to make the $99 product look attractive. So if I put a $99 product that looks awesome next to a $299 product, it looks even more attractive. I mean, God bless the 2% that even take the $299 product. But what you actually see is the mix shifted, more people took the $99 product because the pricing made sense, it was respecting the psychological thresholds, and next to a decoy it actually made more sense to pick that product, right? So it's just reframing the conversation. It was a 30+ percent increase in MRR and ARPU right after they actually did this change. No changes in products, no changes in features, just in terms of how they reframe the conversation.

(01:19:13):
I mean, these kind of things are around us, and we need to understand these. For instance, if you go to a movie theater, you'll see a small popcorn for $7, an extra large popcorn with butter on it. Huge one is $8. Most people will say, "For $1, I'm getting this extra large one, let me buy it." But that $7 popcorn is a decoy. I mean, if that was not there, most people would be scratching their heads saying, "Why am I paying $8 for popcorn in the first place?" Right? So this kind of behavioral framing and nudging becomes important, it's not about deceiving your customers, et cetera, but it's just about framing the products in such a way that it also appeals to the irrational side of the brain as much as the rational side.

(01:19:52):
The example that I talked about in the SaaS product on the three products, and compromising to the 99, rather than going for the early product, is simply product discipline. Don't give too much away in your entry level product. Don't give the farm away your entry level product, at least reserve something for the $99 product. So if you build the packaging correctly, you can emphasize a compromise effect, and this is a well known behavioral theory where people avoid the extremes. If you are quality conscious, you'll go to the right. If your budget conscious, you'll go to the left, but most people will compromise in between.

(01:20:25):
If you actually see your packaging mix is like this and is not the normal distribution, as in most people actually prefer the entry level product, you're giving the farm away, maybe you should think about how to change your features and benefits so that you can actually steer more outcomes towards a middle package compared to the entry level one, and also then charge based on the value that you're actually bringing to the table. So we have talked about many behavioral pricing strategies in the book, dedicated an entire chapter to this.

Lenny (01:20:54):
Did you actually share a few of them? Just like some of these tactics that you find? I don't know if you have them in your head.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:20:58):
Sure.

Lenny (01:20:59):
But yeah, anything that you could share.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:21:00):
You can talk about these topics all day long and I'm probably going to keep telling you what I know, but tell me when you're bored.

Lenny (01:21:05):
It's great. You're board.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:21:06):
So there are a few, right? I mean the compromise effect is the good, better, best that we talked about. The next one is what we call as, let's say pennies a day effect, or how you actually frame your pricing. So for instance, if I tell you a $30 per month price, it's very different from $1 per day. The way you actually frame your price, if you can actually showcase some kind of bargain, like AWS does this really well, the price that you actually see is so less because also the units and consumption is so less, but of course that will stack up if you use it a lot. But the price, if that started with a higher price point compared to a lower price point, that could have been different sort of situations.

(01:21:47):
Similarly, for instance, when you take let's say you have a monthly subscription in your SaaS business and you also have an annual subscription, you need to showcase your annual subscription as a monthly price. Like, for instance it is 29.99 if you actually take an annual subscription, but it's 40 bucks a month if you actually do monthly subscription, but you're still messaging the price as a monthly price because if you actually just do the computation and say, "Okay, instead of saying $30 a month." I would end up saying it's 360 a year. That price could actually look like a higher price, but if you reframe it looks like a more attractive price. So that's a pennies a day kind of effect. I think that that kind of makes sense.

(01:22:29):
On a product side, if you're what you're building is products and consumables, then things like the razor blade model actually makes a lot of sense. Most famous, made famous with razor blades, right? I mean if you think about the Gillette stick that you're buying, it's probably cheap, but their razor blades add up very quickly so that initial pricing or investment is less, but then you're making money on the consumables. Right? The HP print cartridges, same thing, the printer is cheaper, but then the cartridges add up. For a SaaS product, it's very similar. If you actually have a product that's a base platform, but then you have consumables, then you might want to make the platform price attractive so that people onboard themselves on the platform and then they're paying for chunks of usage, or things like this, which is a razor blade model, which is much more attractive for people typically because there's a lot of scrutiny on the upfront cost that people are actually paying as opposed to doing an entire TCV calculation.

(01:23:25):
I mean, like a total cost of ownership calculation. Most people don't do that. They're looking at what they're actually going to pay. So if you're more attractive upfront, that could be a different way to reframe your product or price. Maybe an advanced version of a behavioral tactic that I would probably talk about from product side is what we call is a Panini effect. The thesis for this is when we are kids, or for those of your listeners who have kids at home, one of the most repetitive exercises that we all went through as kids was to build puzzles, or fit different things together. Right? I mean, I used to do that. I thought I grew out of it. It so happens that you never grow out of this from a psychology standpoint, people love to build puzzles and have a compulsion because they just started with most of this in their childhood.

(01:24:12):
So it is a Panini effect comes from the sticker book album that we actually used to collect when we are kids, or building puzzles, 500 pieces, whatever, all of these kind of things. So when you actually build a product, and even in the most of the most complex SaaS industries like financial services, when we have tested this with our clients, if you list the products usually 20% of people will buy more than one product, or they will attach themselves to more than one product because most of them are just buying one. Like, you have a real estate product, let's say you have a brokerage product, you have a different investment product, et cetera. You just list all the product. But if you show it as a puzzle and you actually say, "Hey, these are the six products that we offer, and if you complete it, you complete the puzzle. You have actually finished checking a few of these and these are empty."

(01:25:02):
And that's like the first thing literally people actually see when they come into the product, we actually see the attached rates going crazily up. 40 to 50% of people suddenly start taking more products because there's a compulsion to say, "Yeah, I didn't finish this one." Even in a B2B SaaS setting. But of course if you're a B2C customer, like say you're a food delivery platform, or you're a ride hailing, for instance, if you say, "Okay, this is your weekly puzzle and if you take a ride every day, or you take a ride during evenings." Or, if you give people a task or a puzzle and show them the puzzle and show them that you have done this, but then these are the other things that you have not done, people change their behaviors because they actually feel a compulsion to finish it. Starbucks actually launched a bingo card, which is the same principle.

(01:25:47):
So the Panini effect is a nice way to actually think about how to showcase your products in such a way that you create compulsion for people to buy multiple products. I mean, if there's show notes in your podcast, I'm happy to give you some visuals that you'll see it, it's bloody obvious.

Lenny (01:26:04):
Absolutely. Please send, we will include them. I don't get why it's called the Panini effect. It makes me think of LinkedIn and their whole little completion percentage, but is the Panini because you make a thing and it all comes together?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:26:15):
No, I think this Panini effect, it comes from the Panini sticker books, whatever, all the things that we used to use before-

Lenny (01:26:22):
Not the sandwich? Okay.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:26:25):
No, it's not the sandwich. And yeah, I mean, I guess we made a category out of what this is.

Lenny (01:26:25):
Cool, okay.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:26:32):
We just call it Panini.

Lenny (01:26:32):
Got it. There's something else you touched on that might be worth double clicking on it, is this price threshold psychological trick? Is there heuristics, or just rules of thumb of like, here's thresholds people generally have, or is it generally very custom to the product?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:26:46):
If you look across B2B SaaS, or consumer products, you'll find some thresholds that often make sense. Like for instance, if you are looking at $29, most people would say equate that to a dollar a day and say that $ 30 is a threshold. So you see some of these things. Beyond this you need to test for your own products and categories because the anchors are also referenced based on other competitive alternates, what their perception of value is, and so on. So doing the exercise, like I described earlier, the acceptable, expensive and prohibitively expensive would give you psychological thresholds. And by the way, that's also a behavioral pricing thing because you're saying if you cross 99 to like 101, there's a steep drop in the demand curve. And if you didn't know this, you can do all the quantity you want, you're going to probably optimize your prices somewhere.

(01:27:36):
But at the end of the day, people are also looking at pricing from a psychological standpoint, and often we are able to validate this statistically and significantly as to what are the different thresholds for your products in the market. And this also gets a bit more quickly complex, and that's why the testing is important because it's not just about the product, but what happens when you have add-ons? What happens to the thresholds when you have price structures? Or, what happens to the thresholds when let's say you have a platform plus a usage strategy? So then the testing and learning becomes inevitable and there's no rule of thumb that you can just apply. But of course there are certain things like 30 bucks a month or whatever, that's a usual threshold that we see, or 9.99 famously made famous by all the subscriptions that we probably use.

Lenny (01:28:22):
Awesome. Well, to start closing our chat, just a few more questions that I wanted to get through.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:28:28):
Sure.

Lenny (01:28:28):
One is the market is slower, the economy has slowed, purchasing seems to have slowed. Do you have any advice for founders, or product managers, or anyone thinking about pricing in this kind of market that we're in now?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:28:46):
Yeah, I think it's a great question because we need to prepare for it, but of course be proactive. And I would say three things that founders can keep in mind when it comes to product pricing, if there is a downturn especially. The first thing to think about is building a lesser expensive alternate compared to what you actually have and keep it in your back pocket. So for instance, if you have a product, SaaS product, I would think of what can I de-feature from this product and then create a lesser expensive alternate that I keep in my back pocket to reduce churn. So if someone says, "You know what? I can't afford this anymore, it's a downturn." Give them the lesser expensive alternate, keep them in the system as opposed to them going away. If you just discounted price, guess what's going to happen six months later, that's going to be your new price.

(01:29:36):
So before you price discount, think about what value can you exchange to actually justify that price discount. So you are taking value away in a de-featured product and hence you can discount. So having that kind of price integrity is super important with your customers. So don't just rush to dropping price, that'll be the absolute worst thing you can do to yourself at that moment, and also in future. So having these kind of less expensive alternates. Second one I usually say, which is in line with not dropping the price, is to think about three non pricing actions that you can do when this actually happens. For instance, do I give more product to preserve the price? That's a non pricing action. So I give more value. Say, "Hey, times are tough. Take the best product professional, you've being a great customer." Earn the loyalty. But when times are great, you're probably going to renew the pricing at let's say a higher price because you just gave them a product for one year at the same price that they're actually paying. So I think that's a non pricing alternate.

(01:30:42):
Or, it could be change the contract terms, say that, okay, take a three year contract, or two year contract and then think about that as an alternative as opposed to reducing price. Or, things like for instance, payment terms. Like, "Okay, if you say it's difficult, I'll change it from 15 days to 30 days." And level the payment terms as opposed to changing price, right? So three non pricing actions. We write about some of these also in the book, and the last one I would probably say is think about changing your business model or pricing model. You talked about usage based pricing, frankly an outcome based or attribution based pricing. Frankly, there's the best time to actually think about these things. Like, if people are not using the product, changing it to a usage based, people would say, "That's great because there's a downturn, we're not using the product." And they would opt into a usage based pricing because they're going to pay lesser because they're not using.

(01:31:37):
But when times are good, again, they're going to use it. And basically what you did is you just lodged in a usage based pricing easily compared to trying to do that when the times are good and people are saying, "Oh, I actually want fixed, or I don't want the usage." And things like this. You actually just took that as an opportunity to change.

(01:31:53):
I mean, one extreme example that was interesting during the pandemic is a software company that was actually providing software to hair salons. I mean, just as an example, like hair salons. And this company, I mean, it used to be a per seat model. I mean, that just used to make sense, but they want think about usage. During the pandemic no one for instance, went to a haircut. They were all taking this at home. So they said, "Okay, let's change it to a per haircut basis." But of course when things are back again, that kind of model can recoup a lot more compared to a per seat model because that's really where the value is actually getting derived, right? I mean, just as an example. So three things again. One is thinking about changing your pricing model, three non pricing actions that you can take, and then how can you de-feature something and keeping it in your back pocket so that you can have a proper pricing conversation and not just drop a price.

Lenny (01:32:48):
That is some killer advice. Thank you for sharing all that.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:32:51):
Thank you.

Lenny (01:32:52):
Something else is, during our chat, preparing for this call, you mentioned that you're maybe working on a new book.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:32:59):
Yes.

Lenny (01:32:59):
Can you talk about what it's going to be about and anything else?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:33:02):
Sure. I will try to see what I can talk about without getting too detailed, but the thesis of the book is... the title of the book is, it's called Unlocking Growth, Growth That is Profitable, Better, et cetera. So Unlocking Growth and the subtitle is Breakthrough Strategies for Acquisition, Monetization and Retention of Customers. So this is a bit like where Monetizing Innovation stopped and this book picks up from that, when let's assume you've built a great product based on what customers need, what they value, what they're willing to pay for, now what? You need to acquire customers, you need to monetize them, you need to retain them. So this book actually gets into all of those dimensions, and the key pattern that we have seen Lenny, over and over again is most companies would have teams and people dedicated to these three functions. I mean, acquisition, monetization, retention.

(01:33:52):
If you unlock these three, you're getting to profitable growth, right? I mean, that's literally the three things you ought to focus on. But what ends up happening is most people don't understand the interaction effects across these, or they, in the worst case, they even treat it as silos. So the acquisition team works on something, but the monetization team is not looking at the interaction of what they actually do. For instance, 90% of customers or people who we meet who claim to have a land and expand strategy are only landing. They're not expanding because they gave their farm away in the land. So how do you actually think about a land and expense strategy in such a way that you can acquire, monetize, and retain customers? So this book actually goes into breakthrough strategies to balance the trade off between acquisition, monetization, and retention and build the right products and come up with the right pricing strategy.

Lenny (01:34:41):
You're going to have incredibly strong product market fit with this audience. Is this something anyone can pre-order yet, sign up to get notified when it's out?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:34:48):
I think the pre-order probably is still open in Amazon, so I think that's something you can check. I haven't checked lately, but you can follow me on Twitter, @MadhavanSF. That's M-A-D-H-A-V- A-N-S-F. I usually tweet about this book, and in general, or follow me on LinkedIn, or add me on LinkedIn. I think those are probably some good ways to keep in touch. The book is supposed to be out in Q2. Q2, Q3 timeframe, so watch out for it.

Lenny (01:35:17):
Amazing. So it's called Unlocking Growth, they can search on Amazon, right?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:35:20):
Yeah, absolutely. If you look for Unlocking Growth and even bookmark it, you're going to have it in your list of books that you want to buy.

Lenny (01:35:26):
All right, I'm going to pre-order it immediately. Any other good resources that you recommend for folks that want to learn more about pricing and just all the things that we talked about other than your book?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:35:36):
There are a number of resources. Our founder Herman Simon, of the Simon of Simon Kucher has done a lot of books, particularly I like one, which is called Confessions of the Pricing Man. I mean, he started this business 35 years ago and literally out of university and academia, and we have grown to where we are today. But it talks about some of the lessons that he has learned. I find it fascinating and it's probably the better book, compared to Monetizing Innovation. So I think I would urge readers, definitely read that.

(01:36:05):
The other book that probably we also put out, which is topical right now, is one of my partner colleagues, Adam Hector and Herman wrote a book on pricing during inflation and inflationary times. So I think that's a very topical book that I think your readers can pick. This is within our Simon Kucher assets of people who have actually written books. Another resource to probably look at is Kyle Poyar from Open View, he puts out some really good stuff on product led draw pricing, et cetera. I mean, he's an alumni Simon Kucher, so we are proud of our alumni, but it's some fantastic work that he has done. He has also written some SaaS pricing guides, et cetera. So I would highly encourage you to check Kyle's work. I think that's fascinating, and also feel the folks at First Round are pretty good at putting some good content on pricing product, et cetera.

Lenny (01:36:55):
Amazing. We will link to all of that in the show notes. Madhavan this was everything I hoped it would be. This is probably the record for the longest podcast we've done, and it's no better topic to spend a lot of time on. Thank you again so much for joining me. Two final questions. You answered most of them, but just in case there's anything else, where can folks find you online and learn more? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:37:18):
Online I mentioned LinkedIn, so Madhavan Ramanujam that's on LinkedIn and @MadhavanSF on Twitter, that's probably where you can find me online. Or, even at SimonKucher.com, and you can search for leadership and you'll probably see my name there.

(01:37:32):
What can listeners do? I think I would probably say that the fundamental level, if you can talk about this topic, actively share what you have learned. If there are sections of the book, for instance, that you like talk about it, the biggest thing that we can all do is to educate each other and everyone that there's a science behind all of this and it's not just an art, and if that's relevant, then I think message accomplished, that's also why we wrote Monetizing Innovation.

Lenny (01:38:04):
What a beautiful way to end it. Madhavan, thank you again for being here.

Madhavan Ramanujam (01:38:07):
Thanks, Lenny.

Lenny (01:38:09):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating, or a leaving review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at Lennyspodcast.com.

(01:38:27):
See you in the next episode.

Naomi Ionita (00:00):
Do not set it and forget it. I see companies do this, where they labor over designs and features. And they build this perfect product that's delightful to use. And then pricing's sort of plucked out of thin air, and then they don't revisit it. This was Evernote. It was many, many years before we went back and overhauled the pricing. So, think about your pricing just like you do your roadmap. Every 6 to 12 months, there's probably something meaningful that you're launching for users. So, treat that as an opportunity to revisit your monetization strategy and making sure you're compensated appropriately.

Lenny (00:32):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast. I'm Lenny. And my goal here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing product. Today, my guest is Naomi Ionita. Naomi was one of the first early leaders in product life growth and monetization, having built early teams and infrastructure over a decade ago at Evernote. She was also an early contributor to Reforge when it was just getting started and helped create some of their early programs. She's also VP of growth at Invoice2go. And currently, she's a full-time VC at Menlo Ventures.

(00:59):
In her work as a full-time investor, she gets to see what works and doesn't work across many companies. And one area that she spends a lot of time on is monetization, when it's best to start charging for your product, how to decide what to charge, and how to evolve your pricing. And that's what we spend the bulk of our conversation around. We also touch on a really interesting framework Naomi has been developing that she calls the Modern Growth Stack, which is essentially all the areas that new starter products can help take the load off your plate and help your product grow. Naomi is awesome, and I'm excited to share this episode with you. With that, I bring you Naomi Ionita right after a word from our wonderful sponsors.

(01:36):
Today's episode is brought to you by Miro. Creating a product, especially one that your users can't live without, is damn hard. But it's made easier by working closely with your colleagues to capture ideas, get feedback, and being able to iterate quickly. That's where Miro comes in. Miro is an online visual whiteboard that's designed specifically for teams like yours. I actually used Miro to come up with a plan for this very ad. With Miro, you can build out your product strategy by brainstorming with sticky notes, comments, live reactions, voting tools, even a timer to keep your team on track.

(02:10):
You can also bring your whole distributed team together around wire frames where anyone can draw their own ideas with the pen tool or put their own images or mock-ups right into the Miro board. And with one of Miro's ready-made templates, you can go from discovery and research to product roadmaps to customer journey flows to final mocks. Want to see how I use Miro? Head on over to my Miro board at miro.com/lenny to see my most popular podcast episodes, my favorite Miro templates. You can also leave feedback on this podcast episode and more. That's miro.com/lenny.

(02:47):
This episode is brought to you by Notion. If you haven't heard of Notion, where have you been? I use Notion to coordinate this very podcast, including my content calendar, my sponsors, and prepping guests for launch of each episode. Notion is an all-in-one team collaboration tool that combines note-taking, document sharing, wikis, project management, and much more into one space that's simple, powerful, and beautifully designed. Not only does it allow you to be more efficient in your work life, but you can easily transition to using it in your personal life, which is another feature that truly sets Notion apart. The other day, I started a home project and immediately opened up Notion to help me organize it all. Learn more and get started for free at notion.com/lennyspod. Take the first step towards an organized, happy team today, again, at notion.com/lennyspod. Naomi, welcome to the podcast.

Naomi Ionita (03:45):
Thank you.

Lenny (03:46):
Did you know that you're one of the very few VCs that I've ever had on this podcast, and so you're basically representing VC kind here? How do you feel about that?

Naomi Ionita (03:54):
Wow. Well, thank you. I think early growth folks like us have a unique bond and a lens on startups and investing. So, my operating background is something I lean on every day and has actually informed a lot of the thesis areas where I spend time now as an investor. So, hopefully, we'll bring it all together in that capacity.

Lenny (04:15):
Awesome. That's exactly what I was just going to say, so I'm glad that you covered that. And so that's a good segue just to... Let's get into your background briefly. Can you talk about some of the wonderful things that you've done in your career both at Reforge, which you'll touch on, and growth stuff, and then your VC life now?

Naomi Ionita (04:29):
Perfect. So, I'm a partner at Menlo Ventures. I focus on early-stage SaaS from seed to series B. I started my career in engineering and consulting before getting into tech back in '06. Fell in love with product. Did some new product development at a big media company before business school. And while at business school, I spent time at the Design Institute at Stanford. So, this was an opportunity to kind of bridge my analytical background with this refreshing view on human-centered design and learning from the founder of IDEO.

(04:56):
So, brought that with me then to Evernote back in 2011, early days over there. I was there from about 10 to 100 million users. And over that arc, I shifted from more of a core product role to starting our growth product function. This was super organic. I started just collaborating with colleagues from across the business, come up with hypotheses, do user research, run experiments, drive metrics. This was a new way of building product back then. This was a decade ago, so the acronym PLG had not been coined yet. And I really just thought of myself as a user and data-driven product person.

(05:33):
After Evernote, I joined a bootstrapped mobile SMB company called Invoice2go. It was the top-grossing business app at the time. There, I built teams across product, data, growth engineering, design and research, and again, focused on product-led growth and monetization. Over those two jobs, I found myself doing a lot more advising and speaking on the side on these topics. And my board members used to farm me out to their companies to help their founders think through things around product growth and pricing and various topics like that. And Reforge came together at the same time, so I would come in and speak on topics through that community. So, that really accelerated my transition into venture. I realized how much I love having that portfolio view of the world and helping founders look around corners. So, I think it's an incredible privilege to get to do the work that I do.

Lenny (06:22):
One thing you mentioned is Evernote. I don't know how much you can talk about this, but they just got sold, right? Someone bought Evernote. And if I think back to Evernote, it feels like they could have been Notion, which is killing it right now. Any thoughts on what maybe they missed and didn't turn into Notion along the way?

Naomi Ionita (06:39):
Yeah. We're going to clear some cobwebs here. It's been a while. But one challenge that Evernote really struggled with was this evolution from single-player to multiplayer to team to enterprise. It's a chasm that a lot of bottom-up SaaS businesses struggle to cross. Evernote was philosophically antisocial. It was meant to be your second brain, kind of your personal tool. And I think that capped the company's growth potential. I always used to say you can't retrofit collaboration. You have to be collaboration-first. And a lot of companies now really take that for granted. But back in mid-2000s, this was kind of a new way of building product. And so we missed that bridge.

(07:20):
If companies do that well, it benefits every metric. That bridge from single-player to multiplayer. Acquisition goes up. You grow organically through referrals and shared workflows. Retention goes up because now you have these shared workflows that are incredibly sticky. Employees are accountable to each other to say, "This is how work gets done." Design in Figma, roadmap planning and ticketing in Jira are linear. It just becomes the default platform. And modernization goes up. Revenue scales with usage. And so the more people using it, the more they use it. You start tripping the wire on paying more and more over time. And so Evernote really struggled in crossing that chasm from the prosumer tool of choice that employees wall-to-wall were using, but never became this larger high-ACV contract from a sales perspective.

Lenny (08:06):
Yeah. It's always easy in hindsight to see what could have been better, what could have worked out, what didn't work out. So, what are you going to do? You mentioned monetization. And I know that you spent a lot of time with founders working on pricing, monetization, especially using monetization as a lever for growth. And so I want to spend some time there to pick your brain about what founders and growth teams can do and how they should think about monetization in terms of growth.

Naomi Ionita (08:06):
Perfect.

Lenny (08:31):
And then you also have this cool concept that you've been developing that you call the Modern Growth Stack, which is kind of this play on modern data stack. And so I want to spend some time there.

Naomi Ionita (08:40):
Perfect.

Lenny (08:40):
Cool. So, to dive into that first topic of monetization, if you think about when you're starting a company, what are some of the biggest challenges you face? Start building a product, especially a B2B product, I always think about pricing and trying to figure out how much to charge, how to charge, your pricing model, how to evolve your pricing, when to charge, all these things. And so I know that you work with founders helping them figure these sorts of things out. And so maybe a first question here is just what do you find startups most often miss or get wrong when they're starting to think about monetization?

Naomi Ionita (09:12):
There's a lot to cover here. I'll cover a few missteps that I think are most common. One is waiting too long to monetize. Another one is underpricing. And this isn't just setting the base price too low, but it's also leaving money on the table by not offering different plans to cater to different segments. And the third one is all too often with pricing, people set it and forget it. So, this idea that when your product development work is never done, neither is your pricing, and you need to combat that along the way. So, those are three areas I think we can cover here.

(09:47):
Maybe starting with one, I can jump right in, I think waiting too long to monetize. The beginning of a startup's journey is all about creating something of value. Right? That's the whole point. Hopefully, founders have some unique market insight or some authenticity around a pain point and some novel solution that's going to change the world. So, that business value is really critical. But the other side of the same coin is being properly compensated for that value as a business. I understand the vulnerability of being a new startup. You just want people to use your product. And I view that early free beta user feedback loop as an R&D cost to make sure you're building the best possible product and that they're driving a lot of value.

(10:28):
But I see companies way too long to make that shift from building a product to building a business. And I think that's the true signal of product-market fit, is ultimately having people open up their wallets and pay you, so looking for people to get to that end goal. And so again, these things aren't mutually exclusive. You're going to create business value, but you're going to be compensated for it and prioritize your roadmap over time so that you're building based on what people actually want and are willing to pay you for.

(10:55):
So, when you don't monetize, I think you're doing yourself a disservice. The things that I see as the pain of leaving money on the table, you're inadvertently cheapening your product. People attribute a lower dollar value or a $0 value to what you've built. You're missing out on critical feedback loops to understand what people are willing to pay. And you're shooting your future self in the foot because this is the other problem, is at some point you're going to start charging, and you're going to experience some backlash. So, it's nice to get ahead of that. A few things to think about, kind of food for thought around delaying and kicking the can down the road from a monetization-

Lenny (11:29):
So, just to reinforce that, your general piece of advice is if you're building a B2B product, start charging immediately. Don't give it away for free. At least have some... You could probably give it away for free but make it clear, "We're going to charge you this much soon." How do you think about that?

Naomi Ionita (11:45):
Yeah, I don't think those are mutually exclusive. So, this isn't to say that I don't like freemium models. Evernote was the darling of freemium over a decade ago. So, I'm still a big believer in that. It's more a question of where you put the paywall. How much do you give up for free? And then how do you price and package a paid version of your product? So, freemium is all about getting that top-of-funnel excitement, getting people to build habit formation. You're collapsing time to value. You're building habit formation. You're building all these champions to use your product. But the idea is to shepherd them along into a paid version of your product and to, again, not delay the idea of, "What should our premium features even be? What should that paid plan even look like?" Again, going back to the misstep at Evernote, I think there was always a premium plan, but it didn't really bridge into enterprise. So, we can talk more about that.

Lenny (12:35):
This is kind of a tangent, I know, because you have these two other pieces of underpricing and setting it and forgetting it. Been talked about, but do you have any advice for deciding what goes into freemium and what-

Naomi Ionita (12:44):
If it gets you to the aha moment, that path to habit formation, that has to be free. That's the core utility of your product. And so the idea is that in that first session or first day, someone's getting to see the delight and saying, "Oh, my God. I'm never going back to the old way. This is how X gets done." If you're looking for some virality or network effect, that's the other thing. Your free users, you might not be getting revenue from, but the idea is that they help you manage CAC. So, these are folks that are driving organic growth for you and helping reduce the incremental cost of your next set of users. So, that's another part of the math equation to think about in giving up revenue.

Lenny (13:23):
You also have this model that you didn't mention that you mentioned in a previous chat we were having offline of this idea of day one versus day 100, stuff people need on day one versus what they need down the road. Do you still believe in that? And what should people know about that?

Naomi Ionita (13:36):
I do believe in that. That was tied to... We had done this experiment at my last company, Invoice2go, where... Typically on the demand curve, the higher you raise the price, the average revenue per user or ARPU, the lower the conversion rate. So, these things are inversely correlated. And we were able to do this rebalancing of our pricing and packaging so that we actually doubled our upgrade rate from our starter plan to our pro plan.

Naomi Ionita (14:00):
... We doubled our upgrade rate from our starter plan to our pro plan while also increasing the price of the pro plan. So, to actually get twice as many people to upgrade while paying something like 30% more for that new plan is pretty rare to get the compounding benefits of that. And what we did was thought a lot about what is a day one premium feature? What is a premium feature that you can get value from the very first time you engage with the product? That's different than your day 100 features. Those are the ones that represent more advanced functionality. Maybe they're ones where the value is derived from having a certain scale of data in the platform.

(14:37):
And so, those you shouldn't waste cognitive load for your users to have to even understand or try to appreciate when they're first getting going. Push those into a more advanced pro version of your product, and monetize them down the road through an upsell. So, big believer in how do you really keep pricing simple? And we've all seen those SaaS pricing pages where there's a laundry list or just a gnarly matrix of features and functionality. So, do what you can to think about that journey for a user and how they're going to continue to increase value with your product over time, and how you can map your pricing and packaging against that journey.

Lenny (15:13):
I really like that framework, because it's so straightforward and simple. As you use it, you'll need more enterprise features innately, because you're sharing it more widely. Your head of security's going to be like, "What are you doing with this thing?" Your finance team's going to be like, "Oh, how do we pay for this thing?" And so, that's a really nice simple way of thinking about what to put in freemium in your free plan versus not. So, glad we touched on that. Okay, so we were going through the three things that companies and founders do wrong when they're starting to price. And so, the first you said was they go too late and I tangentized us, so I'll give it back to you to keep going through this.

Naomi Ionita (15:53):
[inaudible 00:15:53] This is by far the most common issue. And so, one framework I like to use here is matching price to value. When you do that, you create alignment with your user. So, this entails picking the right value metric. So, this is the unit of value that they derive from using your product, and it creates this natural escalator, because as people use it more, you get paid more over time. SaaS was historically built on a seat based model. That's been historical SaaS pricing. And now with the rise of PLG, we've seen more of these usage based approaches gaining speed, so that's pretty exciting to see. Whether it's number of API calls or messages sent or terabytes of storage used or words written, this usage-based approach really matches price to value over the lifetime of a customer. The other thing that happens when you match price to value is it helps you understand who you're building for, and it lets you target different customer segments.

(16:46):
In doing that, you're able to better serve each segment, but you're also able to maximize revenue for the business. Evernote always had a business model. From its beginning, it had $45 a year for an annual subscription. And this set the foundation for the company and tens of millions in revenue, early revenue growth, but the approach was suboptimal. So, as a growth team, we started doing surveys. I was really curious to understand why people converted from our free version to our premium subscription. And one of the most popular answers without fail was, "Well, I just feel guilty. I use it so much. I get so much value from it that I just feel obligated to pay." And take that in for a second, because if guilt is one of the main reasons why people are paying you, then your free version is too good, and you are leaving money on the table.

(17:36):
So, a single premium tier is often a mistake, and you're going to be leaving money on the table for specific segments, and it's important to drill down and understand who those are. Our additional research helped us understand that brand-new users with low perceived value of Evernote looked at it like their Apple Notepad app that was pre-installed on their device. And so, they couldn't understand the idea of paying $45 for Evernote. But then we talked to avid users, and these were people that were cross client using it on desktop and mobile, every device they had. They were using it for work and personal, they were leveraging OCR capabilities and the web clipper, and it was truly their second brain. They could not imagine life without it. And these people were floored that they were only paying $45 a year. They told us that they were getting hundreds of value from Evernote.

(18:28):
Here, the perceived value for avid users was far outpacing what we were asking from them. And this intuition and research really led to a bifurcated strategy of having different plans for different personas based on the value they got from the product and their willingness to pay.

Lenny (18:45):
That makes sense. When I heard you say that it costs $45 for a year, that sounds way too low. So I could see how that sets the pattern for Evernote just not making enough money over the long term. Cool. And then the third was that you don't evolve your pricing, right? That's like the third biggest mistake.

Naomi Ionita (19:03):
Yes. So, do not set it and forget it. I see companies do this where they labor over designs and features, and they build this perfect product that's delightful to use, and then pricing plucked out of thin air, and then they don't revisit it. This was Evernote. It was many, many years before we went back and overhauled the pricing. So, think about your pricing just like you do your roadmap. Every six to 12 months, there's probably something meaningful that you're launching for users. Treat that as an opportunity to revisit your monetization strategy and making sure you're compensated appropriately.

Lenny (19:33):
What advice do you have for founders around just how to decide in your initial price? Clearly Evernote didn't get that correct, and I'm sure you've learned a lot from that and then other companies you've worked with. How do you actually decide what to start charging?

Naomi Ionita (19:45):
Yeah, there's a full pricing process here, so I'm happy to walk through it. The idea here is understanding who your customers are, why they pay you, what is it that they want or value, and how much are they willing to pay you. I'd encourage you to put together a pricing committee. This is not a single-threaded exercise that lives in one department or another. This very much is a cross-functional exercise. If you are a PLG company like companies I worked at, this was the product growth org that I ran. So the combination of PMs and data scientists, folks like that to iterate on pricing. If you are an enterprise SaaS business, of course, sales and finance and rev ops play a role. Think about who that committee should be at your company, and commit to being that cross-functional team that really owns and iterates on pricing over time.

(20:31):
Then, they are responsible for talking to customers. This is by far and away the most basic thing you can do to just increase those feedback loops and understand how much you can push the envelope on pricing. You do that with surveys, with interviews, there's some questions that we like to use around understanding the relative prioritization of features. Going back to that laundry list of features and matrices on a pricing page, it's very rare that people convert equally across all of those features. There's typically one or two that are the main points for conversion. So it's good for you to understand the relative rank there and how to reconcile some of your pricing and packaging accordingly. So, we would make a list of our features that we had and maybe new things we wanted to build and have people rank them as a must-have, nice to have, or not necessary that help us understand the relative prioritization.

(21:23):
You can also get at it with a hundred point question where you give users a hundred points and say, "Spend them across these different features." And the more points you give a feature, the more value you're assigning to it. This is to get to the demand or the features and functionality that you've created. It's step one. It's understanding what people will actually want and making sure that they're not just saying everything but the kitchen sink, but they're actually getting a good sense for what's most important to them. And then the other side is understanding their willingness to pay. I'd say the easiest on-ramps here for companies to start digging into that is to use Van Westendorp's method here. I don't know if you're familiar with that. You're nodding a little bit.

Lenny (22:05):
Yeah. Yeah. Comes up a bunch on this podcast.

Naomi Ionita (22:08):
Oh, great. So I might be repeating myself here, but...

Lenny (22:10):
No, this is great. This is how we learn. We hear it again.

Naomi Ionita (22:13):
If you take the packages that users designated as nice to have and must have, you make that collection of features in the survey, then ask them, "What's such a cheap price that you start to question the quality of the product?" Ask them, "What's a good deal or sounds like the right price for this package?" Ask them, "What's expensive, but they would still pay?" So you're starting to get to that level of discomfort. And then ultimately, "What's prohibitively expensive? What would people just say, 'Okay, that's it.' You've crossed the line of how much I'm willing to pay here." And by plotting those four curves, you start to get a sense of how to inform your pricing. That's a great way to marry the questions around demand and then the questions around willingness to pay.

Lenny (22:52):
Awesome. I wish that survey name was simpler to say, because I can never remember exactly to pronounce it, but you got it. So Van Westendorp.

Naomi Ionita (22:52):
You got it.

Lenny (23:01):
So, say that you got a price, you launched with something. How do you think about and how do you suggest folks experiment with pricing changes? And then, what impact have you seen from making a pricing change, either in terms of revenue or growth? Because I know you work with a lot of startups on these sorts of things, so I'm curious. How big of an impact can you see from pricing changes?

Naomi Ionita (23:22):
Oh, it can be huge. Our friends at OpenView do a really good job of pumping out content and doing these great SaaS benchmarking surveys. They did something recently that showed that roughly half of companies that instituted a pricing change saw at least a 25% increase in ARR. So that's a pretty massive step function improvement in your revenue from something that doesn't require massive technological overhaul. I find that most companies regret not doing it sooner. ProfitWell is another group that I have friends at and have a lot of respect for them and the content that they've put out. They did a survey once on I think it was over 500 SaaS companies, and they looked at for a 1% improvement on acquisition, retention, and monetization, how did it impact a company's bottom line? And they found that the impact with an improvement on monetization was 4X that of acquisition.

(24:13):
So, this idea of how can you efficiently improve your business monetization is really underappreciated as a growth lever. Definitely something people should be thinking about. That's part of my goal of doing this podcast, is making sure founders are compensated in a way that they deserve. So, let's hope everyone makes a little more money after today. And I've seen a lift upwards of 10X on revenue, but it's sometimes hard to parsh just the pricing change, because usually it can be coupled with big product changes, a rebrand, a lot of PR, the launch of a new plan, like a team or an enterprise plan. So, it's hard to sometimes understand just the pricing change in isolation, but it really can be pivotal.

Lenny (24:54):
Cool. And when you think through the pricing changes that you've seen, is the impact often from raising the price just broadly? Is it segmenting more intelligently? Is it changing freemium versus paid? Is there a bucket you think of, like "Here's generally where the biggest impact ends up being?"

Naomi Ionita (25:13):
Yeah, it comes from doing it holistically. I think it's very rarely as impactful if you just pick a new price or just launch a new plan. I really think of it as rebalancing pricing and packaging overall. So it's doing this whole exercise of understanding what people actually want, what their willingness to pay is, and mapping it to that user journey like we talked about from single-player mode to multi-player, that first other person you connect with and have a workflow with, spreading it to your whole teams and ultimately spreading it wall to wall across an organization. So it's a longitudinal view of the user lifecycle and thinking about your whole business model holistically.

Lenny (25:53):
I don't know if you can talk about any of these, but is there a company or an example that comes to mind where you did a pricing change and just talking about what they changed just to make this even more concrete?

Naomi Ionita (26:02):
I have a specific story there with one of our companies, Envoy. This is a fun one. He was just getting started. This is Envoy, the visitor registration tool that I'm sure a lot of people have used, especially before COVID.

Lenny (26:16):
Probably mostly in SF, so I imagine folks in other countries don't know about it. Maybe describe it.

Naomi Ionita (26:20):
Yeah. So, if you visit an office instead of just signing in to that piece of paper in the lobby with your name and your email address and what time you checked in, it is a digital iPad based way of checking in and sharing information with the person you're visiting. And so, in talking to Larry and getting a feel for his evolution around pricing, he tells a story that I love. He was meeting with a big hospitality company, and the conversation was going really well. This prospect was really leaning in and excited about using Envoy, and the conversation shifted to pricing. So in that moment, because Larry was feeling some good vibes, he decided to 10X the price that he was typically charging people. So, just in the moment he decided to just go for it. Go out on a limb, and ask for 10X the typical price.

(27:13):
And in that moment, the exec said, "Okay, sure. Sounds good." Not a minute of hesitation, not a second of hesitation. And what he learned in that moment was that, one, he was wildly underpriced. It was very clear that he hadn't even thought about what the ceiling was. But the truth was he probably could have pushed it even further, considering there was no hesitation. So, what I encourage users to do, especially in these enterprise conversations, is to continue to ask for more, to understand where the upper bound might be, and to understand that it's okay sometimes to lose some deals due to price. Something on the order of 20 to 30% is reasonable so that you can get a sense for where the limit might be. The vast majority of companies are definitely undercharging like we discussed. So, go out on a limb like Larry at Envoy, and you can see that sometimes you can...

Naomi Ionita (28:00):
... like Larry at Envoy and you can see that sometimes you can 2X, 4X, even 10X your price.

Lenny (28:07):
That's an awesome story and it touches on exactly what you said where people often underprice. I imagine it's strategically smarter not to go straight to 10X and maybe go two or three X until people start pushing back because you lose a lot of data there. But that's one way to just zoom to an answer.

Naomi Ionita (28:22):
Yeah, they're all feedback loops, so I think there's some incrementality to it. But you got to understand who these different segments are, and if you don't have enough data points, it's hard to really understand how to continue to optimize.

Lenny (28:33):
Any other tips that you want to leave listeners with around pricing or monetization, or even testing pricing? Anything there before we shift to our second topic?

Naomi Ionita (28:43):
Yes. So we talked a bit about research methods and different surveys you can do to help inform your pricing. And with Enterprise, it's all about continuously asking for more. But if you're a PLG company and you have a public facing pricing page, I'd encourage you to experiment. This is something people shy away from, and frankly, there haven't historically been great tools for companies and infrastructure to be able to do this work.

(29:08):
So at Invoice2go, we invested very heavily in some internal pooling. We had a whole metering and human management and experimentation system in-house. It was a big growth engineering undertaking. And with that we tested different value metrics. We tested different quota limits, price points, promotions, you name it. We tracked the consumption of our pay as you go model and looped that back into the product so we can nudge users along the lifecycle to get them to convert, or upgrade or renew, once quota limits were reached.

(29:38):
So there's a lot there. I'm excited about this new wave of modern tools to actually help you do this and not sync a bunch of engineering time into building something in-house. So that's something we can talk about in a bit. But that investment was very worthwhile. We had huge revenue gains by being able to iterate in a way that was more streamlined.

(29:57):
There's some things to watch out for though. It's hard to test pricing. There's a lot of different variables to isolate. So you've got to make sure you're bringing a consistent test experience to the in product experience, your pricing page, maybe mobile app stores or lifecycle emails that you're sending.

(30:14):
One trick you can do is we would segment these tests by geo. So we would do some tests in Canada or Australia before rolling out in the US. That was a nice way to just put some constraints around our experimentation.

(30:28):
And the other thing you really have to think about is the long-term nature of pricing experimentation. So knowing if you succeeded and failed often requires understanding the implications on churn. Let's say part of your test is year one discount. You need to understand how users perform in year two and have a sense of the trade-offs around user growth, retention, ARPU. So all of these things are different levers that you want to optimize over time.

Lenny (30:56):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate growth. If your business stores any data in the cloud, then you've likely been asked or you're going to be asked about your SOC 2 compliance. SOC 2 is a way to prove your company's taking proper security measures to protect customer data and builds trust with customers and partners, especially those with serious security requirements. Also, if you want to sell to the enterprise, proving security is essential. SOC 2 can either open the door for bigger and better deals or it can put your business on hold. If you don't have a SOC 2, there's a good chance you won't even get a seat at the table.

(31:35):
Beginning a SOC 2 report can be a huge burden, especially for startups. It's time consuming, tedious and expensive. Enter Vanta. Over 3000 fast growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2. Vanta can get you ready for security audits in weeks instead of months, less than a third of the time that it usually takes. For a limited time, Lenny's Podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Just go to vanta.com/lenny, that's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discount. Get started today.

(32:13):
There's a question I wanted to ask you, and maybe it's too big of a question to answer simply, but it's this question you just raised of trading off revenue versus growth. That's one of the most common trade-offs founders have to make. Do you have any just general thoughts, advice there? Is there one you should generally index on? What have you seen works best? Which kind of direction should you lean, growth or revenue, for your, let's say, B2B company? Like early stage?

Naomi Ionita (32:40):
Yeah, if you know that you have a bridge to move up market, then giving up the long tail of individual users can be very worthwhile.

(32:50):
So I think Figma is a great example of that. This was a company that took a while to monetize. And even having free usage at the individual level, that was the way to just drive insane community and love for this product. Designers around the world just fell for this product overnight. But this idea that once they were using it in a more corporate setting, once they were collaborating with more people across the business, they were tripping a wire to pay. And so what happened there was you had this massive top of funnel of individual users, but knowing that design is inherently collaborative, you're interfacing with engineers, you're interfacing with PMs, with marketers, with researchers, with execs, more than half of Figma users weren't even designers once it was embedded in the enterprise. And so this idea of these compounded growth loops that you got by interfacing with so many different parts of the company and making design truly collaborative and in the browser, they were able to just have this exponential curve on monetization once they shifted into more of a team or enterprise based package.

(33:54):
So that's a good example of saying, they were willing to trade off on monetizing the individual because they knew that it would be so sticky and would go so wall to wall within a company.

Lenny (34:05):
Got it. So your feeling is if it's a multiplayer PLG-ish product, you probably want to optimize for growth. Let it just take over and not go charge as much as you can immediately, versus say like a sales led B2B enterprise-y product, maybe they're focused on revenue immediately versus making it feel cheap. Is that right?

Naomi Ionita (34:27):
And I think if you do have a few free users, crafting it as more of a sweetheart discount, like more of a year one discount, but getting paid over time. I mean, again, I am a big believer in having some early users being your design partners and really giving you that tight feedback loop to make sure you're building the right product. So it's not that you should really optimize for revenue on day one. I mean, it is a journey, but I just oftentimes see companies just take too long. Or in Evernote's case, I mean the free version was just too good. So that's just something to consider, where to put the paywall and be really, really strategic about that.

Lenny (35:02):
Just don't optimize for guilt in your paid driver.

(35:07):
So you're talking about pricing testing and I was going to ask what tools you found that are useful for testing pricing. And that's probably a good segue to talking about the modern growth stack. Would that fit into this concept of modern growth stack, testing your pricing?

Naomi Ionita (35:21):
Yeah, let's do it.

Lenny (35:22):
Okay, let's do it. So just to set it up, there's this term modern data stack that I think it'd be useful for you to explain because not everyone is aware of that, and you've kind of been thinking more about this adjacent idea of a modern growth stack. So can you just talk about these two things, and then we'll lead to some questions there?

Naomi Ionita (35:37):
So the modern data stack is basically a collection of cloud native tools to more easily move and manage data. It consists of a fully managed ELT, data pipeline, a destination for that data. So a cloud-based data warehouse, like a Snowflake or Redshift, data transformation tool like DBT, and then finally a platform for visualization on top, so people can access the data. The play on modern data stack was very intentional. I think of the modern growth stack, or my core thesis area right now at Menlo, as the evolution of what you do with the data. So these are the workflows that the data enables to drive the business forward for product growth and revenue teams like I used to run. It's the modern replacement for infrastructure that teams like mine built or bought. When you're responsible for driving things like activation or monetization or retention, there tends to be a lot of these internal tools that are built because you're really powering cross-functional teams to do this work. It's not mapped easily into legacy departments.

Lenny (36:39):
Awesome. And the general idea here is, there's so many more tools now to help you grow with the data stack. There's just all these tools now that make it so much easier to collect data, use data, make decisions off data, and you're finding the same things happening with growth. What are some of the tools that you found to be super helpful? I know you're an investor in some, you're not a investor in others. It'd be good to just talk about, here's just like a bunch of cool tools and how do they fit together as much as possible to help you grow your startup.

Naomi Ionita (37:05):
And I want to reinforce some different themes before I get into some layers of the stack because I think it's important to frame the benefits of the modern growth stack. So one is data, two is workflow, and three is impact.

(37:18):
So starting with data, the modern growth stack companies really are powered by these smart integrations and the automation that you get as a result. So with this proliferation of SaaS, it's created this need for more data access and interoperability. We've all felt that pain of siloed data. Modern growth stack companies leverage reverse ETL companies, like Hightouch or Census, to break down these silos and help companies, or employees across the company, access data and be more productive. So that's a big data theme with modern growth stack companies.

(37:49):
The other theme that they unlock is around workflow. Here, it's really the enablement of people and process. So rather than employees sitting in their departmental silos, modern growth stack companies build bridges between them. So by unlocking data access, the business side can often self-serve and be more self-sufficient without relying on an engineer or a data scientist to run queries or stitch together data sets for them.

(38:16):
The other thing here is lots of growth work is inherently cross functional. So the efforts to drive growth requires new tools and collaborative workflows like we're discussing. Without purpose-built software, many teams like mine felt no choice but to build in-house. So we spent sacred hours building and maintaining tooling for experimentation, personalization, billing, monetization. These were resources that could have been reallocated to building proprietary features for the business had we been able to buy something purpose-built.

(38:50):
And finally, these products really drive impact. So the idea here is driving hard ROI in the form of cost reduction. So automation means time savings, and oftentimes, that can be mapped directly to cost reduction for a company. But they also help product and growth and go to market teams better engage and monetize customers. So they're driving hard ROI in the form of revenue impact too. I'm really compelled by companies that can drive hard ROI both across cost saving and revenue generation. And I think that ROI story is even more compelling now in a softer macroeconomic climate. You just have to be able to continue to retain sales and pricing power, and I think that's derived from a strong ROI story like I described.

(39:35):
So those are general themes and consistencies across the companies that I get particularly excited about. So happy to talk about a few layers in the stack, and I think you might be familiar with a few of these as well, especially based on your growth background at Airbnb and tools that you probably build yourself.

Lenny (39:54):
Yeah, exactly. That's what I was going to say, that so many of these things are just coming out of startups that have built these in-house. And then they're just like, "Hey, I could start a company doing this and provide it to all these other companies." And so I just love that there's all these tools coming out that just make it easier to build startups and grow startups, and do less work, and have less people. Just reminds me of the number one app in the App Store at this point. I don't know if it still is Gas, which is just like four people, and it's higher than TikTok and YouTube, and all the things, and Facebook, and it's four people. And so it just shows you the power of what tools can do for you to build new startups and disrupt people, and companies that have been around for a long time.

Naomi Ionita (40:33):
And you have to help companies do more with less now. There's a lot of frozen budgets and that's a good way to break through. So I love that these companies can do that for the buyer.

(40:44):
So one that's come up a bit and gotten a lot of airtime recently is product-led sales. This idea of companies that serve PLG businesses and harness the power of all that product usage data to inform the customer facing team around which accounts are most upgradable. It's really free money when you shine a light on an account that nobody was paying attention to and some inside sales team can drive a large account expansion. So I don't know what better ROI you should get than that.

(41:14):
And there's a bunch of companies that are doing this. Endgame happens to be one that I work with. They have customers like Figma, Loom, Calendly. There's other players too. I think Pocus has done a phenomenal job of building content and community to help inform the market around the power of product led sales. So there's just a lot of goodness about all the players in this space really waking everyone up to this opportunity of layering on sales to a product led motion and how to maximize revenue along the way.

Lenny (41:45):
I'm an investor in both of those actually, and I'm going to, just in the show notes, note the one I'm an investor in because I'm investor in a lot of these companies, it turns out. And we've invested in a few, so I'm just going to keep it simple and I'll write in the show notes. Here's ones I'm an investor, just to avoid.

Naomi Ionita (41:59):
I love that. Double- dipping means you're a believer in the category as well.

Lenny (42:03):
I am.

Naomi Ionita (42:00):
... tipping means you're a believer in the category as well.

Lenny (42:03):
I am. I love it. There's so much school stuff happening there and I'm really excited. Yeah.

Naomi Ionita (42:08):
Yep. Cool. I think another layer in the stack is experimentation. So this is really critical infrastructure, in my opinion, for these cross-functional product data growth teams to A/B test hypotheses and understand their impact on the business. How do you know if you make a change in the product or your pricing, whether you succeeded or failed without having infrastructure like this along the way? Category creators like Optimizely really paved the way. I was an early buyer of Optimizely and they targeted marketing personas, and it was just game changing to be able to start to A/B test things and bring hypotheses to life.

(42:44):
I'm also biased as an investor, but some of the modern tools here, like Eppo, which offers experimentation for the modern data stack. So unlike Optimizely, which focused on more kind of click through metrics, Eppo ties directly to the metrics in your data warehouse. So tying an experiment result to things like subscriptions or revenue or margins, really like board level metrics that you're trying to move. They make that full trip really convenient and understand the impact on those business KPIs directly. So it's a lot of automation around the experimentation, results. And analysis they used to live off to the side in Excel or Jupyter Notebooks now is automated away with Eppo. I think you're familiar with that one.

Lenny (43:29):
Yeah, we definitely didn't plan this, but Eppo's both a happy sponsor of this podcast. I'm also an investor in Eppo. Go Eppo, but this was not planned.

Naomi Ionita (43:38):
Well, this is Airbnb roots. [inaudible 00:43:41].

Lenny (43:40):
Love it. It is. Yeah. It's my colleague.

Naomi Ionita (43:42):
[inaudible 00:43:42] was an early data scientist at Airbnb.

Lenny (43:45):
Exactly, I worked with him at Airbnb and he was amazing and I had to invest in anything that he built. He built an awesome thing.

Naomi Ionita (43:49):
Yeah, but exactly like you describe, I love these founders that have steep authenticity around the problem because they built it internally and now they're commercializing it for the masses. And so the story of chain Eppo is a good one on that dimension. And there's other players too. I'm also a big fan of Amplitude and a buyer of that tool as well, and I love a lot of the team there. So if you do not have a data team or a data warehouse and you still want to leverage being able to do behavioral kind of ad hoc analysis or experimentation, that's a great tool for you as well. So a lot of different ways to solve this problem in the market.

Lenny (44:22):
Also, a happy sponsor, go Amplitude.

Naomi Ionita (44:25):
Cool.

Lenny (44:26):
I love it. This is great. Hitting on all my favorites. Okay, let's keep going. What else have we got?

Naomi Ionita (44:32):
Well, I talked a lot about billing and monetization, so I'd have to talk about that one. I think platforms for managing, billing and iterating on your pricing and packaging, this is just such a big need. I think these will transform business models. For SaaS in particular, most companies have been seat-based like we described, so the historical incumbents like a [inaudible 00:44:54] really serve that model. But in this shift to more usage based, there's new entrants that are servicing companies in that dimension. And there's also lots of sort of clunky workflows when you think of bridging from engineering to product and growth to finance or RevOps.

(45:11):
So there's a lot of just streamlined workflow that these new tools can offer. Some early breakout players in the world of usage-based billing are Metronome and Orb. There's also more room to handle the full monetization infra-layer. So for example, I like how Orb marries the billing component with the data infrastructure to actually inform what your pricing and packaging iteration should be and help you forecast and optimize revenue. So there's other players that are doing different components from this journey of the metering piece all the way through to the experimentation piece, and it's been really, really fun to get to know players in that space. And I wish I could have been a buyer of them many moons ago.

Lenny (45:57):
Not an investor in these yet. And so that's cool. Quick tangent, do you have a strong opinion on pricing models, usage based versus seed based versus something else? What's your guidance to founders? Is this the way to go, usually one of them, or is it super dependent? What do you recommend?

Naomi Ionita (46:12):
Yes, this is a similar answer I had before. I don't think that they're mutually exclusive. And so if you look at all the companies that in different pricing models in SaaS, a small sliver less than 10%, around roughly 5% have just pure natural escalator kind of usage-based model. The vast majority have a hybrid approach. And so what I mean by that is they're typically some good, better, best subscription model where there's some consumption component across each tier, like some quota limit for your given value metric. So in Slack there might have been number of messages sent or Dropbox number of terabytes of storage. Invoice2go might be number of invoices. There's some dimension that's been sort of packaged in with a given pricing plan, and once you reach that limit, it is a trigger to get you to upgrade to the next plan over, or sometimes there's overages that you can pay for.

(47:02):
So I don't believe that you should just be seat-based or just be usage-based. I think one challenge with purely usage-based models is that's not always how CFOs want to buy. I think buyers sometimes want predictability. They want to be able to budget for your tool, and I've lived that. I remember using tools like Mixpanel and Segment and even Jira to an extent where I was paying a cheap amount to get going, and all of a sudden I realized we had grown quickly and I looked at all of our SaaS spend and I was blown away by how much more we were paying. So it's the other side of this... I'm advocating for people getting paid and compensated for the value that they're delivering, but there can be a breaking point. And so how do you think about packaging a fixed and variable component so that people can more predictably buy your software?

Lenny (47:48):
Any other layers of the stack that you want to touch on slash which would you be most excited about in the future? Do you think people should be paying more attention to that maybe they're not paying attention to?

Naomi Ionita (47:57):
I mean, I wouldn't be doing my job as a VC if I didn't mention Generative AI right now. It's really having a moment. So there's a bunch of breakout applications there that sit within this theme of the modern growth stack. When you think of using AI to create images or text or code or audio or video, these capabilities change the way teams work. So writing a blog or writing copy for an ad, SDR is doing their work and can outbound sales efforts. There's just a lot of these touchpoints where it's humans kind of tinkering and iterating and laboring over every word. And if the machine, if AI can tell you what's going to be a more performant version of something, that's a very, very hard ROI exercise there. You save time and hopefully you've improved your performance across the various marketing or sales campaign.

Lenny (48:48):
Where do you think AI will be the most help on growth in terms of growth? Do you have an idea there?

Naomi Ionita (48:54):
I think what I described around marketing and sales, just because they really touch the dollars. It can be this ROI story around saving time, but also driving revenue. There'll be plenty of really effective examples within things like customer support. I mean the cost savings potential. There's going to be massive. We'll see what happens in engineering, which generating code. I think there's a lot of areas where it is going to touch the enterprise, but from a modern growth stack standpoint, I think something that's really revenue generating and can point to attributable ROI on that dimension is going to be pretty relevant to where I'm spending time right now.

Lenny (49:32):
I'm excited. Any last thoughts before we get to a very exciting lightning round?

Naomi Ionita (49:37):
I'm happy to hand it over to the lightning round here.

Lenny (49:40):
Well, we've reached the very exciting lightning round. I'm only going to have four questions for you. I'm going to ask them pretty quick. We'll go through them fast, whatever comes to mind. No pressure. Question one, what are a couple books that you've recommended most to other people?

Naomi Ionita (49:56):
My buddy Madhavan from Simon Kucher's wrote a book called Monetizing Innovation. This is a great read. He and others there have done pricing engagements with hundreds of tech companies, so there's a lot of stories and practical tips there. I often gift that one to founders, so I can't do this whole talk without giving a nod to my friend, Madhavan, and his bible.

Lenny (50:19):
Awesome. I just recorded an episode with Madhavan, and so that's a great pick. Question number two, favorite recent movie or TV show that you really enjoyed?

Naomi Ionita (50:28):
I have little kids, so I don't know if this is going to be as interesting for folks, but we like Story Bots on Netflix. They're these little cartoon characters that answer kids questions. So people sort of call in and ask questions and they do a whole episode on why is the sky blue? How do airplanes fly? How do I see? And I inevitably learned something from watching those. So those are very kind of playful and educational shows. I critically need a new-

Lenny (51:00):
No, those are... I don't know the answer to any of those questions. I need to watch this. Okay, so question three. I'm looking at my notes and I've never asked this question before, so I don't know where this came from, but I love it. Who's been the biggest inspiration to you in your life?

Naomi Ionita (51:14):
I mean, this one's pretty easy. For me, it's my parents. They're from South America originally and lived on three different continents before immigrating to the US for graduate school. It's a pretty cliché American dream, but they came here with nothing. Just this idea of building a family and taking advantage of the educational and professional opportunities in America. They progressed through school and building their career in three different languages with no financial support, no entrenched kind of resources or networks to lean on, and I just can't imagine doing that. Just the stress or cognitive load of kind of restarting your life in whole new geographies and cultures and languages and just betting on yourself and figuring it all out along the way. So my drive has always been rooted in their story and I'm forever indebted to them.

Lenny (52:03):
I need to ask this question more often. That was an amazing answer on the spot. Naomi, we have reached the end of our chat. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to learn more, maybe pitch you startup ideas, contact you if they want to ask you questions, and then finally, how can folks be useful to you?

Naomi Ionita (52:23):
I'm a partner at Menlo Ventures, so you can find more about me in the firm at menlovc.com or else on LinkedIn or Twitter. My DMs are open.

Lenny (52:33):
Amazing. Naomi, thank you so much for being here.

Naomi Ionita (52:35):
My pleasure. I look forward to talking to more folks who are building things across workflow automation, data AI, and the modern growth stack. So thank you. It's always a pleasure.

Lenny (52:48):
All right, DMs are coming in as we speak.

Naomi Ionita (52:50):
Thanks, Lenny.

Lenny (52:53):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Patrick Campbell (00:00:00):
The bratty thing here is that real professional ship. At the end of the day, real... I don't care if you're a marketer or a product person, engineer, ops person, people ops, real professional ship, and they ship at a pretty high frequency for whatever they're doing. In my opinion, your tempo framework is more important than your org design. And so if you've ever had a team that seems really, really smart, but they're always planning or they don't really ship a lot, or you've had trouble where everyone kind of gets it at the leadership level, but then the team below them and below them seems to be kind of going in a different direction, you probably don't have enough alignment and you don't have enough alignment on what good looks like in terms of tempo.

Audio (00:00:45):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard-won experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Patrick Campbell. Patrick is the founder and CEO of ProfitWell, which he bootstrapped and sold without any funding for over $200 million. I've been a big fan of ProfitWell and of Patrick for many years. He's one of the most insightful and smartest people that I know, constantly sharing wisdom on Twitter and in his newsletter, primarily on pricing and retention and team building and all of the elements of building a successful SaaS business.

(00:01:19):
I've been excited to get Patrick on the podcast since I launched it, and I think this may be the most action-packed signal-to-noise episode yet. We cover 10 topics in an hour, including hot takes on team building, bootstrapping, shipping, competitive analysis, user research, and of course, pricing and retention. Do not miss this episode, it is one of my new favorites. With that, I bring you Patrick Campbell, after a short word from our wonderful sponsors.

(00:01:45):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate growth. If your business stores any data in the cloud, then you've likely been asked or are you going to be asked about your SOC 2 compliance. SOC 2 is a way to prove your company's taking proper security measures to protect customer data and builds trust with customers and partners, especially those with serious security requirements.

(00:02:09):
Also, if you want to sell to the enterprise, proving security is essential. SOC 2 can either open the door for bigger and better deals or it can put your business on hold. If you don't have a SOC 2, there's a good chance you won't even get a seat at the table. Beginning a SOC 2 report can be a huge burden, especially for startups. It's time-consuming, tedious and expensive.

(00:02:31):
Enter Vanta. Over 3,000 fast-growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2. Vanta can get you ready for security audits in weeks instead of months, less than a third of the time that it usually takes. For a limited time, Lenny's Podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Just go to vanta.com/lenny, that's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discount. Get started today.

(00:03:02):
This episode is brought to you by Amplitude. If you're setting up your analytics stack but not using Amplitude, what are you doing? Anyone can sell you analytics while Amplitude unlocks the power of your product and guides you every step of the way. Get the right data, ask the right questions, get the right answers, and make growth happen. To get started with Amplitude for free, visit amplitude.com. Amplitude, power to your products.

Lenny (00:03:31):
Patrick, welcome to the podcast.

Patrick Campbell (00:03:33):
Thanks for having me, man. Good to finally... we've been texting, chatting for years now and I just realized we've never had an actual conversation, so this is where the relationship and the friendship ends because we realize how awkward we are together, I guess.

Lenny (00:03:48):
I highly doubt it. I hope that doesn't happen. I've wanted to get you on this podcast ever since I started this podcast. It's always been on my list. You're just generally one of the smartest humans and most amazing humans I know, and so thank you for joining me on this podcast.

Patrick Campbell (00:04:02):
We've got to introduce you to more people, but I appreciate that. I appreciate that.

Lenny (00:04:07):
You're a humble, humble man. So usually what I do with these podcasts is I have this one main topic that I focus on, but I feel like you're such a renaissance man of a brain that I thought would be more fun to go through 10 different topics and power through them and see your perspective. I feel like you have all these contrarian takes on things and these interesting insights. And so what I want to do is just go through 10 topics and just get a sense of what's a big mistake founders companies make in this area, what's maybe a big opportunity they miss, or just like what's a hot take on this topic. How's that sound?

Patrick Campbell (00:04:43):
Yeah, 100%. Let's do it. I'm going to change my Twitter bio to that, renaissance of a brain. That's [inaudible 00:04:50] for me. Yeah, I appreciate that.

Lenny (00:04:52):
Yeah, just renaissance [inaudible 00:04:55] that quote. That'd be hilarious. People will be like, "What the hell's he..." Anyway, let's just jump right in. First topic is building your team as a founder or just a leader of any kind. So here's the question, just what are the biggest mistakes people make building their team? What are the biggest opportunities people miss when they're building their team? Or just generally what's like your take on how to best approach building your team as a founder or just a leader of people?

Patrick Campbell (00:05:23):
You always have to start answers with cliches, and I think the biggest cliche with building a team is, team is everything, right? If you're listening, you've heard that, you've probably said that to somebody or gotten mentored on that. And I was told that in the early days of building, and I actually thought it was terrible advice. I thought it was going to be the product or marketing or something that was going to hold us back. But I think that although team is everything, and I truly believe that, if you look at most data or most behaviors that most companies make, this isn't actually how we think or what we do.

(00:05:55):
Let me give you two fundamental issues. I think the first one is we confuse team by being everything to all people to accommodating to every single person, and especially in tech the last couple of years, maybe that's going to change a little bit now, but it was always like, "Oh, everyone needs to be happy." And I think that's a really, really big misconception because you're not there to make everyone happy. You're there for some sort of mission and some sort of goal and you want to set up the culture and the team in a way that gets to that particular goal.

(00:06:24):
And I think the little bit more actionable way to look at this is, I don't think we actually focus on our team. The average tenure of a manager in tech right now is about 15.7 months. I actually went and looked into this mainly because we got into hyperdrive about team a couple of years ago. The average time a report has the same manager in corporate tech is only about 10.8 months, so just under 11 months. And there's no way that team is everything, or at least we actually believe that when the purveyors of your team, your management only lasts that long, it's just impossible.

(00:06:57):
And I think for the most part, people ops is an afterthought. And even if you get into the history of HR, which we should not do because that's an entire podcast, it's all about reacting. It came out of the labor movement in the mid 1900s, and it was all about, "Hey, how do we CYA?" rather than, "How do we push our team forward?" And I think in tech we had the opportunity to do that, but we haven't really focused on our team as much. So I don't know if I answered your question, but that's the scope of that problem I think, is we don't actually focus on our team, we don't actually focus on our team in the context of the mission. We just hire people, hope they're really happy. And obviously I'm generalizing, but if you look at the stats and you look at what's happening, that's how it shakes out.

Lenny (00:07:38):
Is there something you've done in building your company that has been counter to that, something you've learned about? Because I totally agree, people always talk about team, team, team and then that's often really sucky to work at a lot of companies and clearly they don't care that much about your experience.

Patrick Campbell (00:07:52):
So super actionable things that we've done. I think, one, it comes back to the baseline feedback or advice you've probably received, or if you're listening to this before, which is you can't be everything to all people, so who are you for? Who are you for and who are you not for? I think really defining that in your values, and values aren't values unless there's an actual trade-off. And so we had things like optimize for the long-term. There's a clear trade-off when we optimize for the long-term, you probably give up short-term revenue.

(00:08:22):
You also have different types of people that do better at the particular company than not. One of the more controversial things we did is we talked a lot about behaviors and the one thing that we had is this concept known as the most charitable interpretation. It's not something we made up, but there's this idea that basically when there's conflict or when there's some sort of confrontation, the way that you handle that confrontation was really, really important to us. And the way that we wanted our teams or the people that we wanted to hire for basically would take the most charitable interpretation of that confrontation.

(00:08:53):
So Lenny, if you were like, "Hey, Patrick, I like your shirt," and I just didn't like when people commented on my shirt, instead of getting pissed off, going to HR, or getting mad at you, what we would do is we'd say, "Hey, the right way at ProfitWell wall to handle that was be like, 'He didn't know, so I'm not going to bring it up,' or 'Hey, Lenny. You probably didn't know, but I don't really like when people comment on my shirt.'"

(00:09:14):
It seems super trivial, but when you have over 20 people, all of a sudden these things start to come up. And I think most of the time we infantilize our teams where we let them run to HR, we have different policies or all of these different things, when at the end of the day you're paying an exorbitant amount of money for very smart human beings to basically do stuff and you want them basically working together and not having to go in this runaround with policies and people to push things forward.

Lenny (00:09:41):
I love that. It reminds me of something at Airbnb where our head of product was always encouraging us to assume good intent from the other person that just like, "What is the good version of what they're trying to achieve? It's unlikely they're trying to cause harm."

Patrick Campbell (00:09:54):
But the important part is, and this is where you really care about your team, is if you believe that, and it's okay to have a culture that doesn't believe that, it's not a culture for me, and that's okay, that's the entire point, but if you believe that, then people who have trouble assuming positive intent or who have trouble taking the most charitable interpretation, they can't be at your company, and they have to go and you have to find... And we would have people, and we didn't always defend this and when we started defending it, everything got better. But all of a sudden we would say, "Hey, it seems like this is really tough. This is how we think about things. This is how we handle this type of behavior here. If that's hard for you, let's find you another job." And thankfully we're not digging ditches here, we're all working in tech. And so it's "easy", quote-unquote, enough to find another gig even in economies like now.

Lenny (00:10:41):
That reminds me of there's this guy Douglas Atkin, who I worked with for a while who helped us craft the core values at Airbnb, and he made this point that your values need to be clear, exactly like you said, who doesn't fit, who doesn't belong. Because if it's everybody, it's worthless. Integrity, trust, everyone wants that and it fits into that, but it's only valuable if it's clear who's not a fit, exactly how you're saying it.

Patrick Campbell (00:11:07):
Well, we get this fear of that accommodation culture, again, where it starts even in the interview process, we're like, "Oh my god, we need these hires, we need these salespeople, we need these engineers." So we don't end up being upfront with these values and these trade-offs in the interview process. And then all of a sudden you spend a lot of time and a lot of money hiring someone who just doesn't fit. And I think that's really, really bad for them, it's really bad for you. And so that was the other thing is we would pull all of this forward into the interview process and talk about it and basically say like, "Hey, if this is not how you think, that's okay. We're not better than you, you're not better than us, it's just this is how we do things here."

(00:11:42):
And I think a lot of times we're scared to do that because we have that founder, that exact fear of, "Hey, we have to get this thing done and the only way to do that is to do X, Y or Z Z when in reality that's actually going to make your deadline go out further than actually focusing on alignment as much as humanly possible.

Lenny (00:12:00):
Next topic, bootstrapping. I feel like you're probably in the bootstrap hall of fame. You built a company-

Patrick Campbell (00:12:06):
Here we go. That's all I've ever wanted.

Lenny (00:12:09):
I think you're in there. So you tell me if I'm missing anything, but basically you bootstrapped a company, sold it for 200 million. I don't know if I've heard of anything like that. So what's your hot take? What are mistakes people make around bootstrapping?

Patrick Campbell (00:12:22):
The basic idea is bootstrapping is for lifestyle businesses that want to cash flow. Funding is for companies trying to create a billion dollars in annual revenue. And that answer offends everybody. That answer offends the indie friends I have, they're going to be like, "Oh, what about Basecamp [inaudible 00:12:43], ProfitWell?" And I'll tell you, ProfitWell, this was a big mistake. Yes, it was a great exit, we sold for over $200 million, et cetera, but we probably, if we had taken money, we could have had a billion-dollar exit or we could have kept going.

(00:12:56):
And we should have taken money earlier in our life cycle. This was actually a big mistake because we got hooked on the efficiency and that was great, but we could have moved even quicker than we were. And hindsight is 20/20, and I'm obviously not crying over this, but it's one of those things that I think that you have to know who you are and you have to know what your goals are for a company. And our biggest thing was we wanted to build a big company and we were going after that, but we weren't doing the things in order to actually make that happen, which is i.e. getting funded. So yeah, that's my hot take and hopefully I offend everyone. But it's also just the end of the Twitter argument where it's like, "Yeah, it depends," but that's the thing to think about.

Lenny (00:13:38):
It's interesting because usually you hear from the other end, someone that raised VC money is like, "I shouldn't have raised money, I should have bootstrapped this thing longer." It's cool to hear from the other side someone that did that like, "No, we maybe should have raised the VC money along the way."

Patrick Campbell (00:13:50):
Well, I think there's a lot of ideas that should not raise money. There's a lot of ideas that should just be great cash flowing and they can be large businesses. There's large businesses cash flowing tens of millions of dollars without funding. And I think it's just one of those things that you need your goals, your model, and ultimately your funding situation all to match. And I think a lot of folks, they go in the opposite direction where they're just like, "Oh, everything on TechCrunch, everything on Twitter is like, "Hey, I need to raise money, raise money, raise money." And they don't take a step back and go like, well that idea, it's just not a very good business to get money. And money is so plentiful even now still that it is, quote-unquote, "relatively easy" to raise money on, just not a great idea, and so that's obviously problematic.

Lenny (00:14:37):
I've been thinking about writing a post on that exact topic, something like, "Your startup probably is not venture scale," because a lot of people think they could raise money and build a huge business. What's a heuristic that maybe tells a founder that they shouldn't raise money, it's never going to be a billion-dollar company?

Patrick Campbell (00:14:53):
I used to look at it 10 years ago you'd say, "Is this a company that can get to 100 million in annual revenue?" And now those numbers are all changed because IPOs are happening closer to 200, 250 million and the markets are all over the place depending on the day. I look at this as if you are going to be that large company, you need to get to a billion in revenue per year. It doesn't have to be overnight, it can be over 20 years, it's not something that has to happen quickly, but that's how I think about it. And if I don't feel like there's a clear path to that, it doesn't mean I don't raise money. It just means that I take a step back and really think about that particular idea because when you get on that treadmill, there's plenty of ideas that will sell for 400 million, 500 million.

(00:15:38):
But then if you're on the funding treadmill and you look at how much money that founder that exec team ends up getting at the end of it's like you might have been better just building a 50 million cash flowing business that you're getting more money from that and you still have the choice to sell it.

(00:15:52):
So that's how I think about it. It's a spectrum and it's on the margins there. It's not a fixed rule. But the other thing I also think about when I think about building my next company, we're going to be bootstrapped for, I don't know what... It's not a timeline, but I had imagined probably the first 18 to 24 months because I don't want to give up that equity for that funding on figuring out the idea. Obviously, I had an exit so I'm able to afford that and I'm in a position where I don't have to worry about my own livelihood.

(00:16:22):
But I think it's one of those things if you can bootstrap, even if you're going after a funded idea, if you can bootstrap for the initial ideation and maybe even through product market fit, which is not an easy thing to do, but that's the ideal time then to raise because then you're just going and you're going for the fences at that point.

Lenny (00:16:37):
I really like that very concrete stat you shared and that's exactly how we think about it, that if you don't think you can get to a billion dollars in revenue a year eventually that it probably is not a venture-scale business. And I think that just boils down to how large is the market. If there's not enough people that are going to pay enough money to make this a billion dollar a year in revenue business, you probably shouldn't go down the VC treadmill.

Patrick Campbell (00:16:59):
And I think when you think about that, it opens up this world of options for you as someone listening to this. And so think of it this way, you don't have to have the pressure to create a billion dollars in revenue If you can take a step back and be like, "Okay, I can create a $10-million business." You're listening to this and probably you're like, "I don't know." But if you were a director level somewhere at a corporate company or you're leading product somewhere, you can go create a $10-million business. It might not happen overnight, it might take 10 years, all these other things. But that's amazing. That's insane.

(00:17:33):
Think of 20, 30, 40, 50 years ago, you'd have to have a corner store and you'd have to work 18 hours a day to build that type of ability or that wealth to then hopefully retire when you're 65 and sell the business for 1X. Now you can build a software company that's doing a million a year, have an amazing life, reduce the number of hours if you want, or go all in, make it into a 10 or $100-million company over time. And I think that's amazing and we should celebrate that rather than if it's not a billion, you're failing. But we should just know our limits. I think that's the thing a lot of people fail out with funding.

Lenny (00:18:09):
Next topic, pricing. You are probably the most... okay, you're in the top 1% smartest, most experienced people on pricing. We could have done a whole podcast on pricing, maybe we will in the future, but as maybe one of 10 topics, what comes to mind as maybe the biggest mistake people make in pricing, biggest opportunity they miss, biggest hot take?

Patrick Campbell (00:18:31):
It's super boring, but the biggest hot take is you just have to do something once a quarter. That's it. I've been trying to teach about pricing for a decade now. I've done a lot of different approaches on this, and I think the easiest thing is, listen, you have three growth levers. You have acquiring customers, monetizing them, and retaining them. You're spending a lot of time and money on acquisition. You're spending some time and money on retention. You're probably do nothing on pricing and monetization and it's because you think it's this nebulous thing and there are some nebulous aspects to it.

(00:19:06):
But to make it super concrete, it is the revenue per customer. Look at that number, that one KPI, and you want that number going up and to the right, it's obviously going to go to the right over time, but you want it to going up over time every single quarter, not as high as your sales volume or your lead volume or your revenue maybe. But you want that number gradually going up and just do one thing per quarter. The least sexy thing when it comes to pricing is have a pricing committee. If it's a two-person company, it's you and your co-founder. If it's a 100,000-person company, it might be 30 people, but really it's only eight people central to that particular product.

(00:19:42):
And then just realize there's a lot of things that influence that revenue per customer. There's the actual price, your packaging, your add-on strategy, your discount strategy, your price localization, freemium. There's a whole host of different things there, but just find one thing you're going to do every three months, put a calendar invite, let it renew every three months. You're going to snooze it a couple of times, I get it, I've seen this many, many times before. But just do something, even if it's super small. I guarantee you it's just like any other thing you measure, as soon as you start measuring and caring about it, you're going to start to do some stuff, some of it is going to go poorly, some of it is going to go great. Then you're going to do more stuff, and then just over time, all of a sudden that number's going to go up into the right. But just do something. That's the basic idea.

Lenny (00:20:24):
I love the simplicity of that. If I think about the pie chart of the things you will do and may change, you mentioned a few. One is raise prices. One may be lower prices. One's probably change your pricing model. There's a couple more. I guess, in your experience, where have you found the biggest opportunities end up being maybe early in the early phase of a startup in that pie chart?

Patrick Campbell (00:20:47):
The number one thing to figure out when you're thinking about the different pricing pieces, pound for pound, it's the pricing metric or the value metric. That's how you charge per user, per thousand visits, per thousand what's its, whatever it is. Consumer companies, it's a little bit harder. Physical good products, it's really hard obviously because you have that physical good, the physics you can't get over. But the reason this is so powerful is because if you get everything else in your pricing wrong or not great, but you get that right, you tend to be okay when it comes to monetization.

(00:21:21):
And the reason is because, first, from an acquisition standpoint like acquiring customers, you end up making sure that you get Disney coming into your product, they're paying Disney prices, and then you get Johnny or Jane's startup coming in and they're paying Johnny and Jane prices. You don't want them paying the same thing because obviously the value's different, even if they're consuming almost the same amount. So this allows you to figure that line out.

(00:21:44):
And then what's really beautiful about it is churn tends to be about 20 to 25% lower because people will downgrade, but they're using... you don't get this like, "I'm paying for so much and end up not using a lot of it." It's like, "Oh, I'm using eight seats this month, I'm going to downgrade," or it's just automatic. And then your expansion revenue's typically double when you're using a particular value metric because instead of me having to resell you and being like, "Hey, Lenny, there's this really cool feature in this upper tier, do you want this?" And you're like, "I already use the product, I don't really want this." Instead, I just go, "Hey, Lenny, congratulations. You now have 100 videos in your account. That's awesome. You guys must be growing. I'm just going to bump you up to the 100-video plan. Let me know if you have any questions." It's just a very, very implicit way to get expansion revenue. So that's the thing pound for pound that's the best.

(00:22:30):
And then I would say if you have a lot of politics internally, which everyone does with pricing because it sits in the center of so many different teams, I would actually start with a price increase. You should be increasing your overall price once per year if you're building. If you're not building and your support sucks and your NPS is low, then don't worry about it. But if your NPS is over 20, which is not a very high NPS, you should raise your prices once per year. The reason I suggest that is because it gets all of the BS and all the politics on the mat. You're going to have to collect some data, you're going to have to prove it to sales, you're going to have to make sure you have the enablement, you're going to have to make sure your messaging is...

(00:23:06):
But it's a tight enough non-nebulous thing that you're doing versus a value metric where you can have a bunch of debates about this metric or that metric, and should you give 10 away versus 100 away. It's a good way to rip the bandaid off. And most companies don't change their actual number that they're charging once per every three years. So if you haven't done it for three years, you're overdue for it. So it's a good one to kind of rip the bandaid off.

Lenny (00:23:30):
So this episode already pound for pound I think is up there. This is amazing. I'm excited to get to the next topic, but first I'll plug. You wrote a guest post in my newsletter about pricing and we'll link to that in the show notes, and that goes deeper into this value metric and how to think about pricing. So check that out.

(00:23:46):
Next topic, retention. So when I think Patrick Campbell, I think pricing and retention. So again, this could be its own podcast episode, but let's just pick one thing to talk about. What are the biggest mistakes people make, retention opportunities, or just hot take?

Patrick Campbell (00:24:00):
The reason I started writing about retention and publishing data on it is because I didn't want to be the pricing guy. I was trying to basically differentiate myself and then I was trying to be the SaaS guy, but that's too broad. But anyway, so retention, the hottest of hottest takes, and this is the one to offend 90% of the list... no, it's not going to offend, but this is a product podcast, that's how I think about it. Product homies. You fail at realizing most of the time that there are two types of retention. There is strategic retention and then there's tactical retention.

(00:24:38):
Strategic retention is all the stuff that you as a great product leader, a great product team are doing. Your ICPs, your time to value, road mapping, the right features, figuring out your mission metric, agonizing over every little thing, all the paper cuts of being a great product leader. But because you're so focused and so biased towards that, you miss out typically on this thing we call tactical retention, and these are things like payment failures, term optimization, cancellation flows, offboarding, et cetera. And if you're past product market fit this area, this tactical retention, it's typically about 25 to 40% of your churn problem, which is a significant amount, but you don't really look at it because again, you're like, "I've got to go focus on features, I've got to do this, and I'm going to go be this great product leader."

(00:25:26):
And so because product is so entrenched in that thinking that that problem can be solved with two months of work, it's not that much work putting in, basically, a marketing funnel when people's credit cards fail. Not that hard, not rocket science. Doing offboarding, being really smart with offboarding. And one little tidbit. I looked at two million cancellation flows. We built some products for this, that's why I have this data, just to be clear. But looked at two million cancellation flows and we found you have about 18 to 30 seconds when someone hits that cancel button, we found you should ask two questions. One, "Why are you leaving?" Multiple choice. Don't do the free response. You get one out of 100 great responses, and the 99 are not great.

(00:26:08):
And then the other question we found works really, really well is, "What did you like about the product?" And the reason that works so effectively is because that person's on a freight train to basically cancel. They're like, "I'm already done. Oh yeah, this is why I'm leaving." The minute you ask them what they like, you're basically tapping into this nostalgia effect and you're stopping that freight train. And then when I have that information, it's great for a product team, it's great to figure out, "What's working, what's not? What should we do more of? Was this a good customer?"

(00:26:34):
But then based on their engagement data, their plan, whatever, all their firmographics about them plus their answers, then I can offer up a salvage offer or a pause plan or a maintenance plan or these types of things. But all this type of stuff, this is really, really powerful. And I always suggest finance teams should just take this on because product teams are always going to be thinking so much more on the future rather than fixing this right now. But that's the hottest take I've got for retention.

Lenny (00:27:00):
That's a great, awesome take. And I want to plug ProfitWell right here, actually. I know you guys offer a product that does this and I've used it. So I don't know if that's still true, I know after an acquisition, things change. So I use ProfitWell for my newsletters. I just plug it into my Stripe account and it's the most amazing free product because it just tells me everything I want to know. And then it's got this cool feature, you just turn it on and it does these things for you like it tells people, "Your credit card is about to expire." Hey, this card failed, you should try putting in a new card." So that's a cool reason to check out ProfitWell.

Patrick Campbell (00:27:29):
Thanks, man. I appreciate that. And it's actually cool because I think for us, because the fact that product teams don't really think about this stuff, we stumbled into this whole thesis that could be a whole episode, which is all the product features are done for you. So what I mean by that is, you noticed this, but when you log in and set this up, you're not writing emails, you're not setting up the flows. And the reason is because we have all this data from $30 billion in ARR flowing through our metrics product that we can study and understand what works and what doesn't.

(00:28:02):
And that kind of stumbling that is useful for folks is what we discovered is this anti-active usage type product, it retains itself at a really, really high rate because people are just getting the value and they don't have to use it. And so what we found is a little bonus thing on retention. When we look at churn rates across different types of products, those products that are workflow products you use every single day or mostly every single day, or those products you don't have to log into but you still get the value, that's where the lowest churn rates are, the highest retention. Anything in the middle, it's like death. And this is why ProfitWell metrics ended up being free because we were just like, "It's terrible to build a metrics and analytics product. It's so hard because people just don't appreciate how much work goes into it, therefore they don't retain at a high rate, they're not willing to pay that much," et cetera.

Lenny (00:28:49):
I think that alone is a really interesting story, and I don't know if we should get too deep, but just to highlight what you just said, so many startups build an analytics product that it's just a better way to measure and track all the stuff that's going on. And what you've found is you won't make money doing that, people don't want to pay for a SaaS analytics tool.

Patrick Campbell (00:29:08):
You have two options. You go up market and you pretty much become a data product with a UI or you go super niche. And even super niche, it's super hard and it's just because, I don't know, everyone's trying to kill a spreadsheet, and it's like, "You're not going to kill a spreadsheet." All real analysts will do everything in a spreadsheet. So for us it was we want to give you a clean UI and then we want to help you get this data into spreadsheets or email or whatever you're using for your databases, things like that.

Lenny (00:29:38):
Yeah. I don't want to make this an ad for ProfitWell, but it's like founders come to me with pitches of, "Hey, we've built this sweet analytics." So I'm like, "Just look up what ProfitWell is giving away for free, that's going to be a high bar to exceed."

Patrick Campbell (00:29:49):
Yeah. Yeah. We were going to try to sell it. We were trying to sell it in the beginning, but what ended up happening is we ran into all this, that's why we didn't.

Lenny (00:29:56):
All right, back on track. Topic number five, shipping. What have you learned about shipping? What are mistakes people make when trying to ship faster, ship more efficiently?

Patrick Campbell (00:30:05):
Yeah. The bratty thing here is that real professional ship. At the end of the day, real... I don't care what if you're a marketer or product person, engineer, ops person, people ops, real professional ship, and they ship it a pretty high frequency for whatever they're doing. And so the thing that we thought a lot about is, in my opinion, your tempo framework, and I'll explain a little bit more of what that means in a second, is more important than your org design. And so if you've ever had a team that seems really, really smart, but they're always planning or they don't really ship a lot, or you've had trouble where everyone gets it at the leadership level, but then the team below them and below them seems to be kind of going in a different direction, you probably don't have enough alignment and you don't have enough alignment on what good looks like in terms of tempo.

(00:30:56):
And so the way we looked at this was we have to establish mission metric and guiding principles at the top so, what do we do? How are we measuring it? And how we're going to get there? So for us was we automate subscription growth. Our mission metric was the amount of revenue that was on ProfitWell because that was good from acquisition, but it also meant we were doing our jobs. Then how we're going to get there. We want to be the most helpful brand in SaaS. And then we also we're going to do it for you, this whole thing that I just talked about.

(00:31:25):
Then what we did is we established that at the leadership level, every org leader, so marketing, sales, et cetera, they need a framework that fits into that overall. So marketing at ProfitWell was this whole inbound media, so lots of podcast, video series, et cetera. And the most important part of that was they needed to determine what good looked like in terms of shipping. So if we're like, "Hey, we're doing sales," blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, or marketing in this case, "this many episodes per month, it's this many product launches per month, this many big product launches per quarter," whatever it is.

(00:31:57):
And then your leadership is basically a conversation of, "Great, that's what good looks like, we agree. How do we close that gap?" And then all of those conversations are like, "Okay, you only shipped one thing per quarter, we want to do one per month. Why?"

(00:32:10):
"Well, I don't have enough resources."

(00:32:12):
We solve that problem or we figure out how to get the more resources, then they're not doing it again. "Okay, why?"

(00:32:17):
"Well, there's this problem."

(00:32:18):
And then all of a sudden you start to create this very high output team across the board, and you also have this alignment so you don't wake up nine months into someone being at your company and being like, "Well, I think Tim sucks."

(00:32:30):
And it's like, "Well, why did you just all of a sudden wake up and think Tim sucks."

(00:32:34):
"Well, he's not shipping blah, blah, blah, blah."

(00:32:35):
"Well, it's probably an org problem rather than a Tim problem," because again, you vetted Tim. Tim was at this other company and apparently was a really great rockstar. So what's the difference here? You screwed up the hiring? Well, maybe because that is really, really hard, but most of the time you just haven't set an expectation of what good looks like in terms of tempo, and then you haven't had that constant conversation to make sure that Tim has what he needs in order to ship.

Lenny (00:33:00):
What was a big learning, I guess, in doing that? Is that just something you built up over time of we need to create this tempo at ProfitWell?

Patrick Campbell (00:33:05):
Yeah. Complete misalignment if you don't call it out on what good looks like, just complete misalignment. Like so-and-so is going and building, they think one product launch per quarter. Or I'm sitting there and I'm like, "Well, we should have a medium one per month and then we should have a big one per quarter." Complete misalignment. And if you don't have a way to talk about that, some sort of nexus to have that conversation, you end up not having it, and then you end up creating this friction and resentment on both sides because everyone thinks, again, "Tim isn't doing well." And it's like, "That's not what's happening. It's just the expectations aren't set."

(00:33:40):
And then what was really cool is that you start to find out that the why they aren't hitting what good looks like is all solvable, and most of the time it's this team isn't talking to this team. "Oh, great. Well, marketing wants to do these launches, product isn't providing them stuff. All right, let's get these two people together, have this conversation because we didn't have product marketing or official product marketing." They have this conversation and then all of a sudden it's like, "All right, Neil, you need to provide one thing a month. There's so much stuff we've built, a lot of it we haven't announced, you just need to provide one thing a month. Marketing will worry about how to position it in a way that isn't too far, isn't overselling it, but also gets us something per month, and you can approve that positioning." And then all of a sudden you start getting this tempo going, which obviously is the goal.

Lenny (00:34:27):
Reminds me, David Sacks has this awesome post called The Cadence around how marketing and product and sales should operate and create this kind of cadence. So being aligned but also offset schedule, which will link to them in the show notes if you haven't seen it.

Patrick Campbell (00:34:41):
Yeah, that's great.

Lenny (00:34:42):
Next topic. First principles thinking. As a renaissance man of a brain, I feel like you've spent a lot of time thinking about from first principles and in our conversations you always have really interesting approaches to things. What have you learned about actually implementing first principle thinking, which people are always talking about. How do I [inaudible 00:35:00] first principle?

Patrick Campbell (00:35:01):
Yeah, people always talk about it. And there are no good courses that I have found on first principles thinking. There are good blog posts, but the good blog posts kind of explain what it is, and then that's it. It's like, "This is what it is, and here's an example." And most of them quote Elon Musk about rockets and breaking down the different parts. So what I kind of found is there's the five whys, which I think someone's talked before or at least I've read it in the newsletter before, which is just you keep asking why. Kind of, "Well, this is this way."

(00:35:36):
"Well, why is that?"

(00:35:36):
"Well, this is this way."

(00:35:37):
"Why is that?"

(00:35:38):
I found the model that people who aren't great at first principal thinking or aren't great at talking about it that kind of helps them unlock is this thing called problem, cause, solution. So I learned this in debate in college and high school, and it basically is you have a problem that you're trying to solve. Well, you can't actually solve a problem. So if we talk about world hunger, you can't just solve world hunger because it's kind of the symptom, it's this problem that exists.

(00:36:06):
Well then I want to break down what are all the causes of world hunger? And it's a little more brainstormy when you have these conversations with folks, especially again when they struggle with this. And all of a sudden I could list out all the causes, irrigation crisis, aid not getting to where it needs to be, famines, drought, et cetera. And then what I can do is I can rank those causes in terms of magnitude. So if we're trying to solve world hunger, and for some reason we discovered irrigation was the biggest problem, if we solved irrigation, everything would be great, well then I'm going to align my solutions to all of those different causes. And you get this nice alignment between, well, I can solve a cause, and if I solve the cause that's big enough and proper enough, I'm going to eventually solve the actual problem or mitigate the problem, I should say.

(00:36:50):
So that's the framework that I found really, really useful. And also, it's great for using for presentations, it's great for a mission, it's great for all of these different things because it's a little bit more actionable than just the five whys, which is more of a way to have a conversation.

Lenny (00:37:06):
So the way you operationalize this, say problem, cause, solution. You're saying on strategy templates, you write out, "Here's the problem we're trying to solve, here's the source of the issue, and then here's how we're approaching it." Can you talk a bit more about how you implement this at your company and the people you work with?

Patrick Campbell (00:37:22):
Yeah, totally. So I'll say big, medium and small things, and I'll try to be really quick. So big things it's like, "What are we facing?"

(00:37:30):
"Oh, we're going to try to charge for this metrics product. Now there's a bunch of competitors. The customers don't really care about it."

(00:37:37):
So we have this problem and the problem is growth. How do we grow a product like this? How do we grow our company? And what's really interesting about a big problem or a nebulous problem like that is you end up having a lot of conversations about the problem, which I think is more useful sometimes about, "Well, what are we actually trying to do? Let's get alignment as much as possible." And then it's like, "Okay. Well, what are the causes of our growth problem?"

(00:38:00):
"Well, people aren't willing to pay for metrics. Getting accuracy is really, really hard. Actually, the market stance," all these other things.

(00:38:08):
"Well, what are some of the solutions?"

(00:38:10):
"Well, we could do this, could do this, could do this."

(00:38:12):
And normally what ends up happening is the solution ends up being kind of an approach. So our approach that mitigated or solved for some of these causes and mitigate the problem was freemium, and then these paid products that were all pay-for-performance because with pay-for-performance, you could charge a significant amount more in a market that only has 100,000 logos, which is a really small market. And so that kind of an example there.

(00:38:37):
Medium and small, let's talk about a support ticket. This person's pissed off. They're coming in, they're pissed off. What are the causes? Well, there's a lot of different causes that were probably like, "Oh, we didn't get back to them in time, and then we gave a crappy solution, we gave this..." It just kind of allows us to look at the problem. And so it's more of a way of thinking on that level. And it's not happening. We're not going to have an hour-long conversation about a support ticket. But the support folks that I've talked to about this, they go, "Okay, cool. Why is he upset?"

(00:39:06):
"Well, we didn't get the answer in time."

(00:39:08):
Okay, my first line is going to be, "I understand we didn't get you an answer quick enough. Apologies for that." It just allows them to have a little bit of an extra second to think through things and move forward with that.

Lenny (00:39:21):
I love that. I love that big example and a small example.

Audio (00:39:26):
This episode is brought to you by Dovetail, the customer insights platform for teams that gets you from data to insights fast, no matter the method. There's so much customer data to get through from user interviews to NPS, sales calls, usability tests, support tickets, app reviews. It's a lot. And you know that if you're building something, hidden in that data are the insights that will lead you to building better products. And that's where Dovetail can help.

(00:39:51):
Dovetail allows you to quickly analyze customer data from any source and transform it into evidence-based insights that your whole team can access. If you're a product manager who needs insights to motivate your team, a designer validating your next big feature, or a researcher who needs to analyze fast, Dovetail is the collaborative insights platform your whole team can use. Go to dovetailapp.com/lenny to get started today for free. That's dovetailapp.com/lenny.

Lenny (00:40:19):
All right. Next topic, customer research. I feel like you have a pretty interesting perspective on custom research, so let's go into it.

Patrick Campbell (00:40:27):
I think I have the 85-year-old curmudgeonly man perspective on customer research. So here's the thing. Everything in your business, it does not matter what type of business you have, everything is used to drive someone to a point of conversion or justify the product or the price that you're offering up. That customer is a human being you're driving to that point of conversion and it's your job to understand how they perceive you, how they perceive their problem, how they perceive the world around them, around your products.

(00:41:00):
We all know this on a philosophical level, but here are some fun facts. So one, only one in five companies have buyer personas or ICPs, only one in five. So we talk about this all the time, we retweet the articles, we give the advice, so many of us give the advice. But then we look at our own companies, only one in five have some sort of segmentation ICPs. And then only one out of 10 companies actually do customer research or development on a quarterly basis. This should be a continuous thing, it should be a monthly, weekly type thing. Not saying you're sending up surveys or having all these conversations on a weekly basis, but only one out of 10 are doing quarterly. So that means the number they're doing monthly is even smaller than that. And I just think that's insane.

(00:41:44):
And when we look at all data, and we have a lot of data on this, and this is something where I've been talking about customer development for a long time. Everything is better. Everything is better. NPS is higher for organizations that have customer development functions or even just ICPs or buyer personas, depending on what framework you're using. Willingness to pay is typically higher. The funnel is more efficient. LTV to CAC is normally much, much higher. All those growth numbers, you're typically growing in a much higher rate, like a 15, 20%, not a small delta, 15-20% higher rate. Retention's better. All these things are better.

(00:42:21):
And the thing that, I think, 20 years ago or 10 years ago you didn't have to do customer development because, and this is where Keith [inaudible 00:42:30] is just like customer research is dumb or whatever his famous quote is, but you didn't have to do it because there just wasn't a lot of stuff out there and we all were riding the wave of the internet. But now the market's harder and harder. So what are you going to do? Are you just going to keep throwing stuff up against the wall or are you going to actually do the stuff that all of us talk about doing and actually do the research? And the research is hard. It's never going to be 100% accurate because you're going to have to use your judgment, but that's your job.

(00:42:54):
And so that's more of a rant, I guess, than a hot take. But I also think this is one of those things that AI starts solving, especially all this generative AI because now you can just throw all that stuff into a workload and then all of a sudden you'll get back a lot of the sentiment or all that kind stuff so you don't even to do the hard part anymore. Yeah, that's my rant.

Lenny (00:43:14):
Love the rant. Maybe one follow-up question. Why do you think it is that companies don't do this? I love the point you made of the retweeting, "Yeah, research is great." Writing blogs that research is use useful, "We've got to do research." Why do you think companies don't do it? And then what's one thing that maybe they could do tomorrow that'll bring them closer down that path?

Patrick Campbell (00:43:35):
The one thing you can do, put a number on a whiteboard. You're going to have 10 customer conversations a month, just 10 non-sales conversations. You're just going to talk to 10 people. Or you're going to send one survey. And people are terrible at sending surveys. Surveys are actually great. You just have to be good at sending them. And good, it's not a high bar, it just means that you have 30 to 45 seconds of someone's time unless you're compensating them. And don't send 45-question surveys by email where the first question is, "What's your email?" Don't do that. But just put a number on the board.

(00:44:09):
I think the reason we don't do it is because it was, quote-unquote, "easy" to get away with not doing it. If you really think about a funded environment... and some products are so paradigm-shifting that the biggest misconception about customer research is I have to listen to them. You don't have to listen to them at all, you just have to understand where they are, and then you're filtering all of that with all this other data and then you're making a decision and you're earning your paycheck as a product person. Typically, it's the product person, but also in marketing.

(00:44:37):
So I think it's just one of those things where you could get away with not doing it. Now though, the way the market's going, you're just starting to see this more and more, you're starting to see more tooling. The reason you're seeing more tooling is because they're starting to connect it to actually being useful rather than you having to set up your own customer development program. I think the other reason typically people haven't had to do this is because there's a lot of brute forcing that's done in startup land and it only lasts so long.

(00:45:06):
So all of these companies that raise a bunch of money, get the $100 million dollar exit, everyone's clapping because it's a big number, but cap table screwed, everything's bad. It's a win because it's a win, but all of those companies are ones who were able to brute force to a certain level and they never learned how to actually understand their market or their customer. And I think that that kind of story will continue to happen as long as we have a lot of capital flowing in the market. But I would rather not be that company. I would rather be the company that gets the $100 million, 200 million exit with bootstrapping, or builds the billion-dollar annual revenue company because I know my market, I know my customer so well.

Lenny (00:45:47):
Talking to customers is good, you should do it. Great reminder. People are going to listen to this like, "Yes, we should do this," and then we'll just move on. And then-

Patrick Campbell (00:45:55):
My joke when I give talks is, "Only 20% of you are going to do this when I give a talk on it, and so I'm not even going to talk deeply on it. You 20%, come talk to me, I've got a whole framework for you," that type of a thing because I think people just nod their heads and they tweet it, and they just don't end up doing it.

Lenny (00:46:10):
Status quo is hard to overcome sometimes. We're onto our eighth topic, we've got three to go, and it's on competitive intelligence. And this touches on a really interesting part of your background that I don't know a lot of people know.

Patrick Campbell (00:46:24):
Yeah. So my background, I started my career... I worked in US Intelligence, I worked for NSA. And I was just a entry level intel analyst, basically, I was only there for just over a year. And what was interesting is you get taught first principles thinking in so many different ways because you're solving essentially puzzles every day. Now those puzzles are finding a bad guy or a gal or finding this piece of information. Those are all the puzzles, but you have to think through how to figure this out. And a lot of those puzzles involve, "You have these number of entities, how are they going to react?" And you're trying to predict how they're going to react, and you're also trying to help figure out how you're going to react or act in the context of them, so like node analysis, basically.

(00:47:09):
And what's interesting from a startup or a business perspective is I think that don't focus on your competitors is terrible advice. It's amazing advice for product teams. When you have a competitive intelligence program or you have competitive intel, I try never to share that with product ever because products should just focus on the customer, they should not give two craps what's going on with competitor A or competitor B. But as an overall missive, don't focus on your competitors is terrible advice. And if I'm being charitable, it's just outdated because some fun facts, and I alluded to some of them before, over the past decade, if you're building in tech, particularly in SaaS or subscriptions, you now have 16 times the number of competitors if you started a business today, than if you did 10 years ago, and this is because everyone and their mother can spin up a website, a server, they can drive traffic to that site.

(00:48:02):
So there's just a bunch of stuff in the market. And then because of all that stuff, all these marketing channels are getting denser and denser. CAC and B2B is up about 110% over the past 10 years. Consumer, it's up 145%. If you're selling sales and marketing software, it's up 220% because there's just so much sales and marketing software doing sales and marketing things in the market. And so the other reason for this is we haven't had a brand new marketing channel since 2015, and that was Snapchat. We have TikTok, but TBD, depending on how you think about it. But we're going from brand new marketing and advertising innovation every quarter to basically every five years.

(00:48:42):
My point is, if you are not in a Blue Ocean, you're not in the Peter Teal, go to a market of one, you're not in those types of things, which is most of us, and even some of us who think we're in those things, we're actually not, you do have to focus on your competitors on some level. And the levels I particularly think are a bare minimum, just knowing who they are, having a strategy. So for ProfitWell we never had comparison pages because we very quickly went from a challenger in this very competitive market to the leader in the market. So all of a sudden we were going to be above the fray, that was the idea, that was the strategy that we had, which is, "We're going to have a lot of intel on what's going on with them, why people care about this product." We had white label NPS surveys and customer development surveys going to our competitors' customers. That's the level. And it was just automated. It wasn't like it was taking a lot of time, but we just wanted that intel.

Lenny (00:49:34):
When you say white labeled, that means you're emailing your competitor's customers to see what they think of your competitors, right?

Patrick Campbell (00:49:41):
Exactly. So we're basically, and we did it as a third party basically, which was, I think one of them was analyticssoftware.com, stuff like that. So it wasn't like we were spoofing as our competitor because I think that crosses a little bit of a line. But basically we would have this intel. There's a whole program here. Basically, I'd have sources... Basically, these customers I knew were always going to stay because they liked the founder or something like that. I would get on the phone with them every quarter or two just to be like, "Hey, what are you liking? Why haven't you switched yet?" these types of things, or I'd see them at conferences.

(00:50:14):
So there's a whole program there. And again, it's not like it's distracting anything, it's just I want the intel so I can predict what's going on, I can predict who to care about, who not to care about. But even then, if you're a challenger, competitor marketing pages are really powerful. And the thing is, your customers, especially in a denser market, they know your competitors exist or they're looking at them. Don't infantilize your customers, help them, "Hey, this is how we compare to X, Y, Z competitor," and be honest as much as possible. Well, we should always be honest, but be as upfront as possible, I should say, with where you're bad at and where you're great at, those types of things.

(00:50:55):
But long story short, having something awareness and then choosing a particular strategy, and then depending on your strategy, you might ramp up how much you actually do with the actual intelligence program.

Lenny (00:51:06):
This is amazing. Two questions. Should every startup have a former spy on their team to help them operationalize these ideas? And then two, is there anything else that you found super valuable that you did based on your training there?

Patrick Campbell (00:51:20):
We didn't have a formal program, but I love hiring veterans, either veterans of intelligence, so they're citizens, so they're not veterans from a military perspective, but people who had worked in Intel or people who were actual veterans of different military branches. There's a lot of reasons for this, but I think that the intelligence folks, it's a way of thinking. Now you ought to be careful, and this is just purely my opinion, because depending on how long they were in... the reason I left is because it's the government, it's super bureaucratic. It was one of the most fulfilling jobs I will ever have, and I was only there for a short amount of time. But it's just one of those things where it's just so bureaucratic.

(00:52:01):
So the 15-year person there is not thriving, they're not trying to change the world necessarily. They have a job. So you've got to be careful with that. But yeah, I think there's these really smart people that just think in a different way. And a broader point is I think it's just really, really good to go to different industries. All this customer development stuff, you go to any major retailer or any major e-commerce company, they have entire teams just dedicated to this stuff. Hallmark was one of our first pricing customers back in the day before we went subscription focused. They had 119 people in customer insights and research. And this was one of the reason we were like, "Well, you guys don't need our help, you've got enough people." But those are great people to hire, even though they don't necessarily have the actual industry knowledge, they have a lot of domain expertise.

(00:52:50):
In terms of things I learned, I'll put it this way, not to get political, if I was in charge of budget, I would give so much more money into the intel community. I saw conflicts or heard about conflicts being stopped just because of intelligence that didn't go hot in terms of war fighting. I think it's one of those things where I would put so much more money there than the actual other side of the defense budget.

(00:53:12):
And also everyone asks me about Snowden. So again, not to get political, it's a lot more complicated, I think, than a lot of people think. It's one of those things that the issues that were brought up, obviously they got really sensationalized, but they're really important conversations to have, but it's not as simple as, "Oh, stop doing this, start doing that."

(00:53:33):
You don't have to worry about the NSA, the NSA's all outward-looking. You should worry about the FBI. The FBI are the ones who get a little testy with certain things, and you're seeing that in the court cases and stuff like that. But just know there's a lot of really hardworking, very well-intentioned people who you might disagree in terms of trade-offs, in terms of safety and things like that. They're also some of the most privacy orientated people on the planet, so that's worth a whole conversation. So hopefully I didn't throw too many grenades in this part.

Lenny (00:54:02):
No, we need more grenades. That's the first time Snowden was brought up on this podcast, so that's cool. There you go. And this is actually a good segue to the next topic, which is around local strategies like FBI versus NSA. I think you have a strong perspective that local strategies are much more likely to [inaudible 00:54:19] so we'll just get into that one.

Patrick Campbell (00:54:21):
Yeah, yeah. Just to give you a tease, I'll tell you what I think of Snowden after the podcast. So the world doesn't get to know except that I'll tell you what my opinion is afterwards.

Lenny (00:54:30):
What a tease.

Patrick Campbell (00:54:31):
Local strategies. Local strategies, very basic. People like to buy from people, but we as operators get so excited about the scale of the internet that we forget the basics of humanity. Here's some fun data points, we did a bunch of studies on this. So prospects who meet you in person, and this is not just for profit, all the data I've shared, it's all global-level data or segmented depending on how we did it. It's not just our findings, it's like we looked at probably a minimum of 2,000 companies per factoid and most of the time much more. But prospects who meet you in person have 10 to 30% higher willingness to pay than those who didn't. Churn for those folks who you meet in person is typically 20% lower than those folks who have never met you. Expansion revenue is typically 15 to 20% higher.

(00:55:23):
And this is not only in hand-to-hand kind of sales, coffee meetings, lunches, lunch and learns this type of thing, but it's also in scaled products, so products that cost 20, 50 bucks per month. And so my suggestion is to you, especially in a post-COVID, I don't know if that's the right term, but in a world that hopefully does not see another pandemic in our lifetimes, knock on wood, do meetups, do lunches, go to conferences, unless you're Lenny who is not a big fan of conferences. But get out of the office. Make sure you get out of the office. And the budget doesn't have to be as big as you think. Breakfast and lunches are super cheap. We would push all of our P2 and P3s to a meetup, and all of our P1s, we would have one-on-one coffee dates. It's super cheap.

Lenny (00:56:08):
What do the Ps mean? Is that priority?

Patrick Campbell (00:56:10):
Priority 1, we want these people to convert, they're very good fits, all this other stuff. P2s are like, they're probably good fits, but they're just not as big. And then P3s are with a content play, they just love our content and stuff, but they're not necessarily good fits for us. And so people make the mistake, they push everyone to dinners and it's like, I don't want to spend all of my money on P2s and P3s.

(00:56:34):
And so breakfast and lunches are cheaper than dinners. Meetups can be extremely inexpensive, get creative. We like to do barbecue type stuff for, not dive bars, but the unique dive bar, I guess is the best way to put it. So it's not fancy. People just want to meet people, they want to talk to you, especially if you're doing content and things like that. The Lenny Newsletter, Lenny Empire Meetups, I see the pictures of those all the time. There's just an urge to learn from one another and hang out. So yeah, that's the biggest thing, get out of the office or get out of your desk at home.

Lenny (00:57:07):
Yeah, that's right. You're on Zoom. And you're saying it's not just the founders, it could be anyone on the team, salespeople, that all works.

Patrick Campbell (00:57:14):
Anyone. I led marketing as part of my role as CEO, and so I do a lot of this and I'm also the one doing a lot of the content and stuff like that, or the face of a lot of our content, so I did a lot of it. But your head of sales... and you just have to position this a little differently. If they're going to meet with a salesperson, it's the same thing as if they get a email from a BDR, they're like, "I'm not going to figure it out. I don't want to deal with this." But if it's like, "Hey, we're hosting..." We're doing these lunch and learns right now. I was in Paris, New York, and London last week, it's probably why I'm so sick this week, and all of a sudden we did these lunch and learns. People just want to hang out.

(00:57:47):
So we had 10 people, we had 20 people at one, 10 people, all priority 1 leads. And then we did these meetups with 100-plus people at each. Just think of that brand equity. And you just hang out. It wasn't just me at all of these things. I ran the content, but then all of our sales folks were hanging out and doing their thing. But it doesn't have to be super complicated. It's just those touchpoints that people want. And it's so high leverage because there are a lot of people who will not answer your email but will come to an event to meet you or meet someone from your team because it's something to do, especially if you're buying them breakfast or coffee or something like that. It doesn't have to be something that's extravagant.

Lenny (00:58:25):
I love this advice. Basically, it's like if your sales aren't where you want it to be, find a way to meet your potential leads or someone in your team meeting your leads. That's a very actionable thing you could do like, "We're not hitting our numbers, let's just go meet some people, find opportunities to hang out in real life."

Patrick Campbell (00:58:41):
Well, in the early days, pre-product market fit, this is all we would do too. I would stay at the worst hotels, I would stay at hostels, but just to get to, "Okay, I want to sell to these people." The best information I'm going to get isn't in a Zoom or I'm asking them questions, it's going to be like, "Hey." I gave a talk on pricing because that was a high leverage thing I could do because no one knows anything about pricing, but they know it's important, so a lot of people want to listen. But then afterwards it's like, "Oh yeah, how do you think about this? What are you doing for this? What are you doing for..." all of those fun producty questions. It's just really, really high leverage. And I think it's one of those things that... It depends on your role, it depends on your stage, but everyone can use something there.

Lenny (00:59:21):
Great segue to our final topic. A lot of people spend time on top of funnel driving visitors, driving traffic, getting the word out. A lot of people spend time at the end of the funnel, closing customers, increasing within an organization. You have this perspective that the middle of the funnel is maybe the biggest opportunity these days. Can you talk about that?

Patrick Campbell (00:59:40):
Pound for pound biggest opportunity. So take a quick step back. Demand generation exists for more than just supporting the sales team. We forget that. So sales and marketing, the past decade, it's all been the funnel, we're top of the funnel, middle of funnel, bottom of the funnel. HubSpot's trying to make it a flywheel, but marketers are still talking about funnels. And when you look at the data, it depends a little bit on the price point and a little bit on the vertical, but 80% of sales and marketing budgets tend to go to the top of the funnel and the bottom of the funnel. So sales folks and ad-type spend, field events, whatever it is, that's where it goes.

(01:00:24):
And the whole point is you're trying to move someone from a lack of awareness at the top of the funnel to being aware about you and then to a sales combo or a conversion point, if you're not doing sales. The problem is bottom of the funnel efficiency and top of the funnel efficiency has plummeted the past decade, just plummeted. And it's not only because of the factoids I was saying before about CAC and all these other things and so many competitors being in the market, it's just one of those things that the days of just hiring a bunch of BDRs, not training them, not having them in account-based marketing, not doing all these other things, those days are not here anymore. Those days are gone. Maybe in some specific verticals, in specific parts of the market.

(01:01:11):
But here's the other problem. Sales today is so much more about timing than it once was. Because there's so much stuff out there, it's one of those things where people are waiting until it's the right time. They're aware of you, but they're waiting. So the question we have to ask ourselves to not bury the lead any further is do we need to make this river of demand generation, basically what demand generation works? But that's table space.

(01:01:37):
If we want to be even increasingly more successful, that middle of the funnel needs to get bigger. That pool of users who is aware of you, interacting with you on a regular basis. What if you had leads basically hanging out there in the middle of the funnel, interacting with you on a regular basis before all of a sudden their timing was right and then all of a sudden they go to the bottom of the funnel, and even better they opt into them. You don't have to keep going after them and doing sales processes that are very kind of churn and burn. So that pool of leads.

(01:02:07):
And so the best way to create pools of leads, freemium. I'm a huge fan of freemium. I used to write articles about how freemium is terrible, so I'm a big convert. I wrote a book on freemium as well. The thing with freemium is CAC is still up over the past decade, but it's up a lot less than overall CAC. Customers who convert from freemium and become paid customers, their retention is typically about 10 to 20% higher than those who converted from a free trial or converted from a traditional sales process. And then on top of that, NPS or CSAT, we measured it through NPS, is typically about double because they're converting on their own timeline, not on some artificial timeline of a free trial or artificial timeline of sales.

(01:02:47):
You should still have those things, but I want this pool of people who are aware of me and are using something of my product because at the end of the day, what better content do you have than your actual product? Even if you're a big enterprise solution, give them something to interact with. And then the other way to fill that middle of the funnel is, I think inbound marketing is just becoming SEO and eBooks. Kieran from HubSpot gets offended when I say that, but I love you, buddy. It's okay. I'm still a huge fan. And this is just because CAC and inbound marketing has gone up and it's all about a lot of SEO and we'll see what AI does to that.

(01:03:21):
But this whole thing of inbound media, we got on this train about five years ago, and inbound media is just podcast video series. When we sold the company, we had eight different podcasts and video series, all very niche like Pricing Page Tear Down, which was a show about we collected data and tore down pricing pages, the good and the bad. We had Boxed Out, which was a retention focused show for the subscription e-commerce industry.

(01:03:44):
So all of that was to build this pool so that people were aware of us. And then over time, all of a sudden they're like, "Oh, we have a pricing problem, we should go talk to these guys. Oh, we have this content or this retention thing, we should go talk to these guys." But I think the pool is kind of the future and a lot of people are still treating it as just this gateway between the top and the bottom of the funnel.

Lenny (01:04:02):
Middle of the funnel is the new top of funnel. We need a bumper sticker.

Patrick Campbell (01:04:05):
There you go. I don't know if that's going to sell well, but I will buy one, so.

Lenny (01:04:09):
The most nerdiest of all bumper stickers. Patrick, we've gone through 10 topics. Is there anything else you want to touch on before we get to our very exciting lightning rounds?

Patrick Campbell (01:04:18):
I think what I will say is this is all still hard. So I'm giving some heuristics, I'm giving some benchmarks, but your mileage is going to vary. But again, that's your job, whether you're a founder, a product person, an exec, whatever you are, your job is to take in information, your job is to analyze the problem, and then ultimately come up with the best solution. And so I think it's one of those things that there's some hard truths I think we talked about, but then there's a lot of this that you have to evaluate it for yourself. So just a general, I may come off like a know-it-all, but I understand that mileage varies I guess is the best way...

Lenny (01:04:54):
Well, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions for you. Are you ready?

Patrick Campbell (01:05:01):
I'm ready.

Lenny (01:05:02):
Okay.

Patrick Campbell (01:05:03):
I feel like I need a buzzer.

Lenny (01:05:05):
I'm going to add a buzzer someday. Anyway, here we go. What are two or three books that you recommend most to other people?

Patrick Campbell (01:05:11):
I have read High Output Management probably 20 times in the past 10 years. I read it at least once a year now. I commissioned a bronze bust of Andy Grove, so that's being done. I'm a big Andy Grove fan.

Lenny (01:05:25):
Oh, it's in progress?

Patrick Campbell (01:05:26):
Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's in progress. It's not done. I'll send you a mockup after this. But yeah, High Output Management. Thinking in Bets, going to that first principles thinking. I find that a good book to share with people so that they can think about things and get on board with that.

(01:05:40):
And then Powerful by Patty McCord. Anything around HR to kind of break your brain a little bit about what you think about HR and people ops. That's the gateway drug. That was the one where I was like, "Oh, we can choose how to design our people ops teams."

Lenny (01:05:55):
Okay, next question. Favorite recent movie or TV show?

Patrick Campbell (01:05:58):
I don't have one that's recent, but I watch The West Wing at least once per week, so I've done that for a long time. I love Sorkin, I think the writing's just so good, so I'll just throw that out.

Lenny (01:06:10):
Great one. Someone was telling me there's a podcast to analyze each episode, which [inaudible 01:06:14].

Patrick Campbell (01:06:13):
It is a great podcast and I've listened to most of them, so yeah.

Lenny (01:06:18):
Okay, great. You're all over it. Favorite interview question that you like to ask because you're interviewing.

Patrick Campbell (01:06:22):
I have a controversial one. I'm not going to be able to go through the entire question in a lightning round. But what I do is I do a mini... I did all the final interviews at ProfitWell, and we did a very hard culture check in the final interview. There's a mini case study, it only lasts about a couple of minutes, I'm not going to go through it, but I asked them if someone in Slack responded to someone sharing something benign, like some report they found on the internet from McKinsey, they shared it in Slack, and then someone responded to that with something indirectly offensive.

(01:06:55):
So it's changed over the years, sometimes I say, "Oh, they called it the R word, they said it was stupid," something indirectly offensive. And I say, "What would you do, and what do you think the company should do?" And no matter what they say, I challenge them, and I always tell them, "I've never seen that at ProfitWell," which is always good just to make sure they don't have a bunch of fear in this position.

(01:07:19):
But it gave me a really, really good opportunity to talk through our culture, particularly the most charitable interpretation piece. And I would say there were about 10% of people who had a zero tolerance policy for whatever the situation was. And I would tell them, I would say, "Hey, listen. We have zero tolerance for the obvious things, we probably all agree on those." But for this type of situation, we would ask some questions, we'd want to figure it out, we want to see, there's probably some judgment around what happened, how long if they'd been doing this for a while, that type of thing. And then we would make a decision on what would happen. And a lot of times nothing would happen except, "Hey, don't be an idiot, you're smarter than that, use better words," or something like that. And so that was a good culture check to opt them in or out.

Lenny (01:08:05):
That is very cool. It circles back to the value of culture and values and being aligned within your company on culture and values. And it's interesting that that's the question you ask, and not something technical or skill-based.

Patrick Campbell (01:08:16):
Yeah. Well, I do all the final interviews. So they've already gone through a skill-based and they've done culture screen already and stuff like that. So this is more of the, here's why you should not work here, that type of conversation basically.

Lenny (01:08:30):
I love that. Next question, what are five SaaS products that you or your company uses that you love? And bonus points for ones maybe people haven't heard,

Patrick Campbell (01:08:39):
That's hard to answer too because at the end of the day, we'd all say Zoom, Google Workspace or whatever they're calling it these days because those are the things that are so central. I've got to give a shout-out to Notion, we use Notion for all of our documentation. I use Notion for my personal... all these things. I know Code is a sponsor, so I apologize but-

Lenny (01:08:59):
They're both sponsors, and so we're friends with everyone over here. Both are great-

Patrick Campbell (01:09:02):
Amazing. Lenny's Podcast, friends of all products. Descript. I use Descript quite a bit. I use Descript not only for... it's like a video recording and editing tool, or you can bring in video to edit. But it's got some cool features that... I use it more than Loom a lot of times because it just works in my workflow, not only for creating, but also for those quick conversations.

(01:09:25):
K-Tool. Here's a fun one. This is an indie product, K-Tool. There's probably other products that exist like this, but I actually really like the interface of it, it's super simple. Basically if I'm online or someone sends me a PDF or something like that, I can basically choose to send that to my Kindle. So if someone sends me something I could just choose to send and then I can batch all of those things into a weekly newsletter that I can curate. So my Sundays and my Monday morning are just spent reading. So I have this weekly newsletter of someone wants me to review this thing or someone wants me to read this article or something like that. So I batch that into a little newsletter and it's just a Chrome extension that works really well.

(01:10:03):
Tweet Hunter, I'm trying to be more on Twitter. I went through lulls, so now I'm trying to be consistent. So Tweet Hunter's pretty good. It's got some AI fun stuff into it to make discovery better. And then it's not a SaaS application, but the last one is this Apple Watch Ultra. So I don't carry my phone anymore. I just don't... I found myself being on a computer, walking away with my phone, going, doing stuff and then just never being off-screen. So I have this for when I'm not in front of my computer and I'm this close to also doing it when I travel to when I've been traveling, my phone will stay in my suitcase, but it connects if I need to make a phone call. It connects via Bluetooth, all that kind of stuff. But just trying to take my attention away from my phone basically, so that's, that's been the unlock.

Lenny (01:10:51):
Damn. What a list. That was incredible. I'm going to ask just one more question. What's favorite lesson from your NSA experience that helps you in life day to day?

Patrick Campbell (01:11:02):
I shouldn't say everything, but most things are more complicated than it seems. And that's not like a sinister thing, it just means when that person's coming at you and super angry about something, whether it's your fault or not, something's there, they're having a bad day, on top of it, you really messed up, you tapped into a particular emotion that you didn't realize you did. Or hey, there's even the story in the news about this politician's bad or something like that. Everything's a lot more complicated, and not in a it's too hard to understand way, it's just you should always caution yourself on believing the first reaction that you have.

(01:11:44):
And I developed that there because there's so many things where... And it was also my first job, so a lot of this stuff happens because it's your first job, many people may have this experience at a different place, but it was like, "Oh, this geopolitical thing that's happened. Oh, here's my first instinct, that means this is bad." They're like, "Well, actually, there's this other thing going on over here and this other thing going over there, and those are actually connected. That's why this is caused." So that's helped me, one, not get so pissed off at the news. That's also helped me, I think just as a human, along with most charitable interpretation, to just be like, "Okay, let me not overreact here. Let me seek to understand and then react or respond, versus react."

Lenny (01:12:23):
What a beautiful way to end it. Patrick Campbell, renaissance man of a brain. This may be the most action-packed episode we've had, and I'm not surprised. Two final questions where can folks find you online if they want to ask you questions, reach out, learn more about what you're up to? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Patrick Campbell (01:12:38):
Yeah, so I am on Twitter @patticus, childhood nickname, P-A-T-T-I-C-U-S. LinkedIn, Patrick Campbell. I don't check my LinkedIn messages, I'm going to get around to it, it's just there's so much spam in there. But yeah, you could find me there or just pc@patticus.com, that's my personal email. So yeah, if I can be helpful or you want to see more of the data or you have this question or that question, we've probably written or recorded something on some of the things we talked about today, so I'm happy to send it over and just obviously want to be helpful, so yeah, feel free to hit me up.

Lenny (01:13:08):
Amazing. Patrick, thank you again for being here.

Patrick Campbell (01:13:11):
Thanks for having me, man.

Lenny (01:13:12):
Bye, everyone.

Audio (01:13:14):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

