Chandra Janakiraman (00:00:00):
I started noticing that there was a certain mystique and aura about product strategy. There was this perception that some people were intrinsically really good at strategy and others were not. It was almost as if there was a strategy gene you needed to be born with to be good at it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:16):
Say someone's sitting down, okay, I'm going to start developing a strategy for our product. Where do you begin? What does this process look like?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:00:23):
In terms of what product strategy is? There is a smallest flavor of it which focuses on solving problems, they're called present forward, and it typically operates in a two-year horizon. We use a five-stage process to get there and it takes about eight to 12 weeks. The reason I think this process works is there is a ton of alignment built in. It goes back to human psychology of just something that comes from you, feels a lot more familiar and easy to accept.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:49):
Let's talk about big S strategy. When should you approach strategy this way?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:00:53):
There's this interesting quote by Elon Musk, which is-

Elon Musk (00:00:56):
"Life's got to be about more than just solving problems."

Chandra Janakiraman (00:00:58):
I think this is true of every sort of company. There needs to be an aspirational and cool component to strategy. What does the product look like in five to 10 years? Why is the world better in 10 years? And what is the most exciting version of that view?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:15):
Today my guest is Chandra Janakiraman. Chandra is chief product officer and executive vice president at VRChat. He was a product leader at Meta, chief product officer at Headspace, a GM at Zynga, and a senior PM at Amazon. And the way this podcast episode happened was an avid podcast listener, Karthik Suresh, told me about Chandra at a community meetup. And when I connected with Chandra, it was clear that I needed to get him on the podcast.

(00:01:40):
Chandra is a student of strategy and has spent his career developing what he calls an operator's guide to strategy, which essentially pulls together the best ideas from Good Strategy, Bad Strategy, Playing to Win, Michael Porter and others to create a very clear, reliable and easy-to-follow five-step process to develop a great strategy and a set of next steps for your product and company. After hearing Chandra walk through this in our conversation, I'm basically going to now point everyone who wants to get better at strategy to this episode and Chandra's method. Strategy is at the heart of every great product and team and business, and it's also the source of so much pain if you do it badly. This episode is meant to help you avoid that. A big thank you to Karthik for making this connection. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing feature episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Chandra Janakiraman.

(00:02:39):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next-generation A-B testing and feature management platform built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams, companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth and for understanding the performance of new features and Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does.

(00:03:09):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most was our experimentation platform where I could set up experiments, easily, troubleshoot issues, and analyze performance all on my own. Eppo does all that and more With advanced statistical methods that can help you shave weeks off experiment time and accessible UI for diving deeper into performance and out of the box reporting that helps you avoid annoying prolonged analytic cycles. Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insights with your team, sparking new ideas for the A-B testing flywheel. Eppo powers experimentation across every use case, including product growth, machine learning, monetization, and email marketing. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com/lenny and 10 x your experiment velocity. That's geteppo.com/lenny.

(00:03:57):
This episode is brought to you by Airtable ProductCentral, the unified system that brings your entire product org together in one place. No more scattered tools, no more misaligned teams. If you're like most product leaders, you're tired of constant context switching between tools. That's why Airtable built Product Central after decades of working with world-class product companies. Think of it as mission control for your entire product organization. Unlike rigid point solutions, product central powers everything from resourcing to voice of customer to roadmapping to launch execution. And because it's built on Airtable's no-code platform, you can customize every workflow to match exactly how your team works. No limitations, no compromises. Ready to see it in action, head to airtable.com/lenny to book a demo. That's airtable.com/lenny.

(00:04:51):
Chandra, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:04:55):
Pleasure to be here, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:57):
I want to share actually the context and how this conversation happened. I was at a meetup of my readership, of my community and someone came up to me and they're like, "Lenny, you need to get this guy Chandra on your podcast. He's the most amazing playbook for developing a strategy." He's gone through it with you at a company he worked at with you once, and he's just like, "People need to learn this because it's so good." And to me, if someone can get better at strategy, it feels like it just makes so much of the way the company operates and the way that people work better. So we chatted, we met, I was like, "I completely agree. We definitely need to get you on this podcast to share your approach to the strategy." So we made this happen, and so we're here. So again, thank you for doing this and sharing.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:05:37):
Thank you. Thank you, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:39):
First of all, I wanted to ask just you're very passionate about strategy and developing a way to consistently create great strategies. What got you so interested in this stuff in the first place? What kind of sparked your interest in this area?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:05:53):
Yeah, yeah, it's a very interesting story. It goes back all the way 10 years ago, but I remember it vividly like it happened yesterday. And I was a relatively new VP of product at Headspace, and we had this amazing company vision and mission that the founders had laid out, and I had come in and established goals for the team in terms of our key metrics, and we had a very buttoned up roadmap in my mind that fed into that company mission and vision. And I was feeling pretty good about how things were shaping up.

(00:06:37):
And on a particular Monday, the founder, CEO pulled me aside, and in his usual disarming style, he sort of made a short but profound statement. He said that, "Hey, CJ, I'm hearing that a lot of people don't really understand why we are working on what we are working on," and that was it. That was really the extent of what he shared. And it was a little bit of a bubble bursting moment for me because we obviously had spent a lot of time building the plan and I was feeling relatively good about the plan.

(00:07:21):
And so I spoke to a few people. I sort of wanted to understand it a little bit deeper, like, "Hey, what's happening?" And he was right. He was right. A lot of people didn't really understand why we were working on the things we were working on, and it led to some soul-searching. And basically I was lucky because there was actually a board member of Headspace who had a product background, kind of knew what good looked like, and I came to the conclusion, "Hey, we needed a strategy for Headspace."

(00:07:56):
So with extensive work with her, with the board person, we built the first written product strategy for Headspace. And that, and the subsequent actions on the product led to a complete re-imagination of the product. And basically we were able to create a new product, we call it the Next Generation Headspace, which on one hand it could support a comprehensive library of content, not just meditation, but non-meditation content as well. It had the sort of home experience where everything was incredibly personalized for the individuals, and there were several motivational elements built into the whole product experience. And it was very transformational for the company and the product because it changed the product from being a meditation app to a broader health and wellness service and really put the company on a different trajectory. It led to my promotion to the first CPO at Headspace.

(00:09:07):
And most interestingly, I had a chance to, while going through it almost in a sort of out of body way, observed the process of like, okay, how did we put this thing together? And what actually went into it? What really started as almost a personal crisis moment of finding this need to create a strategy for a product and a company led to a bigger sort of quest for me, which is I started noticing that there was a certain mystique and aura about product strategy, and there was this perception that some people were intrinsically really good at strategy and others were not. And it was almost as if there was a strategy gene that you needed to be born with to be good at it. And that bothered me a lot, and I sort of wanted to ask myself, is it possible to break that divide between the haves and the have-nots and make this capability widely accessible through a procedural approach. And I have news for you. The answer is yes, anybody can build product strategy through a clear understanding of what it is and through a friendly and repeatable playbook.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:29):
Amazing. That's exactly what I want to do here. The point you made about the why, I think everyone listening to this that's been in product for long enough has heard that of just, "Your team doesn't understand why we're doing this." I've heard that a number of times, as much as you think you're killing it, there's always that, you forget sometimes to do that or you aren't doing it great. And I love that basically the solution to that is the strategy solves that problem of helping people connect the dots and understand why this is the roadmap, why this is the strategy. Okay, so before we get into it, just one more context question, what's just the best way to think about what you're about to share and also who's it for? Who needs to hear this briefly?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:11:11):
So the way to think about this, the substance is that this is not a new framework or theory that I'm going to be talking about. There are plenty of excellent materials on strategy from ancient texts like The Art of War from Sun Tzu, all of Michael Porter's work, Good Strategy Bad Strategy by Richard Rumelt, who's been on your podcast, Playing to Win Lafley and Roger Martin. So there's a ton of extensively researched and well-founded materials out there. So the way I would think about this is, it's more of an operator's interpretation of all the stuff that's out there and are able to package it into something that's friendly and repeatable, particularly for product people who think they are weak at strategy or perhaps have received such feedback.

(00:12:05):
And just in terms of the battle-tested nature of it, I personally use this playbook about five to six times tweaking and optimizing it each time based on what I thought worked, what people thought worked and didn't work, including several times at Meta and usually leading to strong results, both for me achieving senior leadership alignment as well as driving business results for the company.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:36):
Okay, I'm getting more and more excited. Let's get into it, let's get into this playbook. People hear this word strategy a lot. They're told be more strategic, build a better strategy. What's the simplest way to understand what is a strategy?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:12:49):
Yeah, let's start with some basic definitions, which is as you asked, what is product strategy? And if you think back to the Headspace example, this sort of comes to life as well. So product strategy, strategy sits between the mission and vision and the plan. It could be at the company level or at the team level, but it's usually sitting between the mission and vision and the plan. And the plan, you can call the plan the roadmap, which is basically an ordered list of things that you want to get done and the mission and vision is basically sort of the purpose of existence, what does it look like when you achieve your purpose of existence? So it sits between the two and it forces choice to deploy scarce resources to generate maximum impact.

(00:13:40):
And I want to borrow an analogy from the world of physics. There is this concept called resonance, and the concept of resonance is really interesting, and it's actually very close to the concept of strategy. So the concept of resonance works as follows, when you apply a certain frequency to an object and you get pretty close to its natural frequency, you see a disproportionate increase in the amplitude of how that object vibrates. And so it's very interesting, if you apply any other frequency, there's very little effect on the object, but if you get close to its natural frequency, there's this exponential increase in the vibration of the product. So this concept of resonance is interesting.

(00:14:27):
So the way to think about it in the context of strategy is, it is selecting that frequency to achieve resonance between the product and the market. And so when you get close to that frequency, you should see tremendous impact in terms of the product landing well in the market. And so that's how I would think about it. It sits between mission, vision and the plan. It forces choice to deploy scarce resources to generate maximum impact, so using resonance as a sort of an example, and it ideally includes three components. The first is a handful of areas to focus on and I call these strategic pillars and then a whole bunch of areas that are explicitly not the focus. And the third component is why. So why are the focus areas, A, B and C? Why are these whole bunch of areas not the focus? And that's the three components. That's really it in terms of product strategy.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:32):
I love it. And I love the things we aren't doing as a core part of this, that comes up a lot on this podcast of being clear is what we're not going to do. We know these could be things we could do, but we're deciding we're not doing these things.

(00:15:42):
Okay, so let's just talk through how you go about developing a strategy using this method. Say someone's sitting down, "Okay, I'm going to start developing a strategy for our product." Where do you begin? What does this process look like? Let's start talking through it.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:15:59):
So I sort of want to first explain this concept called smallest strategy, and I'll sort of talk about what that is and how it's different from another kind. But the basic sort of strategic process I would say takes about eight to 12 weeks long. It's something that I think people often underestimate how long it takes and eventually end up taking a lot more time. But when they start off, they think, "Oh, I could probably stand this up in a couple of weeks," but usually through iteration it actually ends up taking 8 to 12 weeks anyway. So it's good to start with setting clear expectations that it takes about eight to 12 weeks. And the way to justify the ROI on that is typically a strategy like this can be leveraged for about a couple of years. So relative to that sort of payback period, I think the investment is relatively small. So it's pretty healthy from that sense to manage expectations and say that that's how long it's going to take.

(00:17:00):
So within that period, there are five phases. There's the preparation phase, there's a strategy sprint, the design sprint, the document writing and the rollout. And those are the five phases, which I'll explain how one would go through. And basically each of them has a certain sort of time recommendation. For example, the preparation phase I would say is probably about four weeks. The strategy sprint is up to about one week. The design sprint is another one week, document writing maybe one to two weeks, and the rollout is maybe two to three weeks. So that's how you get to that range of eight to 12 weeks.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:40):
Essentially it's like a quarter of work to get to a final great strategy. And of these five phases, the biggest bucket is preparation, which to me sounds like it's not like a full-time team thing. It's starting to gather data and user research-

Chandra Janakiraman (00:17:56):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:57):
As you talk through this, I'm curious just how much of the team is involved in each of these steps. But I think it's an important point, if you want a really good winning strategy, you need to give a time. You can't just say, "In a month or a week, we need to develop a strategy, go figure it out, write this document." Great. Cool. So let's talk about step one preparation.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:18:14):
That's correct, Lenny. And I think you, if I forget, remind me that sometimes there is pressure. There's just business pressure, like the CEO might still want a strategy in two weeks, how do you respond to that? And I think we can find some clever shortcuts there, but I think to the extent possible, the leader should push for [inaudible 00:18:39] to make something really great.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:40):
And I think part of it is that as a leader, you can start on this before... you know this is coming, so you should get started before it's even asked for.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:18:48):
That's correct.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:49):
Yeah, awesome. Okay, let's get into it.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:18:51):
So I think you sort of touched on this in terms of the preparation phase being the longest phase, but also not being sort of like a full-time thing. So that's absolutely right. So the preparation phase is really... The way to start this, which is a little different from other approaches I've seen from people is to actually form a strategy working group. This is an important concept. So the strategy working group is sort of a small team. It typically consists of engineering, product design and data at a minimum. And in certain cases, there's a luxury to have other functions like product marketing, user research, that's also part of the strategy working group. But the minimum quorum, I would recommend is engineering, product design and data because design in some ways represents both sort of product design and user research. So you do get the voice of the user from that perspective. And typically the PM is driving the strategy working group and the process, but that working group is actually the team that's going to collaboratively create the strategy doc.

(00:19:59):
And so in the preparation phase, there's usually a kickoff meeting where the PM pulls the team together, talks about the purpose of the process, lays out the different phases, and gives everybody a feel for what's going to happen in the next 8 to 12 weeks. And basically then creates a list of very discrete action items and deliverables for each of the stakeholders in the working group. So specifically, there's an action item around aggregating all the behavioral insights that the team might have around the product. And usually this is a combination of previous analysis that the team has run on the data side and potentially also feature launches and how they have done. So all kind of analytical analysis.

(00:20:50):
The ask is really to create a meta analysis of all of the analysis. So the data person on the strategy working group has to scan the historical archives at the company and sort of synthesize and condense that into a very sort of digestible macro themes and learnings about users. So that's sort of one preparation phase item.

(00:21:16):
The second is UXR insight. So again, there's probably a lot of soft hard signals about users, not just based on research that's run by user researchers, but also potentially from the customer service team, social channels, and basically a meta analysis of all of that into one very actionable and synthesized deck on all the insights on users. That's usually led by the design person and with support from their research team. And that's sort of the second action item.

(00:21:53):
The third action item is leadership interviews. So I sort of have this fun story of the fruit with leadership strategy reviews, which I want to share. So imagine, this is sort of how sometimes strategy reviews go, which is you bring a fruit to the reviewer and say, "Hey, here's a mango, what do you think?" And the reviewer says, "I actually don't like mangoes." And you're like, "Oh," you're sort of sad. You take it back, you bring an apple and you show, "Hey, what do you think of an apple?" And then the leader says, "I actually stopped eating apples last year." And so you're disappointed again. You go back, you bring a banana. "I hated bananas since I was a kid." And so it's a bit of a silly caricature of reviews, but there's a bit of grain of truth there, which is, imagine how frustrating that is for both the reviewer and the person who's reviewing.

(00:22:54):
And so it could be made so much better if you just engage with your leaders before you actually build a strategy. It's amazing how few people actually do that. And so the fruit story tells you, hey, imagine if you just asked the reviewer, "Do you even like fruits?" How much better the experience would've been for both parties. And so leadership interviews are a very important part of a strategy formulation process. So you can divide and conquer, there's several leaders, like you assign different leaders to different people on the strategy working group and each of them sort talks to that leader. And there are a few questions that I would recommend asking, and it's basically, what does success feel like for the leader? What does failure look like? What is the measure of success? What are principles to keep in mind while going through this process?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:51):
And these are centered around the product that you're working on?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:23:55):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:55):
For Headspace, it'd be like, what do you think success looks like for Headspace or the specific feature of Headspace? [inaudible 00:24:03].

Chandra Janakiraman (00:24:02):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:03):
Okay, cool.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:24:04):
That's right, yeah. And also I think ask them for their favorite or better ideas. It's actually what I've found through this process is a lot of leaders have these better ideas, they just feel shy to share it because they don't want their teams to think of them as micromanage-y. They want their teams to figure out the answer themselves, but then when you ask them, they actually have a pet idea always.

(00:24:29):
And so asking them just takes the mystery out of it. And it also gives them a creative avenue. So some people feel nervous about engaging senior leaders in these conversations in the sense that, hey, is it a waste of their time? What I've found is the exact opposite, senior leaders are, they welcome this because one, it's actually a more fun conversation for them than the other meetings that they have in their day because they're getting a little bit of their creative juices going, and they actually feel happy that somebody actually asked them what they're feeling and thinking about. And so it's actually very, very positive energy when you ask leaders just what they want. And it's also not a sign of weakness. It's actually a sign of strength and humility to ask your leaders what you want. And so keeping that fruit story in mind, I want to just say that this is a very, very positive thing, a very powerful thing.

(00:25:26):
The next area is competitive analysis. So if there is a product marketing person, they can do it for you. If there isn't, the PM should do it themselves. And basically the idea is you try to understand who are the comparables or the competitors in the space, and you sort of build a little bit of a head-to-head and sort a stack chart of where's everybody going and what are of the angles of investment for different people based on the explicit signals, which is what are they releasing?

(00:25:59):
You don't really know what their strategies are, but you can kind of tell when you look at the features they're putting out that, oh, they seem to be focusing on this particular area. And so that's sort of competitive analysis. And bigger companies, there's also another important input, which is adjacent roadmaps. Are the teams adjacent to you and what are they investing in? Because oftentimes that can have a rub-off effect on your team, and if you're not aligning with other key teams, it's going to be important. So adjacent roadmaps and a summary of that.

(00:26:33):
And last but not least, is what I call user observation. So I like the strategy working group to actually either interview a user or watch a video and report key learnings. And the idea is not to action those insights, it's really to build empathy. When you get somebody in the room with a user, it just changes their mind, it softens them a little bit. It gets them out of their own preconceived notions of what to build, what the strategy should be and...

Chandra Janakiraman (00:27:00):
... their own preconceived notions of what to build, what the strategy should be, and it humanizes the whole process. That I think is the purpose, but you still give them the homework of writing down what they learned because it's a little bit of a forcing function.

(00:27:16):
The output of all of this is what I call the comprehensive preparation readout. It is a single master deck where you sort of have the behavioral insights meta analysis, you have the UXR insights meta analysis, you have a download of the leadership interviews, you have the competitive stack charts, you have the adjacent roadmaps, and you have a section on user observations. It's a lot of work, but to your point, it can be done in parallel with your day jobs. You can multitask, and that's why you take about four weeks to do that. That sort of concludes the preparation phase. You get the deck, and that rolls into the strategy sprint, which is the next phase. I want to pause and see if you have any questions.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:06):
Yeah, I have a million questions, but I'm going to keep myself contained. Just to quickly summarize. Basically you kick off, we're going to start developing strategy for this product, and you were going to touch on this, but it may help just to talk about this right now. I know you have big S Strategy, small S strategy. This process, what's an example of the level of product scale that this process is for? Because I know you have another approach for a larger scale of a product, basically for a company. What's the best way to think about small S strategy, which is what we're going through?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:28:37):
Yeah, I think it's a good question, Lenny. I would say that the process works well at sort of a growth stage company or in a vertical within sort of a larger company. I think it scales pretty well. The main difference between this small S and big S is the time horizon aspect and the aspirational component, which we'll get to.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:02):
Okay, so this is a process you can use for entire company strategy of not a large company, not a massively, and then also just a product within a company?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:29:11):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:11):
Okay, perfect. Okay. Hey, we're kicking off strategy for this thing. Let's say VR Chat 2.0. You have this kickoff meeting with your working group. You assign action items and there's six things you ask everyone to do. Gather all the behavioral insights, all the user research insights that you've had, leadership interviews, interview people, ask what they want and see what they're hoping for, what success looks like, competitive analysis, adjacent roadmaps across other teams and user observations, just like watch users, see what's happening. You assign each of these tasks to different people in this working group. You set a deadline. We have to present this in say, four weeks. People go work on it. You meet ongoing as it's coming together, and then the output is a deck that you share. Do you share this deck with just that working group, or who do you share this deck with and read it out to?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:30:02):
Yeah. The deck is an output of the first phase, and then it flows into the second phase, which is a strategy sprint. You don't share the deck with anybody yet.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:10):
Got it. This is our secret.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:30:11):
In the strategy sprint, it's like a key thing. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:13):
Awesome. Okay. I love how very concrete and actionable this is with time boxes and action items and the exact output you're looking for. I love this. Okay, cool. Basically what you're trying to do here is gather all of the input that will inform the strategy.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:30:27):
That's correct.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:28):
It's giving yourself time to do this, because if you think about it, the output is determined by the quality of your input. I love, it feels like a core component of this method is spend time creating, gathering all the input, all the best input, actually spend time there. Don't just make it a half-assed last minute thing. Okay. Amazing. Okay, let's talk about step two, which is the strategy sprint.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:30:52):
Yeah, so the strategy sprint is the heart of the process. This is sort of where you make the decision. If you recall, the definition of strategy is it forces choice to deploy resources into a few areas for maximum impact. The core of strategy is really picking those areas and the areas you're not going invest in. That happens in the strategy sprint, so really it's the heart of the process.

(00:31:22):
Typically, it's like a three to five day process. The first day is the share out date. Everybody has done some great work. They go in, they share what they've collected, what they've sort of learned. It brings everybody in the working group to the same state of understanding, the same state of consciousness on the state of the union. That's a great process where what I encourage people to do is write down things that you are, as you're listening, write down things that you find are problems for our users, things that are coming in the way of our growth and things that are sort of suboptimal for the business.

(00:32:05):
People take a lot of notes during that time and the people who are presenting are sharing everything they've learned. That's really day one. It's just absorbing a ton of information and writing down a ton of notes so people can kind of understand where all the problems are. It's a very problems focused process, and that's an important point. I'll get back to it when we talk about big S, which is different. Once people have that common awareness, shared knowledge of all the problems, day two is literally the most important day in the entire 8 to 12 weeks because that's where you actually make the choice. The way to flow through it, it's actually really important to flow through it correctly. The first step is really generating a whole bunch of problems, because people have been taking notes the previous day.

(00:32:59):
You start the day with, "Hey, let's collect everybody's thoughts on what the problems are that are holding us back." It's a free flowing session. Everybody throws out their observations on what's holding us back, and you just capture all of that in a Google Sheets, for example. Over even an hour, you start to see these patterns emerging of like, there's these clusters of problems that are really holding us back. The next step is you do a joint clustering of related problems and you create these potentially, typically in my experience, I've seen about 10 to 15 clusters form of very related problems. The beauty of it is each of those bigger cluster, you actually know what the sub problems are within that cluster because you sort of generated it very organically.

(00:33:55):
Then you have, let's say 10 to 15 clusters. What you then do is you, because remember, because it started as a problem generation exercise, each of the clusters also has a name that is a problem, and so the next step is to flip it into an opportunity framing. Let me give you a couple of examples.

(00:34:16):
Let's say there's a bunch of problems around people don't really know where to find different things in our product, and they don't really know where to go, where to find a certain feature or a certain experience. There's let's say a lot of problems in that area, so difficulty finding things becomes the cluster, the problem cluster and discovery becomes the opportunity sort of framing of it. It's sort of the more positive framing of it.

(00:34:46):
Another example could be that people get a lot of content that they don't like. They see a lot of stuff that they don't like, and so they disengage with the product. The opportunity framing of that would be relevance. It's basically stuff that really matters to me. Maybe if it's a social product, then maybe people are finding it difficult to find friends and they are lonely because of that. The opportunity framing would be social connection.

(00:35:20):
Flipping all of those problem clusters into positive framing and opportunity framing is the next step. Then you're in a great spot because now all you have to do is you have to down select from those 10 to 15 opportunity areas into ideally three, maybe five, but I would recommend three because it creates more clarity and focus. The way to do that is really sort of ranking them on, I would say four or five key dimensions or criteria, and the first is expected impact.

(00:35:56):
Let's say you actually tackle that area. What is the expected impact to whatever matters to you as a company, as a business, as a product? The second dimension is certainty of impact. Certainty of impact is basically how concrete is the evidence that this is a problem? Sometimes you have really hard data, sometimes you have more anecdotal evidence, and so the confidence really depends on how big the problem's sizing and frequency is. Expected impact, certainty of impact. The third one is also very important, which is clarity of levers.

(00:36:34):
Do you actually have an idea of how you would solve it? If you don't, it's going to be really difficult to move the needle on it because you should kind of know that, okay, I can imagine these solutions could actually move the needle. I can actually launch this sort of nudge system that can help people find things. I can recommend people. I can recommend friends so that people can form friends quicker on the platform. You should have a sense of how you would solve that particular space. Is there clarity on levers? That's the third dimension.

(00:37:08):
The fourth dimension is super important, which is are the levers unique and differentiated to that particular team or company? Which is that if another team or company could build it better than this particular team or company, then it's probably not that differentiated. It's probably going to be pretty generic once you launch it. It's a combination of sort of like, is there a lot of impact here? How confident are we of the problem? Do we have a sense of the solutions? And basically, are we the team or company that has the capabilities and the skills to uniquely build it where other teams cannot?

(00:37:52):
Once you have that, and sometimes what happens is you don't have too much data, and so it's okay to have qualitative scores on this like high, medium, low, T-shirt scores, whatever that is. The key is you're doing it together as a strategy working group, and you're debating the scores and you're reasoning why it should be higher versus lower. There's a ton of alignment and collision that's happening when you're doing that, which is very healthy for the eventual outcome.

(00:38:22):
Once you do that, basically you can do a simple sort of addition of the scores and a sort, and what you have is basically the top three and you have the remaining 7 or 12 that are basically not the focus. That's the core of the process, is getting those opportunity areas and getting to a shared sense of how do we prioritize them and why?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:51):
Okay, and this is all done in a week. I know there's more to it. There's a couple more items that help you move from what you just said to the next step, but I love that this is the core of the biggest element of the process, and you do it in a week and you're only able to do it in a week because of the work you did ahead of time. Again, highlighting the importance of that prep step.

(00:39:13):
Just to share what you've shared so far, and then we'll finish the strategy sprint step. It's basically do the share out so everyone's on the same page about all the information that, all the inputs essentially. Enumerate all the problems, like individual small problems and then cluster them into 10 to 15 problem clusters. Flip it from here's the problem to here's an opportunity we have. Rank them based on, basically there's these four attributes you shared, which I'll actually, I wrote these down. Impact potential, confidence that it will have the impact, clarity of levers and are they differentiated unique levers? Is there something different from what other folks are doing? Those are ways to rank these ideas and problem clusters. You essentially come up with, here's three bets basically we potentially should take. Okay, and then I think that's where you stopped. Is that right?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:40:03):
That's totally right, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:06):
Okay, cool.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:40:06):
Those three that are at the top of that pile are basically our strategic pillars. We've sort of gotten our strategic pillars and they basically hold up the strategy. That's why they're called strategic pillars. The idea is once you have the strategic pillars, we basically translate that into a few how might we's? Let's say it's a relevance thing. How might we find the best content for a particular user? How might we surface it in the right place? There's a few how might we's, and the how might we's are basically intended to help the next phase of the process, which is the design sprint.

(00:40:43):
You generate these areas, these strategic pillars, you generate the how might we's. How might we's are typically pretty straightforward. Once you have the strategic pillars, it takes probably an hour to generate some how might we's for each of them, maybe two or three for each strategic pillar, and then you're done with that stage.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:00):
I just want to highlight real quick, this phrasing is really important. I used exactly the same phrasing. I had a PM that I worked with and his name was Andrew Chen, but not the Andrew Chen people know about, that's an investor, who had this concept of fertile questions that create ideas and spark ideas and solutions. This phrase, "How might we", is actually really powerful as a way to come up with ideas to solve problems. It's just like, how might we increase discoverability in our app? How might we improve relevance? There's something magical about that phrasing that it opens up your mind to, how might we? Let's think about it. Versus like, how do we improve discovery? That's a different, your brain works differently hearing this. That is a really powerful phrasing. Just wanted to highlight that.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:41:47):
Yeah, that's awesome. It's also something that designers are familiar with, Lenny, so it flows really well into sort of a design sprint.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:56):
Okay, so you have these how might we'd. You have three pillars, maybe three or four or five how might we's to solve these opportunities/problems, and then what happens after that?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:42:06):
Exactly. Then the third day is it's good to start fresh. The team's accomplished a lot.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:13):
This was all the first two days.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:42:14):
This is the first two days, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:15):
Wow. Okay. So much done in two days.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:42:18):
Yeah, exactly. The second day is particularly intense on the team, so it's good to give them a break, because it's a lot of really mental sort of wrestling, and so give the team a bit of a break. Then the third day is when people are a little bit refreshed, we get to winning aspiration. Winning aspiration is super interesting because it's a very creative exercise. You basically imagine in two years, because that's the typical time horizon of a smaller strategy, is like 18 months to 24 months. This is what I tell the team. Imagine two years there's a newspaper, there's a journalist that covers this work, and there's a newspaper article that comes out. I want you to imagine the progress on all these strategic pillars and what the headline of that newspaper article looks like. It's called a newspaper headline approach.

(00:43:09):
Basically, everybody generates a newspaper headline in parallel. It's interesting because you often see there's these common themes that sort of form when people generate these headlines. The forcing function with the headline is also that it has to be somewhat simple and plain speak. It's not too technical. You have to get to a more simple layperson's language and you have to get to the key benefit that ultimately, the impact it has on the world. Those kinds of themes come up often.

(00:43:44):
Then you do a little bit, you put them all into a blender, you put all of those headlines from the team into a blender, and you mash them together and create the winning aspiration, which is ultimately what does progress on the strategy look like in a couple of years time? That comes from the working group, it's not like one person writing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:09):
What's an example of an aspiration that you've come up with on a project you worked on, a winning aspiration?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:44:14):
We did this process for the privacy team when I was at Meta. Really the strategic pillars were around a lot of features that we would build, but the winning aspiration was really like, could we move consumer trust? The newspaper headline is something like, "Facebook has moved the needle on consumer trust by investing in these areas." That's how you create the bigger impact.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:47):
That's a great example. Obviously this is similar to the PR Amazon method and what I love about your approach, as you said early on, is you're just pulling together all of these awesome ideas from all these different methods of strategy work to a very methodical step-by-step process. Taking all the best ideas into, and as you described, an operator's playbook for doing this. I love that. Okay. When you say blender, by the way, I was thinking as you were talking, put them into a blender, what I'm inferring is you just take everyone's headlines and you come up with one that kind of covers the gamut of all three pillars being successful.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:45:20):
That's exactly right. More tactically what I typically do is I put them all on a slide and start, it's almost like a word cloud, and then you start to see these common words. Then you converge those words as the key elements of the final winning aspiration. Then you try to create a nice statement out of that. It also symbolically, everybody sees their own statement on the deck, and that's how you get to the final model.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:46):
Awesome. I feel like AI could help with that now.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:45:46):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:48):
Just put in all your headline ideas and it comes up with some suggestions. Okay, cool. Is that the end of the sprint or is there more to the sprint?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:45:55):
That's it for the sprint.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:57):
Okay. At the end of the sprint, what do you have? What are the outputs?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:46:00):
Yeah, this is a great progress on strategy because now we have the three strategic pillars. We have the how might we associate it with the strategic pillars. You also have the why. Why did you get to those three strategic pillars and what are you not focused on and what are the reasons for it? You also have the winning aspiration. It's great progress. The team's done a great job. I think now we sort of move on to the design sprint.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:30):
In your experience, how often are these three the correct three that you end up going with versus you learn something over the course of the rest of the sprint and adjust?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:46:38):
It's a very good question. We'll speak about an example that I had in Meta where typically during the strategy sprint, you don't change it once you go through the strategy sprint, but eventually there are a lot of signals you get through execution where you sort of have to course correct. We'll talk about one very interesting example of how that sort of changed things here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:01):
Awesome. Okay. Basically, you've developed your strategy at this point, and in your experience it ends up being... Until you hit the market and test, you don't really know what's going on.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:47:01):
Correct.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:10):
But there's kind of an implication that in your experience doing this, I think you said five or six times, it has been correct and as good as doing it any other approach.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:47:21):
I would say it's not sort of an empirical study, obviously because of the small sample size, but I would say that it's really opened people's eyes and it's led to really good alignment and eventually good results. Even when it has not, it has led to good organizational buy-in on why and how we are approaching things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:42):
This reminds me of, Tomer Cohen was on the podcast, he's CPO of LinkedIn and he has this phrase that always says he says, which is, "We may be wrong, but we're not confused." I love that a core part of this is everyone is completely on the same page, not from the beginning, but once you start this process of here's all the inputs, here's step by step we are working together on narrowing down, so at least everyone understands the why. Which is what sparked your interest in this in the first place, everyone understanding. I know there's a whole rollout at the end too to solve that.

(00:48:14):
Okay, cool, so we have the sprint. We have basically the three pillars that you're going to invest in, this headline of what it might look like if you're to launch and some solution ideas with how might we's. What comes next?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:48:26):
Yeah. The next phase is the design sprint, and the design sprint can be led by the design person who's in the strategy working group. If you remember, there's engineering, product design and data, so the design person can lead it and the PM can sort of take a bit of a backseat during this process. The input to the design sprint is sort of the three strategic pillars and the how might we's associated with it.

(00:48:50):
The goal of the design sprint is not to sort of come up with these are the features we should build. That's not the purpose of the design sprint. The design sprint is to generate a lot of illustrative concepts that bring the strategy to life because a picture is worth a thousand words. Oftentimes, even though you might have the right words in your strategy doc, people might still scratch their head like, "What do you exactly mean? What are you going to build?" The illustrative concepts really sort of give people something to latch onto, "Oh, okay, I get it. This is what you're going to build at the end of the day with this strategy."

(00:49:25):
The more generative, the better. Then there's the ability to, sometimes if you do the Google Ventures design sprint, you can even test some of it with users and get a little bit of sharpening of things. The goal here is not to build feature-ready designs, it's more to generate concepts. Once you have that, basically the design sprint, and there's different flavors of design sprints, which I won't go into. You can lean on your design lead to decide what's the appropriate way, but the input and the output is what needs to be very emphasized. The input needs to be the strategic pillars. The output needs to be a ton of illustrative concepts to explain each strategic pillar. You could almost have a section where you talk about each strategic pillar and insert those concepts in that section. That's the idea.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:16):
We're going to go through a couple examples to make this very real. You mentioned the design sprint method, which we had the authors on the podcast. They actually didn't go through the design sprint method. They have another book called Make Time that's about productivity. We also had their colleague from Google Ventures that designed a bullseye sprint, which is also an interesting sprint. It's a new thing that helps you figure out your ICP and who to focus your product on and how that informs your product.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:50:40):
Oh, that's right. Interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:41):
It's another type of sprint you could use here. The input is here's the three things we're going to invest in, say discovery, relevance, privacy. The output is here's concepts of what this could look like to get people's minds going. Is it just a bunch of mocks basically in a deck at this point?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:51:00):
That's correct. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:01):
Okay, cool. Okay, amazing. That's a week. That's another sprint. PM could maybe take a little bit of a break.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:51:06):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:07):
And designers take the lead.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:51:09):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:09):
The engineers are kind of inputs and thought partners in this, I imagine.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:51:13):
They're optional. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:15):
Optional, but yeah, ideally they're involved because you want all the best ideas in there.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:51:19):
Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:20):
Okay, cool. What comes next?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:51:21):
Then the next step is the document writing. This is sort of a solo activity that the PM should take on, but the great news is the PM is not starting from scratch. There's so much great stuff to write. If you remember, there's a ton of user insights, a ton of behavioral insights, a ton of competitive analysis. There's the three strategic pillars, how might we's, winning aspiration. There's a whole bunch of illustrative concepts.

(00:51:48):
Oftentimes, product leads have this sort of creator's block. That is solved here completely because you have a ton of great material. I have to tell you, it doesn't make the job easier. You still have to weave together a good story. That's why I think it takes a week or two. I think it's really about combining, connecting and editing at this point and telling a cohesive story from all those components, but I think the building blocks are really solid and defensible.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:17):
Is there a template or kind of sections you like to include in your strategy doc? As someone sits down and is trying to write this out, what do you want to see there as headings?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:52:26):
I think you could almost take the building blocks as a little bit of a steer for the template. You start with the broader context where you talk about what the leaders kind of want from this overall effort. Then you get into key insights and analysis where you have user insights, behavioral insights, competitive analysis. Then you get into the strategic pillars and you explain them. You also explain why. In the appendix, you include the full table that you generated on day two of your strategy sprint. You include the full table in the appendix, including the criteria. That's going to be really important because most people are going to ask, "Why did you pick these?" That's basically sort of the defensibility.

(00:53:17):
Then you have the winning aspiration that's very bold. It's a big part of the heart of the deck, and you sort of embed the illustrative concepts into the actual each of the strategic pillars so that it flows well. Then finally, you end with some kind of alignment questions like, "Hey, do these feel right? Are there things we are missing?" So that it creates that framework for alignment in the subsequent meetings.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:45):
I'm excited to chat with Christina Gilbert, the founder of OneSchema, one of our longtime podcast sponsors. Hi, Christina.

Christina Gilbert (00:53:52):
Yes. Thank you for having me on, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:54):
What is the latest with OneSchema? I know you now work with some of my favorite companies, like Ramp, Vanta, Scale and Watershed. I heard that you just launched a new product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:00):
... and to scale and watershed, I heard that you just launched a new product to help product teams import CSVs from especially tricky systems like ERPs.

Christina (00:54:09):
Yes, so we just launched one scheme of file feeds, which allows you to build an integration with any system in 15 minutes, as long as you can export a CSV to an SFTP folder.

(00:54:18):
We see our customers all the time getting stuck with hacks and workarounds, and the product teams that we work with don't have to turn down prospects because their systems are too hard to integrate with. We allow our customers to offer thousands of without involving their engineering team at all.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:31):
I can tell you that if my team had to build integrations like this, how nice would it be to be able to take this off my roadmap, and instead use something like OneSchema, and not just to build it, but also to maintain it forever?

Christina (00:54:43):
Absolutely, Lenny. We've heard so many horror stories of multi-day outages from even just a handful of bad records. We are laser focused on integration reliability to help teams end all of those distractions that come up with integrations.

(00:54:55):
We have a built-in validation layer that stops any bad data from entering your system, and OneSchema will notify your team immediately of any data that looks incorrect.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:02):
I know that importing incorrect data can cause all kinds of pain for your customers and quickly lose their trust. Christina, thank you for joining us, and if you want to learn more, head on over to oneschema.co. That's oneschema.co.

(00:55:17):
I pulled up Playing to Win, which I know you also pull ideas from, and actually Roger Martin was on the podcast talking about this stuff. And one way I think about it as you're describing a way to break up your strategy doc, is he has these five questions that you ask.

(00:55:31):
The first is actually what's your winning aspiration? So I love that you're pulling that in. This is one approach your doc would be. What's your winning aspiration? Where will you play? What market are you going after? How will you win? What capabilities must be in place for you to win? And then what management systems are required?

(00:55:46):
We'll link to this framework just in case people want that as a crutch in their thinking strategy, but is there anything that we could link folks to that describe how you like to think about this doc? And if not, it'd be cool if you make a template that folks could borrow.

Chandra Janakiraman (00:56:00):
I'm happy to share of the flowchart of the process and the template as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:05):
Awesome. Okay. So this is how long of a process, this writing of the document?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:56:10):
It's about one to two weeks, and I think it's mostly solo work and hopefully by the end of it there's a very tight doc, and that's what we use to roll out.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:21):
And by solo work, I imagine you're looping in this working team to get their feedback as you're pulling it together, or is it just you sit there in a room and then...

Chandra Janakiraman (00:56:27):
I would minimize pulling them in, because they've all contributed so much to the process already. So, I would say that at the end of it, obviously, once you have a draft, it's good to share with them, but I wouldn't tap their cycles too much at this point, because they've given a lot already.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:47):
I see. Okay.

(00:56:48):
And how many pages do you see this doc being, roughly? What's a heuristic?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:56:52):
It's not too long. I would say probably three or four pages and then an appendix has a lot of additional... Like, the table I spoke about and a lot of additional maybe illustrative concepts. Maybe you can only use a few illustrative concepts in the main section so that there could be others there.

(00:57:09):
I think usually there's a desire from leaders to say, "Okay, what are we building next?" And it's important not to include a roadmap as part of a strategy doc, because a strategy doc is meant to be separate from the roadmap. It's meant to be a companion to your roadmap. And even though there's interest, maybe sometimes you can include a illustrative roadmap in the appendix, but I would try to keep it clean and try to keep it focused on just the strategy.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:40):
So at this point you basically developed your strategy, the next step, I think you call rollout, where you just start actually rolling this out, so let's talk about that. But it's important to note how many weeks in this is. This is like six-ish weeks of work and you've got a strategy for your company/product?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:57:58):
That's exactly right. So I think you're probably in the last two to three weeks of the process, and pretty important final step is the rollout, and I would start with what I call gatekeepers. And these are people who are absolutely... You have to get their one-on-one alignment and blessing on this before it moves forward. And it's probably not too many, probably two or three people. So I would pre-flight it with them and get their alignment.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:28):
So these are one-on-one meetings with these gatekeepers?

Chandra Janakiraman (00:58:29):
These are one-on-one meetings. Exactly.

(00:58:31):
And then there's a larger group of what I call key stakeholders, people who are impacted by it, different functional leaders, et cetera. And that can be done either async or through a group review. And then there's probably a rolling of list of team roadshows. There's different ways to do this, but the one that I feel is most effective is the roadshow where you have about eight to 10 people in each session, so people feel more comfortable to ask questions and it's more conversational.

(00:59:06):
So the purpose of this stage is to land it. It's not to seek too much feedback, so it's a delicate balance. At the same time, you don't want to appear just being too inflexible. So it's a very delicate balance. When people ask questions, you can clarify it, and you can add clarifications to the doc, but I wouldn't change... The most important thing, three strategic pillars, I wouldn't change that. I would defend it using the framework, but if people are like, "there's really good arguments about the criteria that led to your ranking," then it's okay to reconsider it. I've not seeing it happen in my five to six attempts, but it's possible, theoretically possible.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:47):
The core of this approach it sounds like, is you've done a lot of the pre-work where you land in a generally correct place.

(00:59:55):
Okay, so this is the rollout. So what I'm thinking as you talk, say you're like a PM on a team, say you're working on privacy, it's like an IC, your ICPM, working on strategy. How do you think about including, say, your manager because through this process, when do you start to like, "Hey, here's what we're planning, here's what we're thinking," making sure they're on board? Because I could see this working team off to the side working, working, working. "Okay, we're ready to roll it out." Oftentimes there's like, "No, wait. There's all this other stuff happening at the company, we don't have resources." Where do you loop them in? How do you think about that kind of stakeholder?

Chandra Janakiraman (01:00:29):
The the more attuned PMs who understand organizational dynamics, probably keep the manager pretty in sync through the process. I think, definitely, the manager becomes a person who you interview as part of the leadership interviews, so you know what the manager's looking for from the effort.

(01:00:49):
And then once you get to the strategic pillars on day two of the strategy sprint, you probably want to just quickly pre-flight it with the manager and say, "Hey, look, this is how it's trending, and these are the things we are probably not going to do" and any issues with that. And then eventually you actually want your manager to support you in some of these bigger meetings, so you enlist their help. So I would say that it's probably each individual style, but I would keep them pretty aligned through the process. But you don't have to be too heavy [inaudible 01:01:23], just be super light.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:24):
Great. Makes a lot of sense to me. There's like a...

(01:01:26):
We're not going to solve everyone's problems with this one framework, maybe just quickly touch on resourcing. As you think about this. Like a part of a strategy includes like, oh, we also need these resources. Just any thoughts on how to include that? And then I want to get into some examples of how you've actually implemented this.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:01:42):
So I actually don't recommend thinking about resources in the strategy phase, because what you're saying is, "these are the areas of focus" and the resourcing question becomes more relevant from a road mapping standpoint.

(01:01:55):
Because then you say, "Okay, what percentage of our engineering do we put on strategic pillar A, versus B, versus C? And what are the specific things we build?" So it becomes a road-mapping question as opposed to a strategy question.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:08):
And so by the end of this, the rollout, the part of the rollout is developing the actual roadmap. We're not going to get deep into that. That could be part two, solve every PM's problems, teach them all the steps of the process, but we're going to cut it off at, here's you have a strategy that is starting to be rolled out.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:02:24):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:25):
Cool.

(01:02:25):
Let's go through a couple examples where you actually move into this to make this even more real. I know there's a couple companies you were thinking about sharing, strategies you worked on.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:02:35):
I think there's just three quick notes to close off this process and I'll share two examples, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:44):
Perfect.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:02:46):
So the reason I think this process works, the first is because there is a ton of alignment built in within team alignment and leadership alignment built in. And it's not seen as, "Oh, this PM went off and wrote this strategy doc and I don't agree with most of it." And part of this is actually very...

(01:03:09):
It goes back to human psychology of just something that comes from you, feels a lot more familiar and easy to accept. So this doc is actually not from the PM, the PM is facilitating it, but it's actually from the strategy working group. And the strategy working group are the leads of the team. And so it's actually... And the leadership inputs have been baked in, so it's actually very team representative. And so hopefully there isn't too much misalignment when you roll it out. And I have seen that, I've seen that work out.

(01:03:43):
The second is there's just better results. You get to better problem articulation, you get a better strategic pillar, because there's just more minds on it than if it was just a product lead.

(01:03:55):
And the third thing is you have clearly defensible criteria and outputs, and if you want to change it, like I said, you have to go back to the criteria and the scoring and then say, "Okay, why do we believe this has to be changed?" And even a change is easy to justify once you do that. So it creates a lot of benefits, but ultimately, and we'll get to this a little bit more, it has to be tested with execution, and that's the most important thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:22):
I think it's important to highlight, no framework playbook [inaudible 01:04:26] method is going to guarantee you have the correct strategy that will win and your company will thrive. It's always just the best effort at plan.

(01:04:35):
As the quote, "no good plan survives first contact with the customer."

Chandra Janakiraman (01:04:41):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:42):
Cool. Let's talk through some examples.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:04:45):
so the first example I wanted to talk about is at Zynga. I was at Zynga a very long time ago, and this was the heyday of social gaming on Facebook. The thing that I was extremely impressed about Zynga was the strategic clarity and strategic encoding at the company. And this was not attributable to me, by the way, this was already there when I got there as a entry-level PM, but the kind of strategic clarity there was really, really impressive and it was very evident and observable from all the games.

(01:05:22):
So if you look at all the games, there were three elements that were very common across all the games. The first was viral game loops. There's these game loops that just required you to have a social and active social network to be successful and play, and it was very tightly and fictionally integrated into the core of the gameplay. That was the first one.

(01:05:47):
The second one was there was this idea of paying to complete things. So you're not paying to skip a whole experience, what you're paying is just to complete it. So what happens then is different people, depending on how much time they have, complete different percentages of a progression task, or a part of the gameplay, and you only had to pay the rest to get through the experience. And it was this interesting experience where people put a lot of investment into it, and they didn't mind paying for the last 20% or 30%, which was very interesting, because it created this market for different elasticity of spend, different times that people had in their lives. And it was very, very clever. So that was again, very common across all the games.

(01:06:38):
And then the third was network. So all of Zynga games had this cross-promotional component at the top of the game and they would promote other games, and it's like the Zynga network was the most important thing, and not an individual game. And those were the three in our parlance now strategic pillars, and there were non-focus areas. It wasn't like...

(01:07:05):
The focus wasn't on high-fidelity graphics, it wasn't on complex game mechanics, and this was extremely clear and hard-coded into the company culture and operations. And it was perfectly tuned to the environment at the time. Facebook platform afforded strong support with social graph, and channels, and basically the game studios contributed through different games in a very network accretive way.

(01:07:31):
So for example, I was at Zynga San Diego, and we took the company into net new game genres like action strategy, match three puzzle games, but we stayed true to the strategic pillars of the company, and we had to invent new mechanics so that the strategic pillars would work in the new genres that we introduced to the company. And what was fascinating is the company actually had systems to reinforce these strategic pillars.

(01:07:57):
And, for example, the data infrastructure was very incredible at the time, and really reinforced these strategic pillars. There was this function called Central Product Management, which basically propagated best practices, made sure that games were network accretive and all these things worked in harmony to enhance those strategic pillars and reinforce it, and it worked really well. The company, if I remember right, got to a billion dollars, it was the fastest to get to a billion dollars in the history of companies at the time.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:32):
In revenue.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:08:33):
In revenue.

(01:08:35):
And it worked really well until the environment changed and there was a shift to mobile. And temporarily... Basically, if you go back to that resonance concept, that deep resonance between the product and the market was temporarily lost once that shift happened to mobile.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:51):
So there's a lot here. I think one interesting note here is, as you said, the strategy work you're doing, which sounds like a lot of time, eight to 12 weeks potentially, this lasted a long time for Zynga. And so I think it's important to remember the work you're doing here, even though...

(01:09:06):
On the one hand it feels like a long time, on the other hand, it feels like very little time to come up with the things that will most help your business grow. In this case, these three elements for Zynga. And by the way, these three pillars, they didn't emerge from this method, but it helped you see the power of being very clear...

Chandra Janakiraman (01:09:24):
Clear, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:25):
And having everything centered around, we all agree, these are the three ways we win. Okay, cool. And then I think the number three, again, I just want to highlight the power of just very few bets in investments. So it's always three. I've always suggested three as well. Some people are like, "three to five," but I think it's... You just find, in general, three is the right number as much? Try very, very hard to make it three?

Chandra Janakiraman (01:09:46):
I agree.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:47):
Okay, cool.

(01:09:48):
And then I think there's also this element of differentiation being really important. So these three elements you shared for Zynga are just like they're unique and differentiated for Zynga. Network, powers of apps driving other apps, paying to complete, these are things Zynga has figured out, "this is how we" win versus other products in the market.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:10:08):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:09):
Sweet. Anything else along those lines with Zynga?

Chandra Janakiraman (01:10:13):
That was in hindsight reflection, Lenny, I was pretty naive when I was there, and I realized how... And this was, in fact, what led to my blind spot when I joined Headspace from Zynga, that you even need a strategy. That's the story I said at the beginning.

(01:10:33):
The reason is because Zynga had it figured out so well that I didn't actually have a need to exercise that muscle at Zynga, and we just had to come up with new games that applied that strategy. And so it was a net new muscle I had to develop when I got to Headspace.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:48):
It's like that parable of the fish swimming in the water where the older fish swims by and he's like, "How's the water?" And they're like, "Hmm?" And then he leaves and he's like, "What's water?" You just don't realize what you're in. You don't realize what you're surrounded by until it's gone.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:11:06):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:07):
Maybe one other thing I just want to highlight while we're on this topic is just the power of focus. In the case of Zynga, just this focus on everything we do needs to get these things, these three things, everything we do, we need to do in order to win. And I think that's a recurring theme in what you're talking about, is just focus. The steps of the process are focus on this one part for now. So I think that's a really interesting thread is just the power of focus.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:11:32):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:33):
Okay, cool.

(01:11:35):
And now you have another example of your time at Meta.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:11:37):
At Meta there's this fascinating example, which I think illustrates a different point, which is...

(01:11:46):
Basically I was standing up the product strategy for a couple of product growth teams in Reality Labs, Oculus, which was coming up with the Quest II at the time. This is a standalone headset, and then Portal, which was our video conferencing product. And we stood up these teams to go after product growth, which is basically driving hardware sales through software features. And we went through this process that I just described. We stood up strategic pillars, and the strategic pillars were fairly similar for both Portal, which is our video conferencing product, and Oculus.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:24):
I love Portal by the way. I was a big fan of... Sad that it's no longer around.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:12:31):
And that led to features that are known to everybody, like the Oculus Referrals Program, the Portal Memories Integration, where you see one of your Facebook memories on the Portal, sponsored ad in your Facebook feed. And also we had this section on the Facebook app, which is also from Facebook at the time, and then eventually also from Meta, which is these other products from the Facebook ecosystem. And all those came out of that effort.

(01:13:01):
And about 18 months into it, they actually had very different outcomes. So on one hand the Oculus effort was incredibly successful, and we graduated it into the VR division at Meta, and till today it continues to be an incredibly successful effort. The Portal effort actually didn't move the needle as much as we wanted to, and we sunset it, and we basically redeployed that team to other initiatives. And that's super interesting. Basically it was like the same strategy process. We got the nearly identical strategic pillars, but eventually completely different outcomes.

(01:13:49):
And I think that that illustrates the most important point about strategy, which is intrinsically strategy has no business value. It's basically a document with a few words. And I think it starts accumulating value as you generate business impact and results. And that happens when you actually test strategy with execution.

(01:14:15):
And so ultimately any strategy is only as good as the results it produces. And so one has to have the intellectual honesty, and the humility, and the courage to say when it's working and when it's not. And sometimes what happens is parts of your strategy might work, parts might not, and you have to pivot away from some and double down on some. But I do think there's that evaluation that's really critical and testing strategy with execution.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:44):
Such a great point. Just a strategy sitting there in a doc is worthless, where the worth comes from, is it actually having impact and being successful. Makes me think about a product manager also, just a PM is not worth anything until they help you drive impact.

(01:15:02):
I think an important, to trickle down from that point, is that you don't want to spend too long just thinking about strategy, you want to spend as little time as possible to get to a strong hypothesis, basically to start learning if this is the right path. And so I love that your approach is like this middle ground between give it real time, but don't spend three, four or five months working on this one document that just maybe one day you'll use.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:15:31):
Exactly.

(01:15:31):
And there is room for a six-month process, which we'll get to in a moment. But for small S I wouldn't recommend more than two or three months.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:39):
And again, small S strategy is for a couple of years out, not like Exactly. It's like a timeframe. Okay, cool.

(01:15:47):
Okay. Anything else along those lines of the examples of Meta or Zynga?

Chandra Janakiraman (01:15:53):
Those are pretty good lessons I would say.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:55):
Okay, sweet.

(01:15:56):
So, let's talk about big-S strategy. When should you approach strategy this way and what are just the steps of it?

Chandra Janakiraman (01:16:06):
So everything we've spoken about so far is what I would call small S, and it's very problem focused. It's basically what I call present forward.

(01:16:17):
It's like you have something, you have a product out there, it has a bunch of problems. How do we make it better for... What are the areas we tackle for maximum impact? Typically led by product managers. And there's this interesting quote by Elon Musk, which is, "Life has to be about more than just solving problems." And he says it in the context of the aspiration to become a multi-planetary species, but I think this is true of every company, big or small. And there needs to be an aspirational and cool component to strategy. And I call this big-S strategy.

(01:16:56):
I'll run through this at a higher level because I think this is a little bit more fluid in how you build the big-S strategy. And it typically takes longer, potentially up to about six months. The approach is a bit different from small S. And you start with the company mission and vision, and there is a little bit of groundwork that is done on long-term cultural trends, social trends, competitive trends, technological trends, and those are all the backdrop to trigger ideas. And what you do with that backdrop is you, again, do these leadership interviews, but with a different goal of generating long-term futures.

(01:17:41):
And some of the questions you can ask during these interviews are "What does a day in the life of a user look like in five years? What does the product look like in five to 10 years? Why is the world better in 10 years? And what is the most exciting version of that view?" And basically take all of that input and cluster it into I would say, three cohesive holes.

(01:18:05):
And what I mean by that is three, at least fairly distinct, descriptions of the future. So to give you almost a very simple example, imagine you doing big S for the future of travel. You could have a future that is talking all about fully autonomous travel, where there's very little human involvement in going from A to B. You could talk about another future where there's extreme speed, where you can get from A to B really fast across the world that is really fast. You could talk about a third where there is no travel, it's virtual travel, and you still have the feeling of travel, and you accomplish the same goals.

(01:18:45):
But those are different futures, they have different properties, like different elements to them. And once you generate those distinct futures, you actually generate prototypes with learning goals. And think of these prototypes as concept cars. And the automobile industry uses this notion of concept cars. Concept cars, the interesting thing about concept cars is they're never commercialized. They're often produced for inspiration, and to potentially take some part of them, like maybe a technology or a feature, and that is brought into mainstream production.

(01:19:23):
So think of these prototypes as these concept cars that really drive inspiration and potentially give you some small nuggets that you can run with. And then you start doing research with them with potential users, you answer key questions, and you uncover certain elements that resonate with people. So you eliminate a whole bunch of stuff, you combine a whole bunch of stuff, and you establish some winning components that are interesting.

(01:19:48):
And then what you do is you push stuff that is winning into the product, live product, testing. So this is actually something that you actually want to start testing your way into and understanding if it works from a scalable standpoint. And this whole thing is typically led not by the PM team, but by design and UXR. And intentionally it's a little bit more open-ended and green field. And it actually is a very different mind space that people have when they approach big. So the roadmap is really built through a combination of small-S and big-S work. And, for example, at VRChat, we are doing both small-S and big-S work, Lenny. And they are run as parallel work streams. The product management team is leading the charge of the small-S work, and the design team is leading the charge on the big-S work. And it's really exciting stuff. What's coming out of both work streams is really exciting and really different. And so we are building the bridge from both sides and both work streams ultimately flow into one roadmap. It's almost like two tributaries that ultimately merge into one river. That's how I would think about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:02):
There's so many things here that are so...

Chandra Janakiraman (01:21:01):
That's how I would think about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:02):
There's so many things here that are so interesting. One is we've had this conversation on the podcast a couple of times, this point that people think and see the world differently. Some people are very open-minded and creative, and think big, blue sky people. Some people, me, just like, "What are we doing next? How do we move this metric? Let's talk about concrete things that we can do?" For this big S approach, I think what I'm hearing is make sure the people leading it are very open-minded, creative, blue sky type people. If you're the person that's like, "How will this move our metric?" Maybe you shouldn't be leading it and give someone else the reins.

(01:21:40):
Cool. And then with these timelines of doing both at once, it's probably hard to align them fully. So what I'm hearing is it's like these are kind of ongoing sometimes.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:21:49):
Correct.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:50):
And they'll both inform what you're doing. You don't need to have this perfect timeline of-

Chandra Janakiraman (01:21:54):
I agree to this. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:56):
Sweet. And the big thinking I love, because sometimes, you may experience this, designers often are like, "Oh, we just work on all this boring, incremental optimization stuff. I want to think bigger." Which is great, and this is a really good lever to allow for that in a contained environment. Cool. Let's just go crazy. Let's think about what this could be in the future. Still, let's make sure we're moving some metrics short-term, but let's give us opportunity to think big. And oftentimes the biggest ideas come out of that. So I love it's giving space for both types of thinking, thinking bigger and thinking long term.

(01:22:30):
Anything else about these two methods that might be interesting to share? Otherwise, I want to talk about AI a little bit, just how that impacts things and a couple other things.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:22:39):
Yeah, yeah. I'll end on one short sort of note on how this all feels when you do it, and then we can segue into AI-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:47):
Great, great.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:22:48):
... Lenny. So I think that whether it's big S or small S, these are incredibly satisfying processes to go through in the end. So once you get to the end, they're incredibly deeply satisfying. But with anything in life that is very deeply satisfying at the end, they have a ton of challenge, frustration, and dead ends while you go through it where you kind of get a lot of self-doubt like, "Hey, will you ever reach the end?" And I just want to sort of normalize that. That's actually normal and I want people to expect that as they go through it. And I think that's what makes it even more rewarding when you get to that sort of point where you start to see things connecting.

(01:23:33):
The second thing is I would say that the person who's leading the charge on these efforts has to be really good at connecting diverse viewpoints and keeping them all moving forward. And it's not easy, it's very hard because sometimes you have people who take you in different directions and you have to keep it all hanging together.

(01:23:57):
So in terms of picking people who have that skill, who are good integrators, who are good connect the dots, I think it's critical for these to be successful. And in some ways low ego because it's not like... They do get to introduce their own ideas, but truly, it's about bringing the team together. So that's the skill that you should look for for these leads.

(01:24:22):
And then the third piece is I would say that I would just approach these with a little bit of a lighter touch and more playful sort of approach, because it's an intensive process, it's a long process. And people can get tired, they can find it grindy. So just having a little bit of playfulness along the way goes a long way in making it feel more tolerable for the people going through it. So those are some thoughts about either of these processes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:48):
That was really important context, especially this will be frustrating throughout. It sounds really beautiful and great and smooth as you describe it. In reality, there's a lot of pain that goes into... Because you're making hard decisions. A lot of people have opinions, they have perspectives, there's data that's... Rarely is there clear answer from the beginning, so I think that's really important context.

(01:25:08):
I wanted to actually come back to your point you made about how Elon made this point about life shouldn't just be about solving problems. I think part of that quote is just like we should work on things that are awesome and exciting and inspiring, that aren't just immediately pain solvers. And he's very good at that, just inspiring people to what could be, and we should be thinking much bigger than we are.

(01:25:32):
I was actually at an interview with Zuck where he said the same thing. He's probably inspired by Elon. He's like, "I've just gotten to a point in my career where I want to work on awesome stuff, stuff that is just awe inspiring, not just-

Chandra Janakiraman (01:25:43):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:44):
... another social feature." so I think that's a really important point. And there's a lot of power in that. People get really excited about holy moly, I did not imagine this is what Headspace could become, what VRChat could become, what Meta could become. It's just really powerful, getting people really inspired. And I love this process they shared of how to do that.

(01:26:03):
And I didn't actually summarize it, so I have it right here in front of me. I'll just share the five steps of the biggest process. So it's preparation, mission, you figure [inaudible 01:26:10] mission, vision, trends, interview people about where they think things are going. Then you come up with three distinct futures of what the future might look like if you were to do the things you're thinking. Then you build prototypes of what might this look like? And then you actually test these in your product, which I love, to start de-risking these ideas. That helps you converge to here's actual plan we want to execute, and then you turn that into roadmap.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:26:36):
Yeah, yeah. And the first testing of the prototypes is with UXR, so it's more sort of concept testing or prototype testing with a handful of users. And then you use that as synthesizing to a live product test.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:50):
Great. Basically, it's like big ideas and then de-risking, validating them along the way-

Chandra Janakiraman (01:26:51):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:55):
... in various ways to like, "Okay, maybe this could actually work. Let's try." Sweet. Okay, so just two more things. One is I want to talk about AI briefly, of how that impacts this work. And then two, just maybe a recap of the framework for people that are listening, you're like, "Oh my god, I have so much. I wrote all these notes." Let's give them a summary so they could remember to use it.

(01:27:14):
Okay, cool. So let's talk about AI briefly. How has AI tooling helped you evolve this process? How can people use AI to make this easier?

Chandra Janakiraman (01:27:24):
So the first disclaimer is I'm not sort of an AI futurist, but I read all the emerging stuff that's coming out, most of the emerging stuff that's coming out and use some of the tools. And it's fascinating what's happening. And I think it will definitely have an impact on strategy formulation. So what I'll share is what resonates for me in the context of strategy formulation with AI.

(01:27:52):
So right away, I think the basic idea is everybody should be using assistance in the strategy formulation process with the basic tools that we have. And there are two ways to get AI to assist you in the strategy formulation process. The first is to support the preparation phase in terms of research. And this could be competitive analysis and, for example, you could do trend analysis from a vast library of competitors' release notes. And you can sort of say, "Okay, what are the themes of investment of a competitor's release notes?" Or you could do a reviews analysis of a competitor product and sort of understand what's resonating for users, what's not. And you could also ask a tool like ChatGPT to do a head-to-head comparison between a few players on a certain dimension and really give you a heat map of how they all stack up. And you could also ask an open-ended question like, "Hey, why is this new product so successful? Why is it getting so many users?" And there's some good hypothesis that you usually get. So really leverage in sort of the preparation phase from a competitive analysis standpoint.

(01:29:12):
The second one is in this idea called generating mock strategies. And I know Claire Rowe at your summit spoke about this, and I think this is absolutely right and should be a critical input into the strategy process, which is asking these tools for a mock strategy. And I call this a mock strategy because it's kind of almost the answer but not quite the answer. So what I've found is that these mock strategies, like let's say I support VRChat now and I ask it like, "Hey, what should VRChat do? How should we grow?" And it generates a mock strategy.

(01:29:49):
What I've found is that it's, one, surprisingly good. It's incredibly well-informed and well-articulated. I've also found that its biggest strength is also somewhat its weakness, which is these mock strategies tend to be pretty comprehensive and extensive, and there's an investment recommendation in a vast number of areas. So basically, if you remember, the core of strategy is really to be very targeted and to be very focused. So these mock strategies become an interesting input and the burden is still on the team to down-select into the most important areas for investment. So forcing that choice still, I think, is a human element and needs that layer of additional judgment, which is very context specific to the company. So this is sort of right away, I think people should be doing this.

(01:30:44):
I think more medium term and probably not too distant future and likely sooner than we all think, there's probably going to be, sort of the model that resonates with me is sort of the multi-agent model, which is you probably have different components of the strategy workflow automated. So you probably have a strategy agent, you probably have a roadmap or feature agent, you have maybe a engineering agent, and these can communicate amongst each other to cycle through results and iterate. And I think Armand Ruiz from IBM has some good definitional frameworks on some of the stuff. He shares it often on LinkedIn.

(01:31:27):
But let's take a simple example. I can easily imagine something like this for a topic like onboarding. So every company and product team obsesses about their onboarding experience. And today, there are advanced experimentation frameworks. So imagine you're expecting a large surge in traffic. There's these sort of experimental frameworks like multi-armed bandits that can really help you get to the optimal sort of variation very quickly in real time. And there are variations of that, like contextual multi-armed bandits, there's combinatorial bandits.

(01:32:04):
But the interesting thing is they still rely on human design of the variations, the different variations that you test. Even though the experimentation framework is very sophisticated, the variations are still human generated. Now imagine if those variations could actually be generated through generative AI and could be plugged into the advanced experimentation frameworks. The possibilities become infinite. And really, you might be surprised by what you find is the winning onboarding experience that you couldn't even have humanly imagined. And it might be different for every user, different for every sort of territory, etc.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:44):
That is such a cool idea, I just want to say. This agent that's just running, thinking about ways to optimize your onboarding, coming up with concepts that you probably review, like, "Cool, let's try it." And then it does it, ships an experiment to run it and just is constantly optimizing your onboarding. Holy shit, that's an awesome idea. I think everyone will have this.

(01:33:06):
And then what that makes me think there's going to be some company that's built the best onboarding agent. That's what you're going to be paying for.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:33:14):
Totally. Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:14):
Oh my god, that's so good. Okay. Great. Great idea.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:33:16):
Yeah, yeah. So then the question becomes, hey, what is our job? Our job becomes architecting bigger and bigger pieces of the product to take advantage of these agents. And there will be a sequential increase in the complexity of workloads that get automated over time. Onboarding is probably relatively on the easier side in terms of complexity of workload. And you get into deeper experiences, eventually AI will get there.

(01:33:44):
So funnily enough, when that happens, some of the manual processes I describe about will seem archaic. But I think the fundamentals will still have a long shelf life, and as you think about these automated frameworks as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:59):
Man, this could be its own podcast. I have this whole post about how AI, how PMs are the best position, role in tech to thrive in a world of AI, which I'll link to that makes people, I find, feel better when they hear you talk about how much might get done through agents in AI.

(01:34:14):
The other quick thought I had, and I want to get to the wrap up, is I have this ongoing debate with a friend about strategy in AI. My feeling is in theory, an AI tool will be incredibly good at coming up with your strategy for you because it's just, here's all the data, here's everything you need to know, how do we win? And to me, that feels like the ultimate way AI is good, is just here's data, here's what I found as a path to a winning. But my friend's also arguing that's the one thing that AI will be least good at because that's where we need people and context and discussion, all these things.

(01:34:53):
I don't know, it's like one or the other. Either AI will be incredibly good at helping you figure out your strategy or the worst.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:34:58):
Interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:00):
I'm curious. I'm curious, I guess, do you have any quick thoughts on that? Where do you side?

Chandra Janakiraman (01:35:05):
I think there is a crossover point where the human judgment will be inferior to something that's able to process multiple signals simultaneously. There's an element of lateral thinking as well here, and I'll sort of share a simple example.

(01:35:24):
For those who drive Tesla cars with the fully self-driving capabilities, when you make a turn, humans have this fairly narrow field of vision. So you have to look both ways and you have to make a decision combining both those signals, right? Whereas the car has six cameras, which is simultaneously processing and it can make a decision not in sequence, but in parallel. And it moves with confidence at turnings because of that. So there is this crossover point where some of these, the ability to hold multiple signals in the head, it's going to be more... It's going to be stronger.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:36:09):
That makes total sense. What it makes me think about, there's going to be a strategy agent just sitting around always looking for ways to improve your strategy and point you all in a different direction. Oh my god, future is wild, as I've said before.

(01:36:21):
Okay, let's do a quick wrap up of the process for folks that are taking notes and they're like, "Cool, here's the overview." So let's just do that and then let's go to get to the exciting lightning round.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:36:31):
I think the quick recap of everything we've covered is that product strategy definitionally sits between mission vision at the top and plan at the bottom. So it sits between those two either at the company level or at the team level. What it does is it forces choice to deploy scarce resources towards maximum impact. And think about the frequency selection and resonance as an analogy, and it ideally includes three components. A handful of areas to focus on, which we call strategic pillars, and several areas that are explicitly not the focus and why. That's really it in terms of what product strategy is.

(01:37:12):
There is a smallest flavor of it which focuses on solving problems. It's what I call present forward, and it typically operates in a two-year horizon. We use a five-stage process to get there, and it takes about eight to 12 weeks. There is a biggest process that focuses on an aspirational future, is future backward and typically has a three, five, 10-year horizon, also a five-stage process, and can be ongoing up to a six-month period to give it enough space to generate something exciting.

(01:37:47):
And the roadmap for the company or the team is built from a combination of smallest and biggest work, which is like building a bridge from both sides of a river. And ultimately, any strategy is only as good as the results it can produce. So test and iterate through execution and double down on what's working and pivot away from what's not.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:38:10):
Incredible. I'm glad we did that. Anything else that you want to share or leave listeners with before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Chandra Janakiraman (01:38:18):
Just all the best with strategy work and ultimately individual and business success.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:38:26):
Amazing. And when I asked you at the beginning, before we started recording, what your goal was for this conversation, your answer was just to create a ripple of success across companies and teams, and I feel like we've done that.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:38:36):
Thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:38:37):
Okay. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning ground. Chandra, are you ready?

Chandra Janakiraman (01:38:41):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:38:43):
Let's do it. First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Chandra Janakiraman (01:38:47):
Yeah, I love books on creativity and innovation, Lenny, and some of my classic favorites are Walt Disney's biography. And there's several out there, but I think the one that I like the most is the Triumph of the American Imagination. And what's interesting is it talks about how Walt Disney actually loved the theme parks more than the movies. And the reason for that was he could actually tinker with the theme parks. He could make changes to where the rides were, he could change rides in and out, and then he could observe real sort of changes to reactions of people flowing into the theme parks, which he couldn't do with the movies because once it was produced, it was done, it was out of his control. And it was interesting, he was basically A-B testing long before the term was coined. And it's just a fascinating look into how his brain worked, way ahead of its time.

(01:39:46):
The other classic is Ed Catmull's Creativity Inc, and it talks about all the negative forces that eat away at creativity in an organization. How do you, as the leader, have to keep them at bay and make sure the team can innovate?

(01:40:01):
And then there's this probably less popular book, but really good one from Tom Kelly of IDEO, which is The Ten Faces of Innovation. It talks about different archetypes that you need on the team that are essential for creating something special. And you actually need, I think there's the devil's advocate, you need the researcher, you need the ethnographer, you need the stage setter. There's all these interesting personalities that you need to actually make something successful. So I would say those are some of the ones that I usually recommend, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:40:37):
That's a really cool... That third book is really interesting, I haven't heard of that. And Creativity Inc, something I want to highlight real quick is to your point, that a lot of it is how to avoid killing good ideas. And my favorite metaphor from that book is the ugly baby metaphor where every new idea is an ugly baby that people just want to get rid of. Get rid of this ugly baby, we don't want this around here. And just every new idea is ugly when it starts, and you need to protect the ugly baby, basically. Although I don't know who's hurting ugly babies, that's not-

Chandra Janakiraman (01:41:06):
Yeah, yeah, it feels a bit... Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:41:08):
Feels aggressive.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:41:08):
Harsh.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:41:11):
Yeah, harsh. Yeah. But it's memorable because I've never forgotten that.

(01:41:14):
Okay, next question. Is there a favorite recent movie or TV show you really enjoyed?

Chandra Janakiraman (01:41:19):
Yeah, yeah. We watch a lot of animated films with the kids. But were a couple of good movies this year. We really liked If, Imaginary Friend, it's about growing up and forgetting these memories of your younger days, is was a really nice movie. And then of course, we enjoyed Dune II as well. It was a fun watch. But most of our time is dominated by the kids sort of animated folks at home or the cinema.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:41:53):
There's a new Dune TV show, I don't know if you've been watching it. It just started recently on HBO. It's not the best thing in the world, but it gets you a little Dune fix-

Chandra Janakiraman (01:42:01):
Interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:42:02):
... in between movies. I think there's a third movie coming out.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:42:04):
I see.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:42:06):
Third question, do you have a favorite product you recently discovered that you really love?

Chandra Janakiraman (01:42:10):
Yeah, yeah. I've been playing this cute little game for the last few days. It's called Capybara Go! It's a tab-based strategy RPG game. It's got really humorous writing and this cute capybara that goes off on an adventure. It's very well-paced and it's a very well-produced game. It's one game I've been playing recently.

(01:42:37):
I've also been poking around Bluesky. Bluesky is interesting. I haven't gotten into a habit yet, but it's super interesting concept of empowering the community with these community-generated feeds. It's very different experience. But it's also interesting, there's a trade-off with the simplicity of the product and what you get with the additional complexity. It'll be interesting to see how it plays out, how it scales.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:43:05):
Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to, find useful in work or in life?

Chandra Janakiraman (01:43:10):
So there was this 1995 interview of Steve Jobs where he talks about this idea of there's a tremendous amount of craftsmanship between a great idea and a great product, and it sort of stuck with me over the years. And the simple way to think about that is it takes a lot of effort to make something special. And conversely, if it's easy, it's probably not that special or not that great. And it's something that I sort of think about when we build product, is there sufficient pain here where it's sort of a proxy for, are we creating something great, is interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:43:53):
Wow. It makes me think about founder mode a little bit. Like people talk about founder mode. The reason founder mode I think is important is the people that are most committed and passionate and driven to go through that pain and continue to make it... To take it from just an ugly baby idea to an awesome winning product oftentimes needs to be the founder. And that's why I think it's kind of emerged as a trend is it's important to have that drive, to just-

Chandra Janakiraman (01:43:54):
Surely. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:44:22):
... continue to refine it and not just like, "I had the idea, go build it now."

(01:44:27):
Okay, final question. You have an amazing background behind you. [inaudible 01:44:31] if people are on YouTube, it's just a beautiful book background, a bunch of objects and books. I'm curious if there's an object on there or a book on there that might be fun to highlight that you're especially into or proud of. And feel free to turn around if you want to look around. Curious if there's one thing that stands out, like, "Oh, here's this thing, [inaudible 01:44:48]."

Chandra Janakiraman (01:44:48):
Oh, well, it's the picture of my kids right in the center, which is without doubt the most important and memorable thing there. It's also caught it a unique time when they were incredibly... They were sort of super embracing each other and it's a phase where they've grown out of it. Now there's a lot more, I think rivalry and then sibling tussles. But that moment is my favorite.

(01:45:18):
I also have a bunch of fun stuff, like a big sort of Snoopy fan, and so it is... Also a big Beetles fan, so that picture is actually an interesting blend between Snoopy walking, crossing the road and then the Beetles crossing the other way. And then a bunch of books that are more memorable over the years. You'll see Creativity Inc there, you'll see The Ten Phases of Innovation, all of that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:45:45):
Amazing. Thank you for sharing... Your kids' photo's blocked when you're in the center, so it's like a little Easter egg. Thank you for sharing that. Chandra, this was incredible. It was everything I was hoping it'd be. I think we're going to create that ripple that you were hoping for.

(01:45:57):
Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Chandra Janakiraman (01:46:02):
A reasonable choice would be LinkedIn to reach me, and I really, like you and I discussed earlier, I'd be really happy if this creates that kind of ripple effect of successes, both for individuals and for products. And I want everybody to think of this, the stuff I shared as a bit of an open source model. So test some of the concepts, modify it, remix it, and share what worked or did not. And ultimately, that's what makes it all interesting is the community owns it ultimately, and it doesn't belong to one individual. That's what would make me super happy.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:46:44):
Amazing. Chandra, thank you so much for being here.

Chandra Janakiraman (01:46:48):
Thank you so much for having me, Lenny, and thanks for your service to the product community.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:46:52):
Same to you. Bye everyone.

(01:46:57):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at LennysPodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:00:00):
One lesson I learned the hard way a bunch of times on this is that if you think about running a marketplace, you're basically like a gardener. You have to have a very light touch. If you're building a SaaS business, you're a construction worker, you're building the product and the features and selling it, and it's this very linear thing. For a marketplace, you're like messing with this ecosystem that you don't actually really understand how it works. And sometimes you might do something over here which drives this long-term effect two months later, and then you're going to be pulling your hair out two months later trying to figure out what you did over here that made that thing happen. So I think that the main advice is like to tread lightly. When you're messing with the core incentives or mechanisms of a marketplace, be very careful, particularly if you've got something that's working on playing with those variables.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:00:45):
Welcome to Lenny's podcast. I'm Lenny and my goal here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. I interview world class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard won experiences building and scaling today's most successful companies. Today my guest is Dan Hockenmaier. I venture to say that Dan has worked on more marketplace startups than anyone else in the world, including helping scale Thumbtack in the early days, currently working at Faire where he is head of strategy and analytics and, through his consulting business, Faces One, where he's helped dozens of startups figure out their growth models and growth strategies.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:01:20):
Dan hasn't shared a ton of his insights and experiences publicly, so I was really excited to chat with him and to dig into all the things that go into building a marketplace business along with coming up with your growth model. This episode gets very deep into the weeds and so, if you're working on a growth strategy or you're building a marketplace business, this episode is for you. So with that, I bring you Dan Hockenmaier.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:01:45):
I'm excited to chat with my friend, John Cutler, from Podcast Sponsor Amplitude. Hey John.

John Cutler (00:01:49):
Hey Lenny. Excited to be here.

Lenny (00:01:51):
John, give us a behind the scenes at Amplitude. When most people think of Amplitude, they think of product analytics, but now you're getting into experimentation and even just launched a CDP. What's the thought process there?

John Cutler (00:02:02):
Well, we've always thought of Amplitude as being about supporting the full product loop, think collect data, inform [inaudible 00:02:08] ship experiments and learn. That's the heart of growth to us. So the big aha was seen how many customers were using Amplitude to analyze experiments, use segments for outreach and send data to other destinations. Experiment and CDP came out of listening to and observing our customers.

Lenny (00:02:23):
Supporting growth and learning has always been Amplitude's core focus, right?

John Cutler (00:02:27):
Yeah. So Amplitude tries to meet customers where they are. We just launched starter templates and have a great scholarship program for startups. There's never been a more important time for growth.

Lenny (00:02:36):
Absolutely agree. Thanks for joining us, John, and head to amplitude.com to get started.

Lenny (00:02:43):
Hey, Ashley, head of marketing and flat file. How many B2B SaaS companies would you estimate need to import CSV files from their customers?

Ashley (00:02:51):
At least 40%.

Lenny (00:02:52):
And how many of them screw that up and what happens when they do?

Ashley (00:02:56):
Well, based on our data, about a third of people will consider switching to another company after just one bad experience during onboarding. So if your CSV importer doesn't work right, which is super common considering customer files are chock full of unexpected data and formatting, they'll leave.

Lenny (00:03:15):
I am 0% surprised to hear that. I've consistently seen that improving onboarding is one of the highest leverage opportunities for both signup conversion and increasing long-term retention. Getting people to your aha moment more quickly and reliably is so incredibly important.

Ashley (00:03:30):
Totally. It's incredible to see how our customers like Square, Spotify and Zuora are able to grow their businesses on top of flat file, this because flawless data onboarding acts like a catalyst to get them and their customers where they need to go faster.

Lenny (00:03:47):
If you'd like to learn more or get started, check out Flatfile at flatfile.com/lenny.

Lenny (00:03:56):
Dan Hockenmaier, welcome to the podcast.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:03:59):
It's great to be here.

Lenny (00:04:01):
It's great to have you here. So we are actual real life friends and we've collaborated on a number of writing projects, including the race car growth framework and a whole thing on consumer growth strategy. But there's a couple topics that we've never actually dug deep into and that you haven't written about. So I'm really excited to dig into two specific things in our chat today.

Lenny (00:04:23):
One is growth models and two is just marketplace growth strategy and all things around marketplace growth. But before we get into all that, can you just give us a 55 second background on all of the wonderful things that you've done in your career?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:04:36):
Yeah, absolutely. So I feel very fortunate being able to work on a bunch of consumer and marketplace businesses for a long time. I started in consulting at BCG and then in private equity. I don't think I learned much about how to actually run a business at those places, but I did learn a lot about how to think about them. I think my real education on this began at Thumbtack. So I joined when there were about 30 people and we just had to figure it out. I was there for a little over three years and we more than 10Xed the business in that time.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:05:02):
From there I built a strategy consulting firm where we worked with a bunch of the top gross stage marketplaces on a range of topics, and ultimately that firm was acquired by Faire where I am today. So I lead the strategy analytics team at Faire. I think this is probably the most fun I've ever had in my career. It's just the incredible mix of the team. The business is really strong and I love the customers we're serving. So it's a marketplace connecting local retailers and independent brands, and I just think that's a really fun group of customers to build for.

Lenn (00:05:31):
Awesome. And we're going to chat a bit about the stuff that you do there and marketplaces. But before we get into marketplaces, I wanted to start with our first topic, which is around growth models. So people may have heard this term, this general idea. Just to set the stage, can you just describe what is a growth model and why is it useful to think about your business through the lens of a growth model?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:05:54):
So I think it's useful in many contexts. If I apply it to the current work that I'm doing, the strategy analytics team at Faire does a bunch of work to help our other teams make better decisions. So we're typically diving really deep into a bunch of topics across the business. I think it's really easy to make that work kind of go off the rails or go too deep unless you have a conceptual understanding of how the whole business that it comes together. And that's how I think about a growth model, so the analytical representation of how the business grows and it's typically built in a spreadsheet which has a really nice feature of being very hard to fake. You can talk about a business conceptually, but when you actually have to get it to line up and link in a model, it's very hard to not force yourself to understand how the business works. So I think it's very valuable for that.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:06:37):
I think 50% of the value you get from it is simply building the model. It forces you to understand it and then you get this artifact which you can use to understand how to weigh different opportunities or understand the benefit of working on different things. I think importantly it is not a forecasting tool, so it's not going to replace what your finance team is building to project the business. In fact, often the output can be highly variable because you're playing with lots of these assumptions, but it is a great tool for kind of opportunity assessment for the business.

Lenny (00:07:05):
Awesome. So maybe a simple way to think about it, just summarizing, is it's essentially a formula for your business that often lives in Excel that kind of summarizes and puts together all the things that can drive your business. Is that a simple way [inaudible 00:07:19]?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:07:18):
Yeah. That's exactly right.

Lenny (00:07:20):
Sweet. So we're going to go through examples of these growth models and how you've thought about this in actual potential formulas for companies. But first, just broadly, how would someone approach figuring this out for themselves? How would you build a growth model for your own business?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:07:35):
So if you think about some of the basic building blocks and probably the simplest use case would be a SaaS business, there's really three components that you need to build for that. One is to understand your acquisition channels. Are you looking at paid marketing or sales or viral kind of customer referrals? And for each of those you have some different assumptions around traffic or spend or conversion rate, those kind of things. So that's the first section. Second would be retention. So at what rate are these customers activating? And then have some kind of basic monthly retention curve. So how long are they staying around? What's the survival rate in each of these? And those kind of stack over time. And then you have monetization. So in the simplest example, they might be paying you some monthly or annual fee and so that translates in monetization.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:08:13):
So actually if you're modeling a relatively simple SaaS business, those are the only core building blocks you need and you add a lot more complexity on it based on your kind of individual business that you're building. If you then are trying to build this for more of a transactional business, you need to layer on the way that your current kind of retained customers start to transact. So how many transactions per month? What's the AOV? And then you're also going to typically need to build unit economics because those businesses often have higher costs. And so you're going to be thinking about cogs or other major costs that you build into it.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:08:39):
And then one click beyond that would be to build this for marketplace business. So now what we've talked about is mostly modeling like the demand side of a business. So now you'd also need to think about supply acquisition and retention and how these two sides interact. So as we add supply, what's going to happen to demand? But those are the basic pieces. I think you can start pretty linear like acquiring customers, they're activating, retaining and generating contribution margin typically would be the output. But where it gets really interesting is we start making it non-linear. So the most basic example of this would be virality. Your existing customers are referring new customers and those go on to refer new customers. Based on that coefficient, it has a lot to do with how fast your business grows.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:09:17):
And similarly with paid marketing, as you generate contribution margin, you can reinvest that and grow and actually if you link those two up explicitly, it makes it really clear why thinking about something like payback period is a much better measure of paid marketing performance than LTV to CAC because the speed at which you get enough money back to then go acquire another customer has much more bearing on how fast your business can grow than just the raw kind of [inaudible 00:09:39]. This is where it gets really interesting where you get some variables to play with.

Lenny (00:09:43):
Okay. So let's unpack a bit of the stuff you just talked about. There's a whole decade of knowledge that you just I think collapsed into a couple of minutes. So just to spend a little more time there. So the core three kind of variables to a SaaS business, if you're thinking about the growth model of a SaaS business, for example, you said acquisition channels, where's traffic coming from, and that's essentially how much traffic are you getting, how is it converting and things like that.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:10:07):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:10:07):
And then there's retention and then there's monetization and multiplying all that together you end up with here's how much revenue you're making as a business. Is that roughly how to think about it?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:10:14):
Yeah, it's roughly right. And those three building blocks are true for here in most businesses. Most of what we're talking about is then nuance on top of that that makes the business unique.

Lenny (00:10:22):
Cool. So if someone was just starting the spreadsheet for their SaaS business, and we'll talk about even more examples, but if someone was like, "Here, I'm going to try to figure out my growth model," it's create a row for acquisition channels and traffic you're getting, then a row for roughly your retention rate and then how much you're making per customer. Very high level, is that to think about this?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:10:42):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny (00:10:43):
Okay, sweet. And then marketplaces, I think you said that it's transaction over time and average order value. So it's like how many people are buying stuff, how much are they paying each time? And then unit economics per transaction, how much they're making profit per [inaudible 00:10:58].

Dan Hockenmaier (00:10:57):
Yeah, exactly. And the critical distinction there is for a SaaS business, your marginal costs are often very low. And so it's not an important part to model. But for transactional business, you typically have very high cost or something else that you need to model so [inaudible 00:11:09].

Lenny (00:11:08):
Right, because you're just taking a cut and you're not selling software. And then the acquisition channels, retention, monetization, marketplace have those three things just broadly and then plus these additional two elements.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:11:19):
Yeah. I think one warning I would give ... so I built these for many businesses. I built them for Thumbtack, at Faire. Many of the companies I worked with, at my consulting firm, they break down in a few places. As soon as you start stacking assumptions, you're highly sensitive to how many assumptions do you have to make and do you know how to make that assumption. And marketplaces kind of create complexity on both of those because for the first piece you're modeling both sides of the business. There's a lot of assumptions. And second, there's a few pieces which are very hard to understand how they work. So the interaction between supply and demand is a big one. Take Amazon as an example. There's a category manager at Amazon who's running their pets business and he decides that he wants to go add a bunch more pet supply to the business. So he's going to go find pet food brands, pet toy brands. Those businesses will generate a bunch of revenue on the Amazon marketplace.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:12:03):
But how much of that was actually incremental? Maybe there's a bunch of existing pet supply that customers would've bought anyway. And does having a bunch more supply create a happier customer who retains longer and drives those cohorts up? These things are very hard to decide, something we've spent a lot of time thinking about in various marketplace businesses. And so if you're not careful, you can have a junk in, junk out problem with marketplaces. So the thing that I have gravitated to more as I've done more of this is one very basic high level conceptual model, so that's like the building blocks you talked about, which as simply as possible describes how the whole system works. And so you start to get a feel for which levers are important.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:12:39):
And then for each area of the business, so each product pod, each go to market team, they should have their own kind of mini model which describes the piece of the business they're working on. So that team typically has a north star and they should know what are all the inputs that drive that and a little model to articulate how that works. And you'll never kind of stitch this up into one master thing. I think that's a very difficult task. But you have the dual benefit of understanding how the business works broadly and then understanding if you zoom in on this piece, what are the levers i need to be pulling to move my metric.

Lenny (00:13:07):
To make that last point a little more concrete, what's an example of that? What's a team that would have their little model? I imagine every team has their own understanding of how the lever works, but what's an example?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:13:17):
I think there's probably two core archetypes for this. So if you have something that's more like a growth team, it's a little bit simpler. They're typically managing some kind of funnel and they can understand do I want to work on driving more traffic, more conversion, more retention. Typically, that's a somewhat linear relationship.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:13:32):
But then you have all these teams that are really managing some tension in the business, which is totally different than a funnel. So say if you have a marketplace quality team, what they care about is driving some standard for quality for the suppliers on a marketplace, but there's not a linear kind of relationship between working on that kind of problem. So if I let on a bunch of new supply to a marketplace, probably the first thing that happens is our GMV or our revenue goes up because we have all these new suppliers which can transact demand, but if those are on average lower quality, it's going to degrade the kind of customer experience and reduce retention over time. And so the model that they're trying to build is how to manage that tension.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:14:08):
Similarly in a FinTech business or many marketplaces now have FinTech elements, you're often underwriting the transaction. That team is thinking about the tension between extending more credit and driving higher spend versus defaults on the other side, like what's the contribution margin maximizing point at which we could offer credit. And so their models are going to look pretty different than what a growth team is managing.

Lenny (00:14:29):
Got it. So you mentioned this idea of archetypes and I was going to ask you when you think about developing a growth model for a company and with Basis One, the company that you ran before Faire, you basically developed these things for startups and how many companies would you say you helped through this process and helped develop growth models for just to [inaudible 00:14:47]?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:14:47):
We probably built 20 or 30 these in my time at Basis One.

Lenny (00:14:49):
Awesome. It's probably more than anyone out there. So I think that's a context to set. You've had more experience doing this than maybe anyone else out there, but we won't compare.

Lenny (00:14:58):
Are there archetypes/templates/tools that you have found useful to think about, I'm coming in fresh to think about the growth model for a company. What have you found helpful to get started to lay the groundwork?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:15:11):
One thing I'll say is going back to 50% of the value being figuring it out, that actually negates the value of templates in some way. You kind of want to build it up for yourself from first principles to understand how the business works. So the more painful the process of building it is, probably the more you're learning. But I do think there's been a lot written on this that you can find online and I think the building blocks I talked about are a useful starting place for how to put these together. I also think Reforge, which is a product in growth school, which we both know has done I think probably the most work to build this into a discipline. And so if you want to go really deep on this, my top recommendation would be to start with Reforge.

Lenny (00:15:45):
Okay. So getting even more concrete, you've built a lot of these growth models. What's an actual example of growth model you've built and more specifically what have you learned from the experience of building that growth model at either, I guess, I was going to say a fictional company but let's go with a real company?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:16:00):
One of the immediate things that you see when you build these is that your growth is much more sensitive to customer retention than you can ever intuit because there's a lot of interaction between having a healthy retained customer base and everything else you care about, which is the rate at which they're referring new customers, generating content, generating contribution margin. And so it quickly makes it clear that actually getting a smaller percentage gain on retention is often much more valuable than making a bigger change in some other area. And as a result you may be misallocating your product and growth resources in a pretty significant way.

Lenny (00:16:35):
So your point there is really important that the more you work on this stuff, the more you will learn what actually is movable and the expected ROI on investments. For founders that are just getting started on this sort of stuff, do you have any just general advice or guidance on okay, retention is probably going to be very hard to move, don't expect that metric even though it's your point that it's often the biggest lever? Any just general guidance of here's where you probably will see impact, maybe you should now count on a ton. How do you think about that?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:17:04):
I think one tactical piece of advice, I think the best way to start this is to find a smart analyst or smart finance person often is the right type of person to partner with and just start building it. So you may have some intuition around this for the core operating model the business is running. This is a little bit different. You need to start building in more variables but I would start there and start iterating on the model. And I think this process of where you have leverage to move it is very hard to intuit. So I think you just have to start and there's a feedback loop between what kind of gains the team is putting up and how that impacts your model and over the course of multiple quarters of iterating on this, you build much more intuition for what works.

Lenny (00:17:41):
Awesome. So say that somebody has been listening to this episode, maybe they've heard it, they've listened to it three times now and they're just like, "Hey, I got a model that kind of feels like the beginnings of something." What do you do once you have a growth model? How does it actually inform what you do as a startup?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:17:56):
It's very helpful input into a quarterly or annual planning process. It depends a little bit on the stage of the company, but say you're at the stage where you have maybe 10 or 20 product pods which are allocated across various parts of the business and you're going through annual planning. Often you want to do a zero based accounting exercise where we say we want to from the ground up decide how those people should spend their time and there's some kind of pod allocation exercise where we're deciding which places those go to. The most difficult thing about making that kind of effort is developing a common currency by which you can trade off their efforts. So this team is saying they can move this metric by X and this team is moving this metric by Y. I have no way to make those two things comparable. The growth model is the function that lets you do that.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:18:36):
And so you can have this analyst or this finance person we talked about who is operating this model work with the product managers to run those scenarios through this model and generate it into a common currency. So now we have a spreadsheet that says these are the things we could work on. This is roughly how it will impact our short or long-term growth. Now you have the ability to make much better kind of allocation decisions. So that would be at the most macro level. And I think the more micro one is for an individual product pod, I have this north star goal, which levers should I be pulling? They should be using their mini models to make that assessment. If you look at the strategy doc for a product group or team, I think that having a model like this should be a core part of that because that way they can articulate what it is they actually [inaudible 00:19:18].

Lenny (00:19:18):
Have you found a model doing this exercise, coming up with a growth model for a company or a startup you've worked with, radically shifted the way they think? Is there an example that comes to mind of, "Oh wow, we came up with this," and they're like they didn't even know this was a huge lever and that changed the way they approached growth.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:19:32):
I mean the first time this was very eye-opening to me and probably the first one I built was the one we built at Thumbtack in partnership with our finance team, and it made it so immediately obvious that we were exceptionally sensitive to the repeat rate of new customers. If you think about Thumbtack, we offered a thousand categories. This is a local services marketplace for people to hire electricians or plumbers or wedding planners. Almost all the traffic came from a very targeted SEM or SEO on a specific thing. So they hired [inaudible 00:20:01].

Dan Hockenmaier (00:20:01):
Initially, it was very hard for us to then go upsell you into something else, but the rate at which we did that made all the difference because it radically changed the LTV of that customer, which then fed back into how much we could go pay to acquire new customers. And so we had a team that was primarily focused on optimizing that initial flow. So SEO and conversion rate. We shipped hundreds of experiments to increase our conversion rate. We had done much less on the life cycle piece like how do we cross sell you into these other things. Building this model helped us internalize that we needed to shift a bunch of resources from top of funnel to deeper in the stack and that ultimately let us build a much better customer journey.

Lenny (00:20:36):
Awesome. Your point about retention being one of the biggest levers reminds me at Airbnb there's like a data dive once where a data scientist found that same conclusion. "Man, if we move retention by 1%, we're going to hit all our goals." And we tried and it was just very hard. And I'm curious, how often do you find that you can actually meaningfully move retention or is there anything that you've found to be effective in increasing retention for many of the companies that you've worked at?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:21:04):
Retention is a tough measure to work on because it is the culmination of the entire product experience. Whether people come back or not has to do with everything that they experienced along the way. And so I think that the primary advice is actually if you were trying to remove a retention style metric, rarely should you go right to the source and send them more email or push notification or something like that. It's really actually about understanding what is the customer experience and what matters to them. And in a marketplace context, it's often depth of supply or the interaction they have with supply. So you actually should be working more on core product levers than you are on, call it, growth product levers to move retention. So it's a deep understanding of that customer journey and where you actually have the opportunity to improve it.

Lenny (00:21:43):
If you can share any idea or any example comes to mind, what's one of the biggest successes you've seen in increasing retention?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:21:49):
Very often I think the biggest wins in retention come from inflecting the early user experience. So if you're at three, six, twelve months out, usually a customer has formed a pretty strong opinion about whether or not they like this product and they have a pretty good understanding of it. But in that very first experience, you have a lot of opportunity to teach them about why this is a valuable product and kind of prove to them that it's valuable. So the experiments that have been most effective have been typically focused on very early life cycle, and one really valuable lens is to look for variability in that experience. So for the first week or month, which customers are having a bad experience but shouldn't be.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:22:27):
So if you take Lyft or Uber, for example, an Uber driver signs up for the service. Some of them just by luck of the draw are going to make a pretty bad hourly rate because a customer canceled on them or they were just in a low density area, and there was some problem with their experience. That driver doesn't know that's not how it works. They might think, "I just make $3 an hour on this platform," and they're never going to come back. And so if you can target streamlining that experience or homogenizing that experience, it's typically very helpful. This is why you see both of those companies dueling it out to guarantee the highest first first week or first month earning. What they're trying to do is prove to you that this is what the experience is going to be like longer term, and you pull up all those below average first experiences to average and drive much better retention curves going forward.

Lenny (00:23:12):
Amazing. Such a great example and story. It makes me think about this work that I imagine every company ends up doing, which is what are leading indicators of future retention. I'm curious if you've had success doing that. I find there's always these obvious things that you can't do much about to increase retention down the road and there's always this idea of building some ML model that's like anticipating retention based on some behaviors that someone takes. Have you had any experience, any success with those sorts of investments?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:23:41):
I think one of the most common analytical failure modes is this pattern, which is our best users do X, so why can't we make other users do that same thing and then drive future attention. It almost never works that way because there's something unique about that customer and their experience which is driving it. And so these correlational exercises, I put very little weight in because I've rarely been able to move Bucket B into the better Bucket A, for example. So I think it's much more about understanding where the real drivers of value are, how to create that really good first round experience to prove to them.

Lenny (00:24:12):
Awesome. And it's interesting that onboarding comes up a lot on these conversations, just the power of onboarding and how much effect that has down the road.

Lenny (00:24:20):
To your point, people often want to increase retention by focusing on people about to turn and this is a great reminder that your biggest lever is early on when they're just experiencing for the first time.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:24:30):
So yeah, the flip side is absolutely true, right? Working on early user experience is highly impactful. You often see product teams say we should work on resurrection because we have this huge pool of users that is churned out. If we get just 1% of those people back, it's going to be such a big lift. The problem is that pool of users is the group of people who has tried the product and decided they don't want to use it and so it's very hard to convince them otherwise. It's usually much higher leverage to focus on new users and, as a result, typically you want to wait to spin up resurrection efforts until you've exhausted some of these earlier funnel efforts.

Lenny (00:25:02):
So I want to transition a bit to talking about marketplaces. I honestly can't think of anyone that's worked on more marketplace companies than you. Maybe Jeff Jordan at a16z who's invested in Airbnb and worked at eBay and OpenTable and these companies. But I feel you have so much insight into how to grow and run a marketplace and so I'm really excited to dig in to stuff here.

Lenny (00:25:23):
My first question, just why are you excited about marketplaces? What gets you continuously interested in working on marketplaces and why are they such interesting and good businesses?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:25:32):
Why is a marketplace a good business? The first thing is it's like a perfect fit for the venture model, which is why everybody's so interested in them, right? They're very hard to get started, super capital intensive to get started, but once they're rolling, they're very hard to stop. You get this kind of compounding defensibility and gains that makes them very hard to stop. And, as a result, as a marketplace grows, you see these crazy things in the metrics which you don't see for most other businesses. So typically, as you acquire more and more customers, you're acquiring the marginally good fit customer over time and your CACs go up, your LTVs go down, it gets harder and harder.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:26:08):
Marketplace is actually the inverse. The supply liquidity is improving, the experience is improving. So often actually as you see later cohorts in marketplaces, CAC goes down, LTV goes up. You see this crazy inversion where the business gets better and better over time. And so that's I think one of the reasons they're such great businesses. I think to your question on why they're fun to work on, I think everything is just harder. Every question is more complex and so that's made them I think really fun to work on for me.

Lenny (00:26:37):
And that's interesting coming back to your first point about marketplaces are hard to start, but once they're started they become cheaper to grow and you build moats and work effects. It feels like you as a advisor and person that works on marketplaces, the same thing happens. The fact that you've worked at so many marketplaces makes it more interesting and fun I imagine because you've seen so much of this and so many people haven't experienced this, and so there's almost a Dan Hockenmaier network effect.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:27:02):
I appreciate that. I mean I think there's a few folks in this community who've worked with a bunch of marketplace, and you start to see the same topics over and over. So it's really fun to riff with that group on these topics.

Lenny (00:27:12):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like Netlify, Contentful and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern growth team stack. This leads to waste of time building internal tools or trying to run your experiments through a clunky marketing tool. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved about our experimentation platform was being able to easily slice results by device, by country, and by user stage.

Lenny (00:27:49):
Eppo does all that and more delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytics cycles and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic click through metrics and instead use your north star metrics like activation, retention, subscriptions and payments. And Eppo supports tests on the front end, the back end, email marketing and even machine learning clients. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com, geteppo.com and 10X your experiment velocity.

Lenny (00:28:22):
Okay, so we're thinking about marketplaces. One of the biggest questions people ask about marketplaces is how do you know if they're going well? What are health metrics? What are KPIs that you find are most helpful to think about when evaluating the health of a marketplace?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:28:36):
I can give you a couple of pretty obvious ones or basic ones and a couple that are a little bit more nuanced. So that in that first bucket, certainly you need to look at some measure of GMV or transactions. You need something that brings together both the supply and demand side to make sure it's working and that's typically your ultimate north star of which everything else ladders up to.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:28:54):
I think the second would be a deep understanding of unit economics because the dynamic I talked about where they're hard to get started means that most marketplace in the early days have pretty poor or maybe even negative unit economics. Instacart famously was losing the money on every order. Uber was losing money on every drive. And so I think understanding that and the components that lead up to it is a very important part of understanding your marketable. So those would be the two kind of obvious ones.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:29:19):
I think other two that I would look at beyond that, number one is liquidity. And this is a really broad term that people define in a bunch of different ways. The definition I would give is how reliable is the marketplace? If the consumer is looking for something or supplier is looking to sell something, how often can they do that thing that they're trying to do? And ideally you want to express this metric in the form of a dimension or a type of product experience that a customer really cares about. So for Uber or Lyft, wait time is a classic example. As you add more supply, the average wait time for a customer goes down and there's some magic moment around four or five minutes where it really clicks and is now just a much better service than calling a traditional taxi or something else.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:30:01):
For a commerce market, typically it's some form of conversion rate or search to fail metrics. So if I go look for this thing on Amazon, how often can I find it and convert? And so by articulating what the customer cares about and where this threshold is, you can tell when you have a liquid marketplace and essentially until you have a liquid marketplace, really nothing else matters. So this should be the primary thing you're focused on defining and then building towards, and this is why you hear a lot of advice to marketplaces to basically cut scope down to a specific geography or a specific category so you can focus on generating liquidity in that area before you can then scale it elsewhere. So this is the number one, I think, metric for a marketplace.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:30:41):
And then the last one I'll give is share of wallet. So this is effectively for your buyer, how much of their total spend are you getting on your marketplaces versus the alternatives. For your seller, how much of the business that they're doing is you versus others? So for Uber drivers, if they spend X amount of hours driving per week, how much are you getting versus Lyft or Door Dash or something else? For a retailer on Faire, if they're buying to stock their store, how much of the product on their shelf came from Faire versus from somewhere else? These are very important metrics for us to understand.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:31:11):
One, for the obvious reason that as it goes up, your LTVs go up and you have a much better business. But probably more importantly than that, the higher it is, the less likely a customer is to multi-tenant, meaning use another marketplace or another service. And ideally you want that customer to commit to using just this marketplace and the higher share of wallet is the more likely that is. But I will say that it's very hard typically to get this to happen on both sides of the marketplace simultaneously. So often you have to pick your leverage point, which one do you think you can actually drive very high share of wallet on.

Lenny (00:31:41):
Awesome. Okay. So just to summarize, the metrics that you find to be most helpful in tracking marketplace health, there's these two that are just general business health metrics, GMV and unit economics. Then I think what's most unique to marketplaces, which is liquidity and essentially it's just like how often are people having a good time on both sides of the marketplace? And I love the way you broke it up like for Uber it would be how quickly do you get a car. For most marketplaces, it's just like what percentage of the time do you get something that you want, fill rate basically. And then share a wallet, which to me feels like ... even again going back to the first kind of bucket of just broadly this business going well, do you think about that separately versus just business growth and how much we're making, do you feel like share of wallet is a different category of metric?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:32:30):
I do think share of wallet is different for this reason. If you could tell me we could grow GMV 10% by getting 10% more customers or by getting 10% more of our current customers' wallet, I would take the latter because you now have a deeper relationship with them, which tells you something more about the future retention and defensibility of the marketplace. So I think it's basically a measure of depth rather than breadth. And I will take depth every time in a marketplace.

Lenny (00:32:57):
Awesome. You worked on consumer and B2B marketplaces and so I'm curious, do you find share of wallet is important on both types of marketplaces or is it a lot more important in B2B?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:33:06):
So you typically have some form of business on the supply side of a marketplace. Maybe it's a pseudo business that's effectively a consumer, but you can almost always measure some form of share of wallet on the supply side of a marketplace no matter what. On the consumer side, if you're a B2B marketplace, you typically have a cleaner share of wallet metric, but it's not always the case for consumer businesses.

Lenny (00:33:25):
Sweet. And again, just to clarify share of wallet, it's essentially percentage of spend in, say, a problem space that they're giving to you. So for Faire, it'd be like the retailers, what percentage of their vendors come through Faire?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:33:39):
Exactly. If you look at their shelf in their store, what percentage of that shelf came from Faire versus something else?

Lenny (00:33:45):
Awesome. Another constant question marketplace founders have is whether they should focus on supply or demand. And I know it's never black and white, but do you have any general advice on where to focus?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:34:00):
Yeah. I mean the answer is obviously both to some extent. I think you can't ignore either side. I do think though that on average when you hear advice about where to focus, people over rotate on supply and actually are under focused on demand. And I think there's a couple of reasons for this. One is supply is disproportionately important early on because it is the product. Until you have enough supply, you don't have anything and so you do have to focus on it to a high degree early on. And two is often the supply side of marketplace is using the product more deeply. There's more product surface area and you need more product resources on the supply side.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:34:35):
However, I think this tricks people into thinking that that's the optimization function or you think you should think more about supply. I think ultimately demand is the only thing that matters. If you are successful at aggregating the demand in your industry, you will have the winning marketplace. Because if you go to a supplier, a restaurant or an electrician or a driver and say, "I have this customer for you that I can give to you at a rate that's going to make you money," they're always going to say yes. And so demand is the currency. And so when you think about trade-offs or how to optimize a business, I think taking the perspective of the customer or the demand side is always the right one.

Lenny (00:35:11):
I think there's a really important nuance here, and there's actually a little mini Twitter debate with Bill Gurley I think a while ago where he made the same point that in the end, the most important thing you got to get right is aggregate all the demand. You need to become the place people come to transact in that space. But oftentimes the way you do that is acquire supply that is hard to acquire. And so would you agree with that? Often it's just, yes, prioritize the customer experience, but that may be you need to spend most of your time acquiring supply so that they're happy.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:35:40):
Absolutely. And the culmination of those two points is you only should acquire supply to the extent you understand how it impacts demand. So, for example, if we go back to this liquidity metric, there is some point for a market for Uber where you don't want more supply because you're no longer reducing wait times or doing something that improves the customer experience in a meaningful way. And similarly to the kind of pet store example on Amazon, there's some amount of supply where you're probably no longer incrementally improving the pet buyer's experience and so it's probably not worth investing those dollars. So supply is critically important, but it has to be framed from what is the customer benefit that I'm driving.

Lenny (00:36:17):
And another way to put that is what's the biggest constraint to your marketplace's growth, right?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:36:21):
Right.

Lenny (00:36:22):
While we're on that topic, do you have any just rough heuristic that you use to understand which side is most constrained? This may be a big question that isn't answerable in a short answer, but any thoughts there?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:36:35):
One is I've actually become less and less focused on pure marketplace balance metrics. They're important to monitor, so ratio of buyers to sellers, some of these other things. But actually the thing that matters is can you write an ROI equation for acquiring supply and demand which fully internalizes the marketplace dynamic. So what I mean by this is if you're acquiring a new customer, you need to include the CAC of acquiring that customer, but also the CAC of acquiring the supply for that customer to purchase, which is based on some ratio between the two.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:37:09):
And similarly on the supply side, that business can't make a sale unless you also acquire the customer to transact with them. And so if you have dual-sided ROI equations which are appropriately capturing this dynamic, actually I think you can somewhat ignore marketplace balance and just push your acquisition all the way out to the payback period that you're comfortable with on either side. I think the one exception to this would be are there externalities which you can't capture in this equation. So for example, if you have too little demand for Uber drivers, at some point do they just become disillusioned with the service, switch to Lyft, talk badly about it on social media. You do have to look out for extreme low supply or demand scenarios. But generally my view is build really strong ROI models that account for this and then just push to your threshold.

Lenny (00:37:57):
I like the sound of these ROI models. Do you have any guidance for folks to come up with these models in some way? Or is that a whole master class of its own?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:38:06):
So there's a lot of nuance by business, but the basic formulation is CAC for the side you're focused on. So let's take Uber again, as an example. CAC to acquire a rider and then an additional amount of CAC loaded on for the supply, the drivers that you're acquiring, times the ratio of drivers to supply you're acquiring at that time. So basically, do I need one driver for every 10 passengers? We then take the CAC of that passenger times 10% of a driver. That gives you CAC and then you compare that to the LTV of the customer, and that allows you to calculate payback period.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:38:44):
Now there's a lot of nuance when you get into an actual marketplace because often they're referring other sides of the marketplace or other things are happening. But that's the basic formulation.

Lenny (00:38:53):
Wow. Okay. We should do an actual master class on this formula concoction.

Lenny (00:38:57):
A question I wanted to cover also is I find that for early stage marketplaces, founders sometimes over focus on the theory of marketplaces and how all this stuff that people have put out, including yourself and others, about just how to think about marketplace, all the complexity there. But I find that oftentimes it's simpler just to think of a marketplace like 90 something percent of your success is going to be the same things that any business will have to deal with, growth and profit and retention, all these things. And then there's these additional layers that make a marketplace more complicated. And so just to double click on that last piece, what have you found to be most different about working on a marketplace business versus non-marketplace business?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:39:43):
Yeah, it's a good question. So I think that effectively every decision you make in a marketplace has a second order consequence that you need to think through and maybe third and fourth order consequences at that. Take something like pricing. It's like this is a pretty complicated topic no matter what, but if you're looking at a SaaS business and you're trying to figure out how to price your subscription, theoretically you can draw a curve which says, "As my price goes up, fewer are going to convert," and so just find the optimal point on that curve where we're managing the tangent between more customers versus more revenue per customer.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:40:15):
But if you take a marketplace, typically you're charging commission on the supply side and their sensitivity to that commission is much harder to understand because, theoretically, if they can transact at a rate that makes them money, they'll sign up all the way to that highest possible commission you could charge. The more you charge, the more you can fund benefits for your customers. So if Amazon charges a higher commission, they can fund more returns and faster shipping for their customers. And so what's the right balance between charging more and maybe kind of discouraging supply from signing up to giving more benefits to demand and encouraging them to sign up?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:40:52):
So it's very hard to model that kind of relationship. There's not a simple curve that describes it and so many decisions follow this same pattern. And one lesson I've learned the hard way a bunch of times on this is that if you think about running a marketplace, you're basically a gardener. You have to have a very light touch. If you're building a SaaS business, you're a construction worker, you're building the product and the features and selling it, and it's this very linear thing. For a marketplace, you're messing with this ecosystem that you don't actually really understand how it works. Sometimes you might do something over here which drives this long-term effect two months later and then you're going to be pulling your hair out two months later trying to figure out what you did over here that made that thing happen.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:41:30):
And so I think that the main advice is to tread lightly. When you're messing with the core incentives or mechanisms of a marketplace, be very careful, particularly if you got something that's working on playing with those variables.

Lenny (00:41:42):
I love that metaphor and your point about pricing reminds me ... Your colleague at Faire, Carla Pellicano, she led the pricing recommendations team at Airbnb. It was a team of, I don't know, probably a hundred people that were just dedicated to pricing, figuring out what prices to recommend to hosts, how to get them to adopt these recommendations, building a model to actually come up with the recommendations. And so to your point, pricing is such a complex beast and especially in a marketplace.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:42:09):
Absolutely. And in general, Carla's been such an incredible force in growing our team and helping us think more rigorously about marketplaces. This is one of the things I mentioned at the start that makes Faire so fun is we've got a lot of people like this that are just so fun to riff with on marketplace problems.

Lenny (00:42:23):
There's so many ex-Airbnb people at Faire. It seems to be a magnet for the Airbnb alumni. So whatever you're doing, keep that up.

Lenny (00:42:30):
Another topic that I wanted to chat about is expanding marketplaces and just the idea of thinking about where you expand to with new markets, new verticals, and then also horizontal versus vertical marketplaces. But first, how do you think about the idea of expanding your marketplace once you've got a foothold in a specific area?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:42:48):
I've been fortunate to work on marketplaces that are in these massive, massive industries, which is actually true for a lot of marketplaces because they tend to have winner take all dynamics in really big markets. And so you get these really huge [inaudible 00:42:59].

Dan Hockenmaier (00:42:59):
So the local services industry for Thumbtack or the global wholesale industry for Faire, these are meaningful percentages of global GDP. They're huge markets and, as a result, they're really frustrating to work on and also really fun to work on because you have this thing where there's 10 big opportunities that are just one click away from your core business and they all seem really good ideas to do. So how do you actually prioritize between doing those different things? And one thing I've learned here is that actually beyond a certain point, TAM or the size of the market actually matters very little because these are all big enough that they would dramatically inflect the curve of the business if you make them work.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:43:35):
It's much more relevant to focus on a couple things. One is how adjacent is that to the business as a proxy for can we actually go get it? So if you think about Instacart's setup options, it makes much more sense for them to expand into convenience stores which they have than into traditional retailers because the convenience store looks much more like their current model. The high frequency, shipping speed matters a lot, fulfillment speed matters a lot. And so it's much more likely their current model's going to work there than trying to expand into something else. And that's the right prioritization function for them to think about versus as retail is a slightly bigger market that could be in stores.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:44:09):
And the second thing is are there places that you can accentuate your network effect by expanding into new markets. And what I mean by that is are there places where you can use the same supplier or a consumer has demand for multiple things and so it makes your marketplace stronger versus trying to spin up a new network. So for Uber, it makes all the sense in the world to have Uber Eats because, one, they're the same drivers in many cases, but two, the customer wants rides and meals. And so you automatically have this built-in supply base where if they try to do something that was one click further away from this, it would be much less important to them. And so I think that's the way to prioritize new bets.

Lenny (00:44:46):
That is such an interesting point that basically if you're thinking about the upside of a marketplace, think less about just the total TAM of all the adjacent marketplace opportunities in the markets around them and more about how easily it'll be for you to expand into them even if they're smaller.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:45:01):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:45:02):
Awesome.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:45:04):
There's one other lesson here which I've learned a few times, which is that product is the thing that matters when expanding. So because of this dynamic we talked about where liquidity is so important and there's a race to get there, like the first person, the liquidity wins, you often see this arms race where people will spend a huge amount of money on go to market and incentives to bootstrap the market. And that is an important part of the strategy because it actually does matter who drives liquidity faster.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:45:33):
But I've learned over and over and over that that's actually not the main thing. It's who can deliver an incredible end-to-end customer experience first, even if for a smaller number of customers. Because that's what creates the flame where actually customers are really loving it, retained, talking about it, and you can then expand from there. So the other big learning from expanding a marketplace is don't let go to market get too far ahead of product. You need to keep those two pieces in lockstep as you're expanding.

Lenny (00:46:01):
This touches on a really common piece of advice for marketplaces, which is don't focus on GMV and growth rates and just expansion early on, but instead focus on getting a flywheel going even if it's small, to show that you can make people happy and you can give people what they're looking for. Is there anything you can add there or talk about?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:46:20):
Yeah, I think that's exactly right. And the reason this is the right advice is because everything else follows proving you have a good customer experience. Even if you have a very few customers, if your cohorts look really good, they're retaining or even kind of like the classic smiling curve where you see more in engagement later in the life cycle than you do earlier, that's the thing that gives the company conviction to invest resources against it. That's the reason that VCs are going to want to invest rather than a bunch of low quality GMV in a market.

Lenny (00:46:49):
Awesome. Speaking of VCs, investing and expanding marketplaces, something that I've noticed is a lot of marketplaces try to find a SaaS business to build on top of their marketplace and find some kind of recurring revenue component and then, in reverse, a lot of SaaS businesses look for how do we add a marketplace to what we're doing. I'm curious how often you find that this actually works out and what do you have to get right to add this other type of business model on top of something that's working.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:47:17):
So broadly, I will say I think it's easier for a marketplace to go SaaS than it is the other direction and the reason for that is two things. One is it's a new capability to generate demand, which is fundamentally what a marketplace has to do, and it's a higher value activity. This is why the effective commission of a marketplace, often 10, 15, 20% is much higher than the effective commission of a SaaS business in the 2% to 3% range. So you're just doing much more of the value chain in the marketplace. And second is the marketplace by definition starts with relationships on both sides. But the SaaS business does not have any relationships with the demand side customer. And so they have to acquire a whole new type of demand to make this work.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:47:58):
It's not to say it can't work. There's actually a classic kind of SaaS bootstrap to marketplace playbook. This is what OpenTable did. I think we've actually seen some new examples of companies doing this. One in the healthcare space is Solve. They built some interesting products for healthcare clinics that they're now bootstrapping into marketplace. And so I think it's possible, but I think it's very difficult. And then for a marketplace, the lens you should take is much less about how to drive more monetization, but just how do we create a much better experience for our customers because there's some painful thing that they're doing today that we can build for them instead. And so how do we better integrate with the way that they're running their back office or accounting systems is a classic example of where you can make it much better.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:48:42):
In the process, you're often making their lives easier, but you're also making your product much stickier. Your retention will go up as a result of this. And so I think if you take the lens of what's the customer pain we're solving, you'll be much more effective than how do we get a few more points of margin out of this customer.

Lenny (00:48:57):
If a founder was coming to you and they're like, "Hey Dan, we are a marketplace and we're thinking about adding a SaaS product on top, would you, one, try to discourage them from that? And if, two, that doesn't work, what would you suggest that they focus on most?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:49:12):
I mean I think the first thing is looking at those core metrics we talked about, do they have a really liquid high performance marketplace first. That has to be the optimization function. And before you're there, I don't think you should be thinking about some of these expansion levers.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:49:27):
The second would be show me the customer problem or the reason it's so hard to engage with this marketplace today that we need to build a deep set of tools or products for this customer to solve. And if both of those things are true, then I think maybe it's quite interesting. But I think more often than not, it's better to focus on the core marketplace.

Lenny (00:49:46):
Awesome. Another common question that marketplace founders have is should I go vertical or should I go horizontal? So thinking about eBay as an example, they are very horizontal. You could buy anything you want on eBay. And then there's all these spinoffs that emerged, just classic cars, eBay for classic cars, eBay for guitars. And I'm curious if you have any advice there for either an early stage founder trying to decide should I go horizontal or vertical and/or where do you find the biggest opportunities to slice off a piece of a successful horizontal marketplace?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:50:18):
Yeah, absolutely. And in that eBay example, there are now a few quite successful examples of this like [inaudible 00:50:23] and StockX are two where they carved out the sneaker category and the key insight was you couldn't trust the inventory you were getting on eBay. So there's a lot of work you need to do to verify, and those businesses just did it much better than eBay. Broadly though, I think that we over hyped the idea of unbundling. So I think every six months I'm seeing an article where somebody wrote, "This is the unbundling of Reddit, the unbundling of LinkedIn, the unbundling of Facebook." We're going to take all those blue links that you saw on another site and they're all going to become new businesses. And very rarely that thesis plays out. I think the core logical error in the argument for unbundling is that they over focus on one type of improvement, which is user experience and they under focus on the things that make scale businesses have better economics.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:51:07):
And so to unpack that, if you look at UX, like if you built a LinkedIn just for construction workers or just for architects or just for investment bankers, you could definitely build some set of features that group liked better than the core LinkedIn experience. But then you have to weigh that against all of the benefits of being broader. And so the two big pieces of where you get benefits from scale are in your customer LTV and then I think the network effect you can build. So if you go back to that Thumbtack example, we had a spreadsheet which tracked hundreds of verticalized competitors where somebody would try to pick off the electricians category, the wedding category, the lessons category, and very few of them got traction for the simple reason that we could upsell customers into a thousand things.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:51:48):
And so our customer LTV was always higher and we would always win when we were bidding against those other customers on SEM keywords that were relevant to that category. So it becomes very hard to compete if you're picking off this kind of narrow thing unless you find something which that sub-segment is itself very high frequency or very high dollar value. So Airbnb's an example. They unbundled from Craigslist because they picked off this massive high frequency, high dollar value category [inaudible 00:52:16] but there's not that many of those examples.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:52:18):
And then I think the other source of benefit would be the network effect. So if you go back to LinkedIn, for example, I think actually there's an opportunity and we see some successful businesses picking off now blue collar work. So there's a company called Workrise. I think they used to be called Rigup where they're basically building like a LinkedIn but for blue collar work. And that works really well because it's a huge segment and it's somewhat self-contained.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:52:39):
But for most other things there's a lot of fluidity between the employers and the employees in terms of who wants to transact with one another. And so if you're an investment banker, you don't really want to be on the LinkedIn investment banker because you're probably in the future going to want some other job. So you want to be in the biggest network that's relevant to you and so this is why you can complain about LinkedIn's UI all day, but they have a very strong place in the market because of that network effect. So broadly, I think there are some pretty interesting examples, places where you can unbundle but they're rarer than people think.

Lenny (00:53:10):
That is amazing. There's so much value in what you just shared. So one takeaway I have here is you have an opportunity to unbundle/split off into a vertical marketplace potentially if there's high order value and high frequency. And the third piece is there's almost a self-contained network that doesn't benefit significantly from the rest of the network. For example, I love the Rigup example, like I doubt oil rig operators are on LinkedIn and when something comes around that's like, "Oh, all my buddies are on this thing, I'm going to be on there," you don't need the rest of LinkedIn.

Lenny (00:53:40):
The first piece, though, is interesting. So Airbnb I wouldn't say is high frequency. I'd say it's just very large high order value. And so I wonder if you just need one or the other really in a big way. Really high order value or really high frequency?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:53:51):
This is a good point. Probably what you're solving for is customer LTV and you can get that in multiple places. There's not that many things which are both high frequency and high dollar value so you can do both. I do think if you go to a place that is low frequency, it comes with all kinds of new challenges because, without frequency, customers forget about you. And so what is the hook to get them to come back? Do you have to reacquire traffic? It creates a whole other set of problems. But if you can get it right like in the Airbnb case, it can work really well.

Lenny (00:54:17):
Yeah, Thumbtack is a classic example of how often you need a plumber. And even with the thousands of services that you all had, from what I understand, it's still a struggle to get people to come back often. And remember Thumbtack when they had, "Oh, they have an electrician. Oh yeah, Thumbtack."

Dan Hockenmaier (00:54:30):
That's right. Initially, it was very difficult. I mean the average person hires eight or ten new professionals a year, the average homeowner. And so that's decently high frequency, but it's not food delivery or a ride sharing or something like that.

Lenny (00:54:42):
Coming back to Faire, so Faire is one of the maybe few really successful B2B marketplaces and it's always felt like there's this gap in B2B marketplaces. You always feel like there should be many more. Like why are there so many consumer marketplaces but so few B2B, and I'm curious what's your take there. Do you think there's a rising trend to B2B marketplaces? Do you think this is always going to be a smaller collection? What's your feeling?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:55:07):
So I do think we'll see more of them. Part of the reason we've seen fewer is there are fewer potential founders who understand B2B problems because most of them are consumers and so the consumer use cases are more obvious. So if you take Faire, for example, when I met the founders, which is probably five years ago now, I immediately understood what they were talking about, but only because I had run an e-commerce business in the past and I had the experience of dealing with a hundred suppliers and line sheets and PDFs going back and forth and pricing not being right and just how painful it is to be a retail buyer. And they had a solution which was much better and that clicked.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:55:44):
But had I had the same conversation five or 10 years ago with the team at Convoy like I don't know anything about trucking, I probably wouldn't have understood why that business was going to work. And so I think there's partly that. Just the discovery process takes longer for that reason. But I think the reason we won't see a huge explosion in this area is that B2B also comes with something else, which is much lower fragmentation in many cases and you need fragmentation for a good marketplace. The more concentrated either side of your market is, the more leverage they have, the less likely they are to need you and the less likely they are to be willing to pay a high commission.

Lenny (00:56:20):
You made that point to me once when we were talking about marketplaces years ago, and that's so stuck with me that when evaluating marketplaces in B2B especially, usually the reason it's not going to work is just it's not fragmented enough. And just to double click there, can you explain what that means? What does fragmentation mean in a marketplace context? And then are there any examples of really low fragmentation of this will never work as a marketplace? And then here it's really high and this is why it's working?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:56:45):
Fragmentation is basically just a measure of how many total businesses are there in the space relative to the transaction volume in that space. And if you took the top 5% of suppliers in the space, what percentage of the total volume are they doing? And the higher that percentage is, the less fragmented you are. The challenge that creates for a marketplace is if there's 10 companies in a space that are doing 80% of the volume, it's very important for me to have a relationship with those 10 companies. But those 10 companies are also big enough to have their own sales teams, have their own internal operations. They just need less from a marketplace and, as a result, they're going to be willing to pay less. And you're also probably going to see many more problems with disintermediation, which is when the supplier and the customer go around the marketplace because they can just transact themselves.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:57:27):
One principle to use here is how many total dollars are attached to each transaction in the marketplace. When it goes above a certain amount, it becomes much more attractive to figure out how to go around the marketplace. With ride sharing, for example, the absolute dollars of commission on a ride is $2 or $3. Is it worth it for the driver to figure out how to call the passenger two minutes in advance, go around Uber and pick them up? Maybe. You probably see some of that happening, but usually not.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:57:55):
But now take there's a bunch of people in the kind of material space within B2B marketplaces, you have manufacturers of say beauty products who need to source aerosol cans and all the inputs into making beauty products. There's not that many of these big suppliers and each of their transactions may be tens of thousands of dollars, hundreds of thousands of dollars, millions of dollars. The commission you would charge on that order is too high because a supplier would rather just pick up the phone and call this person and save those tens of thousands of dollars. And so you just run into these kind of fundamental problems where a marketplace doesn't work anymore.

Lenny (00:58:29):
That makes sense. Basically, how much value are you bringing to this market? And if it's not enough where you can charge anything meaningful to run a business is just not going to work. And so that's a really good way of framing it.

Lenny (00:58:41):
Final question around marketplaces and, broadly, and I'll let you go. You've spent a lot of time on marketplaces. You've seen their evolution. You've worked on this maybe for the past decade. Where do you see the future of marketplaces going?

Dan Hockenmaier (00:58:54):
I actually wrote a blog post on this where we charted the commission that a marketplace charges and the year they were founded. And if you put those on the x and y axis, there's this very clear up into the right trend. Newer marketplaces are charging higher commissions and they're doing more work to justify those commissions. So broadly the evolution looks like kind of Marketplace 1.0, which is all they're doing is aggregating demand. So that's Zillow and Home Advisor. They're basically like lead gen and their commission rate is often pretty low. It's like 5%, maybe 10%.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:59:24):
Then you have a managed marketplace like Airbnb or Etsy, which did something really fundamental on top of that, which is generated trust. So they deadhead supply ... You could probably tell me more about what Airbnb did in this space, but they made it a safe transaction and there's a lot of work it takes to make that transaction trustworthy and safe and so they charge a higher commission as a result.

Dan Hockenmaier (00:59:48):
There's then one click beyond that which, for lack of a better term, you could call it a heavily managed marketplace, but now they're typically doing some work in the value chain, which is distinct from just aggregating demand. So DoorDash and Instacart own logistics. They took over logistics and, as a result, DoorDash did a much better job than the previous model of Seamless of being able to bring on a lot more restaurants and make it much more reliable for the customer. As a result, they could charge more to the restaurant. Similarly, Faire, we actually underwrite the transaction. We take the risk. If that transaction falls through or the retailer defaults, Faire eats that. And so we are playing a much more fundamental place in that transaction.

Dan Hockenmaier (01:00:25):
But as you play this out, what happens at the end of this continuum? Ultimately, you're charging a hundred percent commission and you're not a marketplace anymore. So I think, as we think about the future of marketplaces, one important question is which marketplaces are going to tend towards evolving out of the marketplace model altogether and which will stay in marketplace mode in equilibrium? And you see these examples already like people talk about Opendoor as a marketplace, but it's not. It's an e-commerce website which has the highest price points you can imagine because you're buying houses, but there's no supplier on the other side. They've already bought the house so it's just e-commerce. And I think many marketplaces will go that way. And I think the variable to me that matters in deciding which case you're going to have, whether they consolidate or not, is how much creativity there is in the space. So how much do you need the supplier to be coming up with interesting new things for your customers to buy.

Dan Hockenmaier (01:01:18):
What the customer cares about is actually commoditization. They want the same experience every time. Then you're ultimately going to evolve away from marketplaces I think. With ride sharing, basically what I want is a clean car that shows up on time and gets me there every time. So as soon as autonomous vehicles arrive, we're going to fully consolidate that industry and it's not going to be marketplace model any more. On the other end, you have Etsy and Amazon. I think Faire's in this bucket. Steam, the video game marketplace, is in this bucket where the thing you care about is suppliers bringing you amazing creative new things. And that's something that big companies are really bad at doing. So they need the marketplace suppliers to supply this. And so I think those businesses stay in marketplace mode longer term.

Dan Hockenmaier (01:02:02):
And then the middle, I don't exactly know how to call what happens in food delivery. You do want some standardization elements, but you also want the local restaurants and so does DoorDash win or the Cloud Kitchen model win? I think it's a little bit harder to understand, but I do think that's kind of the variable that's determining where the future of marketplaces are going.

Lenny (01:02:19):
It's interesting to think about this event horizon for when a marketplace is no longer a marketplace. Is a simple way to think about that being when you own the supply, you're no longer a marketplace. When you don't own the supply, you are. Is that how you think about that?

Dan Hockenmaier (01:02:34):
Yeah, that's a good mental [inaudible 01:02:37]. Perhaps another way to say owning a supply is when there's no longer a direct transaction between supply and demand. That's what Opendoor took out, for example. You're not transacting with the home seller. You're transacting with Open Door and so that's, in my mind, no longer a marketplace because you also eliminate some of the marketplace mechanics we were talking about a bit.

Lenny (01:02:55):
Awesome. Dan, this has been incredible. I feel like we've achieved our goal of getting really deep into the weeds on growth models and marketplaces. Two final questions for you.

Lenny (01:03:06):
Where can folks find you online if they want to learn more, reach out and how can listeners be useful to you?

Dan Hockenmaier (01:03:11):
Yeah, so I'm on Twitter at Dan Hockenmaier and then LinkedIn. People should feel free to reach out. I think the most useful thing is we're always growing our team at Faire. And so for folks who are interested in this space, I would love to connect with them.

Lenny (01:03:26):
Where do they go to learn more and apply for Faire?

Dan Hockenmaier (01:03:29):
Just faire.com or faire.com/careers.

Lenny (01:03:32):
And that's Faire with an "e" at the end?

Dan Hockenmaier (01:03:34):
That's correct, yes.

Lenny (01:03:36):
Awesome. All right, Dan, thank you for being here.

Dan Hockenmaier (01:03:38):
Thank you so much for the time.

Lenny (01:03:41):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Ramesh Johari (00:00:00):
Marketplaces are a little bit like a game of whac-a-mole. One example that I came across with one of the companies I worked with that I love is our new supply side was having a pretty bad experience.

(00:00:12):
So what we decided to do is build some custom bespoke features that were really going to direct them to more experienced folks on the other side of the market. Good. And then, yeah, lo and behold, pretty soon those metrics start to look better. But then we're looking at it, we're like, "Wait a second. Now the existing folks on the other side are having a worse experience," so you kind of whiplash around. You're like, "Oh, wait a second. We better do something about that." So we take them, we try to match them up with the more experienced folks, and now suddenly a month after that, you're like, "Wait a second," and your metrics just keep moving around. And that's because the whac-a-mole game here is ultimately, a lot of marketplace management is moving attention and inventory around. Many of the changes that are most consequential create winners and losers. And rolling with those changes is about recognizing whether the winners you've created are more important to your business than the losers you've created in the process.

Lenny (00:01:00):
Today my guest is Ramesh Johari. Ramesh is a professor at Stanford University, where he does research on and teaches data science methods and practices with a specific focus on the design and operation of online marketplaces. He's advised and worked with some of the biggest marketplaces in the world, including Airbnb, Uber, Stripe, Bumble, Stitch Fix, Upwork, and many others. And in our conversation, we get super nerdy on how to build a thriving marketplace, including where to focus your resources to fuel the marketplace flywheel growth, why data and data science is so central to building a successful marketplace, how to design a better review system. Why as a founder, you shouldn't think of yourself as a marketplace founder, but instead simply as a founder. Also, how AI is going to impact data science and marketplaces, and experimentation, and so much more. If you're building a marketplace business, or thinking about building a marketplace, or just curious, this episode is for you. With that, I bring you Ramesh Johari after a short word from our sponsors. 

(00:02:04):
This episode is brought to you by Sanity. Your website is the heart of your growth engine. For that engine to drive big results, you need to be able to move super fast, ship new content, experiment, learn and iterate. But most content management systems just aren't built for this. Your content teams wrestle with rigid interfaces as they build new pages. You spend endless time copying and pasting across pages and recreating content for other channels and applications. And their ideas for new experiments are squashed when developers can't build them within the constraints of outdated tech. 

(00:02:35):
Forward-thinking companies like Figma, Amplitude, Loom, Riot Games, Linear, and more use Sanity to build content growth engines that scale drive innovation and accelerate customer acquisition. With Sanity, your team can dream bigger and move faster. As the most powerful headless CMS on the market, you can tailor editorial workflows to match your business, reuse content seamlessly across any page or channel, and bring your ideas to market without developer friction. Sanity makes life better for your whole team. It's fast for developers to build with, intuitive for content managers, and it integrates seamlessly with the rest of your tech stack. Get started with Sanity's generous free plan. And as a Lenny's Podcast listener, you can get a boosted plan with double the monthly usage. Head over to sanity.io/lenny to get started for free. That's sanity.io/lenny.

(00:03:26):
This episode is brought to you by Hex. If you're a data person, you probably have to jump between different tools to run queries, build visualizations, write Python, and send around a lot of screenshots and CSV files. Hex brings everything together. Its powerful Notebook UI lets you analyze data in SQL, Python, or no code in any combination, and work together with live multiplayer and version control. And now Hex's, AI tools can generate queries and code, create visualizations, and even kickstart a whole analysis for you all from natural language prompts. It's like having an analytics co-pilot built right into where you're already doing your work. Then when you're ready to share, you can use Hex's drag and drop app builder to configure beautiful reports or dashboards that anyone can use. Join the hundreds of data teams like Notion, AllTrails, Loom, Mixpanel, and Algolia using Hex every day to make their work more impactful. Sign up today at hex.tech/lenny to get a 60 day free trial of the Hex team plan. That's hex.tech/lenny.

(00:04:31):
Ramesh, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Ramesh Johari (00:04:35):
Thanks so much for having me, Lenny. It's great to be on. 

Lenny (00:04:38):
It's great to have you on. A big thank you to Riley Newman for connecting us. Riley was the first data scientist at Airbnb and head of data science at Airbnb, and that role is actually a really good microcosm of what we're going to be focusing on in our chat today. We're going to get super nerdy about marketplaces, and experimentation, and data. I know that's your jam. Are you ready to dive in?

Ramesh Johari (00:05:00):
I really am. Yeah. And I actually want to thank Riley too. I got to know Riley when I was at oDesk first as a research scientist, and then I directed their data science team. This is way back in 2012, and I was looking around for people who are experts on how we think about data and marketplaces, and Riley Newman came up and so I invited him to come talk to us at oDesk, and we've stayed in touch since then. 

(00:05:26):
Those were early days of where this industry was, and I've had a kind of lengthy career now thinking about those kinds of problems. So I'm pretty excited to talk about it with you.

Lenny (00:05:37):
Let's start broad and set a little foundation. You have a really interesting way to describe what a marketplace business even is. So Ramesh, what is a marketplace business, and also why is data so important and such an integral part of building a successful marketplace business?

Ramesh Johari (00:05:53):
It's interesting when people sit down and think about, say Airbnb, what does Airbnb sell? Average person is like, "That's pretty obvious. Airbnb sells rooms. I go there to book a room I want to stay at," right? Other people say, "What does Uber sell? Uber sells me rides. I'd use Uber when I need to get a ride from somewhere to somewhere else."

(00:06:10):
And in some sense, you're not wrong. I mean, you go there. That's a platform to get these things. But that's not what the platform is selling. That's a really important distinction. There are people on the platform that are selling that to you. The hosts on Airbnb are selling you listings. The drivers on Uber are selling you rides. But Uber and Airbnb are selling you the taking away of something, which is a weird thing to think about. What they're taking away is the friction of finding a place to stay. They're taking away the friction of finding a driver.

(00:06:42):
In economics, we call those things transaction costs. When you take econ 1, you learn about markets and how supply meets demand, and we get prices out of that. But what you don't learn until econ 201 is that markets don't always work. And one of the reasons markets don't always work is because we have what are called market failures due to the presence of these kinds of friction. So what's a market failure? It's that Lenny wants to get from Palo Alto to Burlingame and he can't do it. Why can't he do it? He doesn't have anyone to drive him. Well, why doesn't he just call someone to drive him? Well, who's he supposed to call? Who are those people? Are they out there? Are they willing to drive him right now, right at 10:00 AM on a Friday? Are they willing to take him somewhere?

(00:07:22):
When I want to stay somewhere when I'm traveling, a friction is, who's willing to give me their room? I mean on principle, there's people who are willing to let me stay in their living room, but I don't know who they are. 

(00:07:31):
So those are frictions, and what the marketplaces are selling you is taking the friction away. That's what you're paying them for. And it's an important observation, because what that means is the marketplace's customers aren't just the people buying the rides, they're buying the listings. Actually, the hosts are Airbnb's customers, and the drivers are also Uber's customers. So both sides of the marketplace are the customers of the platform. Both sides depend on the platform to help the platform take that friction away. Because just like you want a place to stay or you want to ride, the driver is at Uber because he wants to earn money by taking people places. And the host is on Airbnb because they want to earn money by selling their listing.

(00:08:10):
I think this concept that we're making money by taking transaction costs away is such a fundamental idea that's misunderstood around marketplaces. That when you're an entrepreneur starting a marketplace or thinking about your business model, I think you can be wildly off if you forget that that's the thing that's fundamentally your value proposition. And then you asked about the role of data, and more broadly data science in marketplaces.

(00:08:36):
So it's an interesting thing, right? The example I always love to give are the ancient Agoras in Greece or Trajan's Market in Rome. When you look at pictures of these things, what really stands out to me is the rock. I mean, these things are made of stone. It's not like you were going to move a booth from one place to another place without moving a lot of rock from one place to another place. 

(00:09:00):
So you flash forward to 2023, and here we are with technology undergirding pretty much every kind of commerce now. And it means we can architect and re-architect the marketplace kind of on the fly, and we really are doing it all the time.

(00:09:14):
And these frictions that are getting taken away, they're getting taken away because of data and data science. So I really want to highlight three pieces of this for people, which I want you to think of them as a cycle. But to start with, let's just lay them out one at a time. 

(00:09:29):
One of them is finding people to match with. So that's the problem of, "I want to stay somewhere. Who is out there, who's willing to let me stay with them on a given timeframe?" And then if I'm a host, I have a listing. Who is out there, who's willing to stay at my place when I have it available? So that's finding matches.

(00:09:49):
Then there's making the match. And so here, going back to my time at oDesk, a big problem that we dealt with there was if I've got multiple applicants to my job, who should I hire? Who should I interview? It's a common problem we face in the real world, but now it's all remote. I don't meet these people in person. All I've got is this application they submitted to me. I need help triaging that. Okay? So that's helping make a match out of possible partners you can match with.

(00:10:16):
And then finally, we make matches. Well, what do the matches tell us, right? I mean, if you stay somewhere in Airbnb, you learn something about the host, you learn something about the listing. The host learns about you too. And that's all information that the marketplace should feed back in. So this is where we get to rating systems and feedback systems, even passive data collection, right? Did you leave your booking before you were supposed to leave? Well, maybe that's a sign that something didn't quite work out the way you wanted to work out. So that's passive data collection. Did you leave five stars? That's active data collection.

(00:10:47):
Get all this back in, and what does that do? Well, that lets us do a better job finding potential matches and make potential matches in the future. Every single thing I just said, finding potential matches, making matches, and then learning about those matches, and then cycling back again, that is the data science in marketplaces. 

(00:11:05):
And I feel like every marketplace that you could think of in any vertical has those three problems to deal with and relies on algorithms in data science to help them solve it. And in turn, that is I think really the underpinning of taking those frictions away.

Lenny (00:11:22):
Many founders try to start a marketplace business, think about marketplace opportunities where they don't exist. And there's often these recurring failures of types of marketplaces that just don't work in an area. I was just writing a couple ideas down while you were chatting like cleaners, getting cleaners as a marketplace doesn't seem to work ever. Car wash, there's a classic failure too. Getting tasks done for you on demand as a marketplace seems to not often work.

(00:11:46):
So this might be too big of a question, but I'm just curious if anything comes up of when someone is starting a marketplace or thinking about starting a marketplace business, what do you find are the most common flaws in, this is probably not going to work as a marketplace? 

Ramesh Johari (00:12:01):
That is such a fantastic question, and I want to preface what I say with a couple of comments. So one of them is that I've worked with a lot of different marketplace companies, but anything I say is pertaining to something more sensitive. I may not name the company over the course of the podcast.

(00:12:17):
But the other more important thing I want to say is that I'm a professor at Stanford, and there's a reason I'm not a successful scaled entrepreneur of marketplaces, and that's because I probably haven't unlocked the key to exactly the question you asked. But nevertheless, I have some thoughts on it.

(00:12:33):
The most important one is this. What I've found talking to people who want to start what they think is a marketplace is that they think too much about a marketplace before they're a marketplace. That in my view is the biggest failure mode.

(00:12:46):
You mentioned specific things, cleaners. I wonder about that, right? Is it something about the cleaning industry? It possibly is. I don't claim to be an expert on the microeconomics of the cleaning industry. But often it's not that, it's that I thought I was building a marketplace from the beginning, and that's not the way the world works. So I'll give you one vignette of this that I really like, and that's UrbanSitter. 

(00:13:09):
So first, UrbanSitter is a babysitting marketplace. We can talk about their whole life story, but I think what's most interesting is really the early days. And in the early days, what I found interesting, the way I found out about them actually is that we were stuck looking for some help. And I found out about this new platform where the clever thing was when you used to hire a babysitter, it's like pre Venmo days, you needed cash on hand. Because when the babysitter's done at the end of the day, they're usually high school suits or something. They want to get paid. They're not going to take your IOU, that you'll send them some check in the mail the next day.

(00:13:43):
And unfortunately, you often don't have cash. They don't take credit card. They're high school students. That was an incredible friction to address, which is literally just we accept credit card payments for babysitting. That's it, right?

(00:13:55):
Now from there, what happened is they took advantage of Facebook networks between parents and babysitters to build trusted introductions. So let's say my sitter wasn't available. I get to know sitters in the Facebook network of that sitter. And once they overcame that first thing to get some liquidity onto their platform, they could move towards asking, how do I solve for these frictions that I talked about earlier? How do I solve for helping people find potential matches? How do I solve for people making those matches, right? You can't do that when you don't have liquidity on your platform. It's silly to tell someone, "Hey, I'm really going to help you find all those drivers out there, even though I only have three drivers on my platform." That's not a friction you're solving for. 

(00:14:36):
So in their example, as they evolved, they actually shifted their monetization model away from billing specifically for this friction of allowing you to pay with credit cards, instead to now billing for how you were interviewing and contacting sitters. They had a two-part plan for that. One with a pay as you go menu, one with a more of a subscription option. But the key thing was either way, what you were paying for now was finding potential babysitters, not paying them with a credit card. That wasn't the key thing anymore.

(00:15:05):
So what's the moral there? The moral is a marketplace business never starts as a marketplace business, because what we think of as a marketplace business is something which at scale is removing the friction of the two sides finding each other. But when you start, you don't have that scale. 

(00:15:22):
So when you start, you had better be thinking, "What's my value proposition in a world in which I don't have that scaled liquidity on both sides?" And that's bespoke. It means different things. And in the case of oDesk, where I started, that initial thing was that remote work is a weird thing, because basically you've somehow got to know that this person who you're not next to is doing what you're asking them to do. And so the initial value proposition of oDesk was to provide tools for workers to verify they were working the hours and doing the things that they said they were doing, screenshots and various kinds of tracking.

(00:16:01):
And then in return for that, to be able to provide guarantees on both sides. So now the workers could say, "Hey, I worked what I said so I should get paid." And the employers could say, "I actually see that you worked what you said. And so I feel comfortable that I got what I paid for." That was the initial value proposition, is resolving a trust issue at a remote scale.

(00:16:21):
At that point, liquidity isn't the game. It's asking, what's a problem that people in this space are facing that I can deal with when I'm not a scaled marketplace? So again, with the cleaning industry, I can comment on that from personal experience, but otherwise, I think that's the way I would think about it. It's almost never about building a marketplace when you're building a marketplace.

Lenny (00:16:43):
That's very similar to the advice I always give marketplace founders, is 90% of your problems are going to be non marketplace specific problems. They're going to be the same problems any startup is going to have. How do I grow? It's going to be the same things you need to do.

Ramesh Johari (00:16:58):
So one thing you said was, "That's what you tell marketplace founders." I mean, something I've actually pressed hard on in my own way of thinking about this is that maybe we shouldn't talk about the concept of a marketplace founder. Really there's founders. And I think every entrepreneur... I mean one way to think about it, right? It's very hard to think about a human business endeavor that has not been disrupted by the potential for transactions to take place online.

(00:17:24):
And if that's the case, it means literally any founder is a marketplace founder. It'll be a choice they make after they grow as to whether they want to build a platform. I mean, to take a very hot recent example, no one in their right mind would've thought of OpenAI as a marketplace, but OpenAI is a marketplace now. They may not want to call themselves a marketplace, but they have plugins. The plugins are flooding that platform. People have played with it. It's not an easy thing to find the plugin you need for what you want to do. And that really is a two-sided thing now. There's the plugin creators and there's the users. And they may believe it, they may not believe it, but they are a marketplace. 

(00:18:04):
So I think a different way to think about it is every founder is a marketplace founder. It's going to be a choice they want to make for themselves of whether they want to become that platform. That's I think one. And two is because that's the case, I think one of the other challenges I find founders struggle with is you don't want to overcommit your future. And what I mean by that is that you're building up trust, and you're building up a sense of what kind of business you are in your early days. If you believe that this kind of platform future awaits you, or market platform future awaits you, there may be choices you're making early on that are tying your hands later. 

(00:18:41):
A great example of this is when oDesk started, it was because the tools they were providing were for ongoing monitoring of work. It's a very natural thing to say, "We will just take a constant fraction of the dollars that cross the platform." That all works well and good until after you become mature. Some of these relationships between worker and employer last a long time, and most of the value was generated now not so much because they're able to track each other, because the trust is now there, but because they found each other, because they're able to build that relationship through oDesk.

(00:19:16):
That meant that the longer that goes on, the less value the platform is adding into that relationship, but you're still pulling 10% of all the dollars. So what does that lead to? A word that most marketplace CEOs know well is disintermediation, which is where you were intermediating between the two parties, and now disintermediation means that essentially they're like, "Hey, we don't need you anymore."

(00:19:39):
My favorite example is we had some stuff delivered from IKEA by a Thumbtack worker once, and my wife is like, "Oh, thanks a lot. You're so reliable." He's like, "Hey, great. Here's my business card. Ever need me again? Just call the number on the back." And that was it. Thumbtack got their one lead gen, and then we didn't need the platform anymore. 

(00:19:57):
And I think this issue for oDesk meant that after they merged with Elance and became Upwork, they had to think a little bit about, "Okay, what's the monetization strategy we want to use? How do we address this issue that longer term relationships may disintermediate? And does that mean you need a pricing plan that actually takes that into account?" So early commitments in this case to a particular pricing scheme, particular monetization, can really tie your hands as you then realize later you actually are a platform.

Lenny (00:20:26):
I really like this message. It makes me think about Substack actually, which started as just a platform for newsletter writers. And then they're like, "How do we make this more valuable?" Because they take a cut of everyone's revenue. And they've actually invested heavily on helping drive demand to writers, for example, me. And at this point, over 80% of my subscribers come from Substack's network. And so they've built this marketplace element exactly as you're describing, where they just found, "Here's a pain point, writers need more subscribers. How do we help them drive subscribers?" So they figured out all these ways to create demand.

Ramesh Johari (00:20:58):
That's a really positive story, where they managed to actually expand the frontier of their business by enabling that network. For every one of those, there's unfortunately a lot of negative stories. I mean, one that I think is very painful is how eBay had a lot of challenges with its seller community as it introduced more and more fine-grained sources of fees.

(00:21:25):
And I think a lot of that, I mean there's many, many treatises at this point written on eBay, and their history, and how they got to the point that they're at. But I think one kind of simple thing I do want people to think about there is that the sellers on eBay who had matured with the platform, who had grown with it, had come to develop certain expectations about what their lives on that platform would look like. And it's understandable, because a lot of these businesses, they had built their livelihood on that platform. That was their entire business. 

(00:21:56):
So when you now reach in and you say, "I'm going to completely change the rules of the game in which your business model operates," from the perspective of those sellers, that's a breaking of a social contract that's been developed over a very long time. So I love the Substack example, because that's like, "Hey, let me amplify our social contract." But I think for every one of those, there's an eBay warning sign that you can trap yourself a little bit.

Lenny (00:22:24):
Just to close a loop on this really, I think important point, a lot of people listening to this are probably, "I'm a marketplace founder. I'm building a marketplace," are going to hear this and be like, "Oh shit, maybe I need to rethink how I think about what I'm doing." What would be your piece of advice to people like that? Is it focus on the friction point and it may be a marketplace solution, it may be a managed marketplace, it may be you own the supply? Is that the advice, or what would your advice be to someone that's like, "I'm building a marketplace"? How should they reframe their thinking?

Ramesh Johari (00:22:54):
Let's go back to kind of thinking about this concept of a marketplace of reducing friction. So the litmus test I like to give to someone who claims to me that they're building a marketplace business or they're a marketplace founder is do you have what I would call scaled liquidity on both sides of your platform? What does scaled liquidity mean?

(00:23:13):
What it means in lay terms... And by the way, I am a data scientist, and I love to think about these quantitatively. But fundamentally, if it doesn't pass the smell test, then you don't have to keep going with the data science. The smell test is scaled liquidity asks, "Do I have a lot of buyers and a lot of sellers on my platform, or do I only have one of these two, or do I have neither?" If you don't have both, you could call yourself whatever you want to call yourself, but at this moment in time, you're not a marketplace. If you have one, congratulations. You've won the game on one side of the market. And now you if you want, you have a choice point. You can lean into growth on the side that you're doing well with. You got a ton of users, ton of buyers? Great. Lean into it, get more buyers. That's one option. There's no shame in not being a marketplace. Scaling a business is scaling a business. If that's the way to do it, do it. 

(00:24:05):
If you decide you want to be a marketplace, then at that moment when you've got a lot of buyers, but not a lot of sellers, or a lot of sellers, but not a lot of buyers, the choice you're facing is, how do I take advantage of having that one side scaled to attract the other side? We can talk more about that, but there's a lot of ways to kind of hack that, to think about how... So to take Uber as an example, they would walk into a new city, and one thing that Uber was commonly known for doing this was back in the days when really Uber Black was the only service is they just hand out coupons for free rides at events, parties, things like that, to take people home. And that was a way of saying, "Hey, we're subsidizing the drivers in the city. That's our scaled side. Now we're going to use that subsidized driver base to attract riders." 

(00:24:49):
So that's like, how do you get that flywheel going? And again, many people have written about how to take liquidity, scaled liquidity on one side, and use it to attract the other side.

(00:24:59):
If you don't have either side, don't worry about it. Don't worry about being a marketplace. Worry about scaling one side. And in that world, it opens your visibility up completely into the advice of many, many startup advisors. People who have advice not so much about scaling a marketplace, but about scaling a startup. 

(00:25:22):
And I want to say you got to let the ego go at that point. It's fine to articulate to people that your vision of the future is to be a platform or marketplace. As I said, virtually every business is going to have that option at some point in the modern tech enabled economy anyway. So you're not saying something people don't already know when you tell an advisor or an investor that. But I do think you need to be humble enough at the starting point to recognize that there's no sense in talking about a marketplace if you don't have scaling on either side yet.

Lenny (00:25:52):
And then it becomes a question of a business model, unit economics of, can I build say a DoorDash, not as a marketplace? Can I just hire a bunch of people delivering? Is this even possible in a different route?

Ramesh Johari (00:26:06):
Yeah, that's a great point. One of the things I think that's useful for people to think about here that you're raising, at some level, it's kind of tied up I think with that question of whether I should have employees, or contract or freelance work on one side of the marketplace.

(00:26:23):
And that's actually a pretty old question in economics. The way we talk about it often is a distinction between a market or a firm. And one of the interesting puzzles in economics, Ronald Coase is a famous economist who thought about this is, "Well, if markets are so efficient, why do we need firms? If markets are efficient at matching labor up with things that need to get done, why would you ever need a firm?" And that's one of the earliest recognitions that transaction costs are a real thing. And that's one of the things that firms are solving for.

(00:26:52):
And I love what you're saying because what it's recognizing is, "Hey, for your frictions, the best resolution to that might not be to have a marketplace. It might actually be to have very tightly controlled labor." A good example of this actually, Stitch Fix, I think one of the things that's cool about Stitch Fix is the experience that people had early on with stylists at Stitch Fix.

Lenny (00:27:13):
I'm a happy customer, by the way. I think [inaudible 00:27:16].

Ramesh Johari (00:27:15):
Yeah, I think one of the great things about that experience is it felt magical to have someone who kind of got to know you. But that depends on a relationship that doesn't feel like a freelance relationship every single time you're going back. 

(00:27:31):
Another example that I would pull out is pretty much any healthcare platform. So for example, for physical therapy, it'd be weird if every time you went to a physical therapy platform, you just got randomly matched to whoever happened to be available then. So I think there's some curation that needs to happen of that relationship. Does that mean full employee? Maybe not. But it does mean you have to think a little bit about exactly as you brought up, what's the nature of curation of your labor pool?

Lenny (00:28:01):
Awesome. Okay, so let's come back to a point you made early on around the importance of data and the power of data in actually making your marketplace a lot more efficient and work more effectively. So say that you have a data scientist, or a data analyst, or someone that is helping you optimize your marketplace. Where do you often find the biggest leverage and opportunity for a data person to help you make your marketplace more effective?

Ramesh Johari (00:28:25):
This is an incredible question, right? Because I think I could answer it a number of different ways. One question I think that's kind of basic, it's just what should this person be doing? And I'm going to actually evade that question a little bit. I'm going to give some examples of what they could do, but I feel like that's one where context matters a lot. 

(00:28:45):
So as an example, at ride-sharing or grocery delivery marketplaces, pricing means actually, what do you pay for that ride? Or what do you pay for that delivery? So that's actually the price that's set at the moment you actually place the order. Just to be clear, by the way, if you order from DoorDash, I don't mean the price of the restaurant. I mean, what do you pay to DoorDash, right? What's that fee? Is there a surcharge, because it's surge or whatever? Okay, so that's a thing, right?

(00:29:11):
But that's not really a thing in a marketplace where the platform's not setting the prices. So in Airbnb, really hosts are the ones who are in charge of setting prices for their listings. 

(00:29:21):
One answer to your question is, if I'm in a place like Uber, Lyft, DoorDash, I want to have good data scientists thinking about pricing. Because that seems like something which should be heavily dependent on the instantaneous state of supply and demand in my marketplace. So that's one type of answer is, well do I need data scientists working on pricing? Do I need data scientists working on search? Why search? Because maybe in my marketplace, finding the needle in the haystack is really the biggest, highest friction problem. So maybe I need a lot more data scientists saying about search. 

(00:29:51):
That's what I'm going to evade. Okay? I'm going to focus more on something completely different, which is just a more philosophical point about what a data scientist does.

(00:30:00):
So in a lot of companies today, especially, a main thing that you ask data scientists to do is build what's called a machine learning model. Now, machine learning model even already can mean a lot of things to a lot of different people. I'm going to focus on something very concrete. You're asking them to predict something. 

(00:30:16):
When I started at oDesk, this is in 2012, one of the funny things about me is I started at oDesk because I'd had a academic career up to that point in about 10 years, just building mathematical models of things. I was not really very much of a data scientist up to that point. What I expected would happen is I'd go to industry and I'd be told, "Hey, look how important data is." And definitely my eyes were opened.

(00:30:40):
And one of the first things I was asked to think about is, well, okay, someone comes to oDesk, post a job, workers apply to that job. Predict which of these workers is most likely to be hired on that job. That was the narrow question. And so why is that a good question? Because we have a whole awesome set of tools now to solve that kind of a problem exactly. How do we do it? Take a lot of past data of past jobs, past applicants, past hires that were made. Then we ask these crazy big black box algorithms, "All right, do the best job you can predicting who's going to get hired on this job with these applicants." And we use that data to test how well these algorithms are doing. That's machine learning in 30 seconds basically. So we're working on this problem. Great. 

(00:31:25):
And then I kind of poked my head up a little bit. I go, "Why are we working? What is this going to do?" Well, it turns out the reason these kinds of things are important is they get used to make decisions. So what kind of decision do you make with that? Well, one thing you do is you say, "Well, if I could predict who's most likely to be hired, then I should just rank people based on that, and that would be a good matching algorithm. That'd be a good way to sort and triage applicants for employers when they're screening, trying to figure out who to interview, who to hire." Great. Sounds pretty natural.

(00:31:58):
And then you think about it a little bit, and this to me, it's such a passion project to get people to understand that this is why the humans in the loop that help us in businesses and making sense of data are so critical, is the following problem.

(00:32:15):
If you think about it a little bit, you realize what that algorithm is doing, it's really just picking up on patterns in past data. So yeah, that's great. This person is likely to be hired. But what we really want is something different. We're trying to add value by ranking people. 

(00:32:32):
So to give another example that's similar to this, when you're a marketing manager, and you've got a cracked data science team that's built a long-term value, lifetime value model for you, you're not going to get in trouble with anyone if you send your highest value promotions to the highest LTV customers, right? Who's going to blame you for that? Because you're like, "This person is worth a lot, and I sent them this promotion." Say that in your monthly report, nobody's going to give you a hard time.

(00:32:59):
But the problem with that way of thinking is actually predicting what their lifetime value is isn't really the question. The question is, how much more are they going to spend on my platform because I sent them that promotion?

(00:33:11):
That's a very different thing. It's a differential rather than an absolute. I'm not interested in their absolute LTV. I'm absolutely interested in the difference in their LTV because I sent them this promotion.

(00:33:21):
And when you look at it that way, what you realize can happen is picking up on patterns because of good predictions, right? Finding the people that have high LTV because you predicted that is very different than making good decisions, which is about saying the difference in their LTV is going to be higher because I sent them this promotion. 

(00:33:39):
I love this example, because I taught a class here at Stanford. It was like an executive education class. We had all the executives from a company in the room, and one of the people in the room was the chief marketing officer. And I just asked this question like, "Hey, okay, let's say you got this great LTV model, who would you send the promotions to?" It's like, "Definitely the highest LTV people," and there's a CMO in the room. And so it's a little bit of a delicate situation, like pushing back a little bit, right? 

(00:34:03):
I do want to be clear, there's reputational reasons you might do that anyway. I mean, I'm not trying to get away from that. But just to make the narrow point that predicting is about picking up patterns, but making decisions, it's about thinking about these differences.

(00:34:15):
Now, why is that important? Because we learn in high school, correlation is not causation. That's a phrase everybody has heard all over the place. What does that have to do with this? Well, when we teach people to build machine learning models, we're asking them to make predictions, we're asking them to find correlations. Prediction is inherently about correlation. But when we ask people to make decisions, we're asking them to think about causation. "If I make this decision, then will I actually increase the net value of my business? Will I have by sending the promotion, increased the likelihood that this person is going to spend more on my platform?"

(00:34:50):
And so the first and most important thing that I feel very strongly about in what would I get a data scientist to do is no matter who they are, even if it was that person in the weeds thinking about building this prediction model for hiring, get them to be thinking in the back of their mind always that their goal is to help the business make decisions. And that the distinction between causation and correlation matters a lot. We can talk a lot more about how does that play out in terms of their day-to-day work. But at least at a starting point, you have to recognize that the first step is always recognition that prediction isn't the same thing as making decisions.

Lenny (00:35:27):
So the takeaway here is as a data team and as a data scientist on the team, is help the business make predictions. Are there a couple more examples you could share of just what is an example of a decision that you think they often should be making and using data to help them with?

Ramesh Johari (00:35:41):
Maybe the right frame of reference for this, and the word that an academic would use is causal inference. So what we're changing from is machine learning to causal inference. So let's think that through in a couple of different use cases that are related to that marketplace data science flywheel I talked about earlier. Finding matches, making matches, and then learning about matches.

(00:36:04):
So finding matches, like you said, a core part of that is search and recommendation, and each of those relies on rankings. So I want to be able to rank order. Let's say I go do a search on Airbnb. On a rank order, the different listings in the marketplace, right? At some level, it's true that what I'm trying to do there is I'm trying to just predict, what are you going to like the most? 

(00:36:24):
But I think there's an important piece of that also, which is that I want to think a little bit about the distinction between two different ranking algorithms. That's the real decision that's being made. 

(00:36:35):
And when I think about the distinction between two different ranking algorithms, I don't want to be only comparing them in terms of how well they recreate the choices people made in the past. The way I'm really going to evaluate those is in my market, does one of those lead to better matches or more matches than the other one, right?

(00:36:54):
So Airbnb as a business, what are the most obvious core metrics? It's bookings and revenue. So you're going to want to ask a very basic question. If I use the ranking algorithm Lenny just developed last night versus the ranking algorithm Ramesh developed last week, does Lenny's ranking algorithm lead to more bookings than Ramesh's ranking algorithm?

(00:37:11):
And it's so important to put it that way starkly, because that's so different a question than, does Lenny's ranking algorithm do a better job of predicting over the last two years what bookings people made than Ramesh's ranking algorithm? So that's I think at that level.

(00:37:24):
Then we talked a little bit about ranking at the point of making a match, and I think that's where this hiring issue popped up. Because in the end, while we might have these predictive algorithms to rank who you're going to hire, that's not the important question.

(00:37:38):
Interestingly, the important question is actually to evaluate the quality of the match that's made. And we would do that through the next step of that flywheel. We'd ask ourselves, what ratings did they give back to that freelancer? Do they hire that freelancer again? So you're comparing two different algorithms not through their ability to recreate the past, but their ability to make matches in the future that can be objectively evaluated to say, "Hey, I increased the value of the business. I actually made better matches this way." And then rating systems, I think we could talk quite a bit about a similar phenomenon there too.

Lenny (00:38:12):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing and feature management platform built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams. Companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp, and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments.

(00:38:28):
Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth and for understanding the performance of new features. And Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does. 

(00:38:42):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most was our experimentation platform, where I could set up experiments easily, troubleshoot issues, and analyze performance all on my own. Eppo does all that and more, with advanced statistical methods that can help you shave weeks off experiment time, and accessible UI for diving deeper into performance, and out of the box reporting that helps you avoid annoying prolonged analytic cycles.

(00:39:05):
Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insights with your team, sparking new ideas for the A/B testing flywheel. Eppo powers experimentation across every use case, including product, growth, machine learning, monetization, and email marketing. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com/lenny, and 10x your experiment velocity. That's geteppo.com/lenny.

(00:39:29):
Yeah, I would actually love to talk about rating systems, but there's an implication in everything you're describing of running an experiment versus looking at what would've happened in the previous world made. You've made change, run an experiment, see if it actually makes an impact on bookings and revenue. And that leads me to a question I wanted to ask, which is with experiments, there's kind of this classic challenge, and always elephant in the room of if you just run a bunch of experiments, you're kind of going to micro optimize, lead to these local maxima, and you may miss big opportunities and big unlocks if you're just extremely experiment driven.

(00:40:04):
You spend a lot of time thinking about experimentation. What have you learned or what advice do you have for people to either be less worried about optimizing and missing something big, or just finding a balance with running experiments, but also creating opportunity to find a huge new opportunity?

Ramesh Johari (00:40:21):
Yeah. First of all, I'm really glad you broached the E word. I was dancing around it, and I'm really glad that we talked about experiments. Because yeah, one of the big lessons of this recent conversation we've been having is just, how could you possibly know that difference without doing something like experimenting? 

(00:40:38):
So yeah, I am a big believer in experiments. I mean, I'll just lay those cards on the table. I love working with businesses that think experiments are important to helping make good decisions.

(00:40:49):
Now all that said, I am also someone who feels pretty strongly about this exact issue that you're raising. It's just, you can't experiment your way out of everything. 

(00:40:57):
And one frame I like to give people is that although you might say you're an experiment driven business, some businesses will proclaim, "We literally test everything." What that kind of leaves aside a little bit is there's a lot of degrees of freedom in what it means to test everything.

(00:41:15):
Because ultimately, what's getting built and tested are choices that are made through the organizational structure, the data scientists, the PMs, the engineers, everybody's on... Before we're running experiments, we're actually thinking about even what's worth experimenting, what designs are we coming with? So that's one.

(00:41:33):
And the other big one is, how long do we run these experiments? Okay, that's a big choice. And what I generally believe, and I think there's a paper we can link to later that I'll point your readers to as well that... Not my paper, from some folks at Microsoft.

(00:41:49):
What I generally believe is we're risk averse on both these two dimensions, that what people decide to test in a world that has promoted experimentation for everything tends to be more incremental by design. Okay? And we'll come back to that actually, answer the because in a second. So that's one. And two is people tend to run experiments for a long time, and probably longer than they should.

(00:42:14):
Now, what do I mean by these two things? So what's interesting to me about this dynamic is experiments don't live in a vacuum. Companies have incentives. And in companies that really go all in on experimentation, one of the things that gets wrapped up in that is the incentives around experiments. Because if you go all in on experiments, a common thing you'll see is data scientists get judged based on how many wins they had that quarter. How do you get more wins? 

(00:42:43):
Well, it's easier to get wins when you're being incremental. And because it's important to have wins, you have to run them long enough to demonstrate that they're really wins. You're less willing to cut something off in exchange for trying something riskier.

(00:42:56):
So the big lesson of this Microsoft paper, it's called A/B Testing with what's called Fat Tails, which in lay terms just means you're running a business where there's potentially big opportunities out there if you look at the effects of the experiments that you run. There's a couple of lessons there about both trying a lot more stuff that's not all risk averse, and not necessarily running everything for so long. So really getting velocity up.

(00:43:20):
So you could see that there's a big incentive problem there, because the culture that says it's okay to fail big actually requires changing the terminology of wins. This is one of the things I hate most in A/B testing, I have to say. I get where it comes from. Experimentation was never historically in science about winners and losers. It'd be weird if it Ronald Fisher who's kind of the father of experimentation with his agriculture experiments talked about winners. I don't think that's necessarily how he talked about things. Experimentation is always very hypothesis driven. It's about, what are you learning?

(00:43:53):
And that's really an important distinction because what it means is if I go with something big, risky, and it, "fails," meaning that doesn't win. Nevertheless, if I was being rigorous about what hypotheses that's testing about my business, I'm potentially learning a lot.

(00:44:11):
So a great example of this kind of thing is that there's an important feature of marketplaces is badging. So sometimes, it's really important to have badges on your top-rated profiles or whatever, when people are searching. 

(00:44:26):
And without going too far into the details, a common finding with badges is that badges you think are going to be great actually turn out to be terrible. And one reason they're terrible is they focus too much attention on the badged folks, and pull too much attention away from the unbadged folks.

(00:44:44):
And if we judge that only in terms of winners and losers, you throw the baby out with the bath water, you're like, "Well that badging idea was terrible. So ditch that, no badges."

(00:44:51):
But that's not what it's telling you. It's teaching you something about how inventory is being reallocated, how attention's being redirected through the badges. And you really want to think not in terms of winning and losing, but learning.

(00:45:05):
So learning is a win. And I feel that that's a cultural thing fundamentally. It's very hard to somehow attach dollars and cents at the top to data scientists running experiments that fail, but learn. And ultimately, I think getting into that space where you experiment more, meaning you don't run all your experiments for quite as long and you accept the willingness to try experiments that are into the tails where you might fail bigger is a cultural thing. It's about saying that, "We're allowing that to be part of our social contract with our data scientists," or actually our employee contract with our data scientists, that not everything is just about how many launches you had and how many wins there were.

(00:45:45):
It's okay to say, "That's how I want to use experimentation," but if you're going to use it that way, then I would say don't be a, "We experiment everything," business. Because then I think you need some other way to deal with these big changes that teach the whole company a lot, but maybe can't fall into the incentives you've created for your data scientists.

Lenny (00:46:04):
This badging example is, I don't know if you're referring to the Airbnb example, but I actually led the launch of Superhost at Airbnb, which is the ultimate badge on Airbnb. And there was a lot of concern from the data team that it would destroy the marketplace, because they've built, as you've described, this very well-crafted ranking algorithm, with just a prediction of exactly as you described, which listings that guest is most likely to book and be successful booking. And then we're about to throw a badge on random listings in the results. And so this one data scientist on our team's like, "No, we can't do this. This is insane. We're going to destroy it all."

(00:46:42):
And we still went ahead with it. We ran an experiment showing the badge to some people and some not, actually, it was no impact at all. Which Superhost itself had no impact at all on the business as far as we could tell initially, which is also bittersweet because it felt like, "Why did we even work on this thing?" There was a slight benefit where a host felt better, they felt more satisfied with being a host, but I went exactly through what you described, so that's pretty funny.

Ramesh Johari (00:47:11):
Without necessarily going into the weeds on the data science of Superhost, I think there's a lot wrapped up in what you said. I guess another thing I'll say is that I'm a big believer that you don't throw your understanding of the business out the window when you process experiment results. And it's partly, I guess what I mean by this is data science is really about accumulation of evidence. It's never about one finding in isolation. And so another kind of trap I think is to sometimes say, "Well, I hit stat sig on my A/B test, green light. It's all go."

(00:47:47):
And I think you had Ronny Kohavi on your show, and he made a similar point that there are different levels of evidence, and just having an outlier A/B test that goes against everything you believe about your business doesn't mean that you somehow have controverted all your knowledge. And I think that's one side of it.

(00:48:05):
The other thing is you can't always measure everything that's important that's needed to really develop a full sense. So with Superhost, one of the things that's hard to measure is the long-term impact of Superhost. Because in the short run, Superhost causes a rebalancing of inventory. There's going to be winners and losers. Part of Superhost is actually about retaining hosts that get the badge over a longer period of time. Recognizing that hypothesis actually says something about maybe how long the experiment needs to be run or what kinds of data analyses need to be done. 

(00:48:38):
And in the end, if you can't do that, you can't run it long enough, or you can't do that data analysis due to sparsity of data or lack of data to address the question, it matters what you bring to the table. What are your beliefs about that?

(00:48:51):
So what I like to tell people to do there is I like to push people to be what's called quantified rather than data-driven, which is, okay fine, some things we can't measure. But maybe you've got a leadership team with different beliefs about what they think the retention value of Superhost is going to be, and they might be all over the place.

(00:49:10):
You can process your experiment results in the context of these competing beliefs. It's almost like a prediction market kind of a thing. And start asking, "Well okay, if this is what we believe about our business, this is what the data is telling us out of the experiment, let's put those two together and ask, is this enough for us to make the bet that we're still going to go with it?" Even though maybe that short-term test you ran was flat.

Lenny (00:49:31):
That's actually exactly how I think of Superhost looking back. It was a great idea. I'm really happy. I can't even imagine Airbnb without that, even though there's no evidence, at least initially, that it made any impact. I'm guessing they looked at it again, and maybe there's something that came out of it. But even if it had no impact, it just feels like it made the marketplace better. And that was a big learning for me. It doesn't need to always drive a metric that you can measure. There's just like, this is the way it should work.

Ramesh Johari (00:49:59):
So one of the reasons the thing you said happens is because marketplaces are a little bit like a game of whac-a-mole, okay? And what I mean by that is, so narrowly in the context of Superhost, because you're redirecting attention to some hosts at the expense of... It's not even obvious if bookings can really go up. Maybe you get lucky and maybe you get a bunch more bookings. One reason you probably wouldn't expect that in the first place is there's only a limited number of Superhosts. How many more bookings are they going to be absorbing because of all this extra attention? And you're taking attention away from other people. Without doing any data analysis, my prior would've been that booking should probably go down.

(00:50:33):
And one example that I came across with one of the companies I worked with that I love is we were working together over a period of time, and in a month, we looked at some of the data and it suggested that our new supply side was having a pretty bad experience. Say, "We got to do something about this."

(00:50:55):
So what we decided to do is build some custom bespoke features that were really going to direct them to more experienced folks on the other side of the market. Good. And then lo and behold, pretty soon those metrics start to look better. But then we're looking at it, we're like, "Wait a second. Now the existing folks on the other side are having a worse experience."

(00:51:12):
So you kind of whiplash around. You're like, "Wait a second, we better do something about that." So we take them, we try to match them up with the more experienced folks. And now suddenly a month after that you're like, "Wait a second." And your metrics just keep moving around.

(00:51:24):
And that's because the whac-a-mole game here is ultimately, a lot of marketplace management is moving attention and inventory around. Sometimes you get lucky and you really expand the pie for everybody. But I think Servaes Tholen, who was CFO at Upwork that I got to know there and then went to Thumbtack later, he had this line when he came to visit our class that I love, which is, "You have to recognize when you run marketplaces that many of the changes that are most consequential create winners and losers. And rolling with those changes is about recognizing whether the winners you've created are more important to your business view than the losers you've created in the process." And it's a hard reality, because nobody likes to articulate the idea that a feature change is hurting some of the people in your marketplace. But because of this fundamental constraint baked into how marketplaces work, many of the things that we would choose to do and the reallocation they create can't necessarily create observed high expanding wins in the short run. You're often making bets that that's where you're headed, partly through the reallocation that you're doing right now.

(00:52:30):
And so I think that's interesting about Superhost to me is that partly points to thinking about, what's the objective you would've defined, the metric you would've defined in the short run that captures this idea of a trade-off?

Lenny (00:52:42):
That's a great way to think about it. I wanted to come back to this idea you're sharing of maybe you should run experiments more quickly, not wait for stat sig, have a culture of learning versus impact. In practice, it's very difficult, because people are measured by impact. There's performance reviews, there's promotions, there's how much impact did this team drive, are going to look at their experiment results? You've worked with a lot of marketplace companies, a lot of different companies. Is there anything you've seen about something you could do to help the company shift and actually work this way, while also recognizing success, and who's doing great, who's not, which team's driving impact, who's not?

Ramesh Johari (00:53:22):
Interestingly, it's actually an active area of research for me now. What I mean by active area of research is I care a lot about the incentives that we create for data science through how we set up reward mechanisms. So there's a couple things I think that could be helpful, that are maybe there may be a little bit less about... Maybe I'm not going to directly answer the question you ask, because I think that's a hard one, right? I think I recognize that measurement on impact is critical. Well, let me answer that actually from the most obvious way first. I think there's a cultural issue here that's really critical. 

(00:53:56):
One of the things I often find is that my PhD students, our PhD students here often go off and get great data scientist jobs. And in one sense, they're doing amazing stuff. They apply really technically sophisticated methods. But when I look at the problems they're working on, they're often more at the margins of the business than they should be. 

(00:54:13):
And it's a cultural thing. It's basically because if you're measured narrowly on impact and that's all anyone sees around you, then it's very hard to engage with the creative aspect of business change and the strategic aspects of business change. 

(00:54:26):
So the cultural aspect there is, I think it's partly incumbent on the leaders to expect something more of their data scientists. And what I mean by expect more is that you expect them to do more than deliver narrowly defined, statistically rigorous results to you in their reports. You're actually expecting them to talk also about what they're learning about the business in the process. So where that's headed is there's this concept of being hypothesis driven, which is like the technical phrase. What does that mean? Again, in a more lay sense.

(00:54:58):
What it means is tests aren't going to be defined only in terms of winners and losers, that each test should also say something about what will we learn about a business flow, a funnel, preferences of the guests, preferences of the hosts. What will we learn about their demand elasticity if we're changing prices around? These kinds of things. So it's possible to articulate in an experiment doc, a launch doc, what are the hypotheses that are being tested? So that's one thing I would say is just culturally, setting the norms that learning is part of the discourse, and it's expected actually I think is important.

(00:55:33):
But the other thing I would say that's maybe a little bit more about programmatically, what could a data science platform team do? A funny thing about experiments is that we throw past learning away effectively. And this is just an artifact of how we analyze experiments, that the statistical methods used typically, P-values, confidence intervals, these fall into a branch of statistics known as frequentist statistics. And the idea behind frequentist statistics without being overly technical is just I let the data speak for itself. There's no beliefs brought to the table about where that data came from.

(00:56:10):
But if you think about this in a company, in A/B testing a company, it's a weird thing, right? Because I might've run 1,000 A/B tests in the past on this exact same button, or call to action, or color, and now I am going to completely ignore that and focus only on this. 

(00:56:23):
So there's ways to take the past into account, to build what's called a prior belief before I run an experiment, and now take the data from the experiment, connect it with the prior, to come up with a conclusion of, "Okay, in light of the past plus this experiment, what's it telling me about the future?" And that falls broadly under the category of what's called Bayesian A/B testing. 

(00:56:46):
So that's one of the things I think can help culturally, weirdly. It's a super technical thing, but I think it can help culturally, because what it's doing is it's now rewarding people for contributing information to that prior. And I think it then becomes possible to say, "Your experiment that failed actually moved our prior." And that's an important thing, because by doing so, you're now altering how we're going to think about this flow or this pricing plan in all future experiments.

(00:57:14):
So there's an information positive externality, positive network effect that's generated for the rest of your business if I can somehow encode what you learned into the analysis of future experiments. So this is one thing. There's strong connection between the culture and incentives of A/B testing and the ability to actually incorporate past learning into these prior beliefs.

Lenny (00:57:35):
I love that you're doing research in this area. We should bring you back when you've completed it and have the ultimate answer for everyone to change how they operate. 

Ramesh Johari (00:57:42):
Yeah, one of the great things about professors is we never complete anything and never have ultimate answers.

Lenny (00:57:47):
Oh boy.

Ramesh Johari (00:57:47):
Yeah, I'll do my best though.

Lenny (00:57:50):
This touches on a really interesting concept that you shared with me around how, just learning isn't free. People think that they could just learn a bunch of stuff and there's not a cost to it. I'd love for you to just chat a bit about what that means.

Ramesh Johari (00:58:02):
Let me start with an anecdote, that I just absolutely love this anecdote. I use it every year in class. So I was talking to a real estate platform, and they had a marketing data science manager who's basically responsible, as many marketing managers are, for allocation of ad spend across different channels.

(00:58:22):
And what they discovered had happened at the end of the year is in one hand, the team had done great, but the manager had held out some subset of arriving visitors, not showing them any of the innovations they were making.

Lenny (00:58:39):
Like a holdout group? 

Ramesh Johari (00:58:40):
Yeah, exactly. What's called a holdout group in experimentation. And one thing about this holdout is it wasn't authorized. That's not the way things are supposed to work. They've got their ad spend, allocate out your ad spend, great. So at the end of the year, they looked at the hole out and they're like, "Wow, that cost us a couple million dollars, something in that range, and it's not a trivial amount of money. What's the deal? What were you thinking?" Basically. And of course the answer was, "Well, I get that I cost you that much, but number one, now you know what my team's worth. And number two, you would never have had that answer unless I'd done that on my own."

(00:59:16):
Now, why is that so powerful? I think what I find so interesting about experiments is that when you don't know something, it seems not even a question that you would allocate some of your samples to all options, right? Treatment and control. I have two different ways of doing something. I don't know which one's better, so of course I'll give some samples to each. After the fact you're like, "Treatment was better. What the heck were we thinking? Why'd we give all those samples to control? That doesn't make any sense now." There's this great Seinfeld clip where he mentions getting a bill at the end of a large luxurious meal, and people stare at the bill like, "We're not hungry now. Why'd we order all this food?" So it's the same thing. I mean, you know treatment's better now. Why'd you waste all those samples on control?

(00:59:59):
And I think that is such a powerful observation that you have to put yourself in the frame of reference of when you didn't have the answer. And at that moment, what you're essentially saying to yourself is that it's worth paying to learn the answer. I think it sounds obvious the way we're saying it now, or this anecdote of the marketing manager and the holdout sounds obvious. What's culturally not baked in I think is that idea. And the reason I say it's not culturally baked in, by the way, is because of the language of winners and losers. Because if we use that language, we're implicitly saying is that we wasted time when we ran an A/B test on loser. If I reward you for shipping winners, then what I'm really telling you is all the time that you spent testing out failures was wasted time.

(01:00:46):
And I think, of course, you don't want to keep data scientists around who regularly are just generating failures. That's not my point. 

(01:00:54):
But my point is there's a disconnect there. On one hand, we can all look at the story of this marketing manager and chuckle at it. And yet, every day we're instantiating language and processes that are reinforcing that same theme, which is essentially trying to say to you, "If you're wasting samples on things that don't ultimately end up being a winner, then the act of doing so is a failure."

(01:01:16):
So I really feel that that idea that you have to pay to learn, again, it's a cultural thing, but it's also an education issue for businesses are populated by people of all stripes. Not everybody comes from a data science or experimentation background. And this idea that learning is costly is not natural, actually. It's not natural as a matter of human nature. It's certainly not natural as a matter of running a business.

Lenny (01:01:41):
I love that example of the real estate platform where it's very viscerally, clearly cost. They lost because they didn't roll out experiments to this group for a long time. Such a good example of this idea in action. 

(01:01:55):
You mentioned star ratings. I know you spent a lot of time on designing rating systems. Sorry, I didn't mean to imply star ratings. That's just one implementation. Rating systems in general.

(01:02:05):
So maybe just to keep it focused, say a marketplace founder is trying to decide and design how they do ratings, and reviews, and things like that. What's a couple pieces of advice you'd give them for how to do this correctly? And is there a model marketplace you'd point them to like, "These guys really do it really well"? And I know it's super specific based on the marketplace, but is there one just like, "They really nailed it"?

Ramesh Johari (01:02:30):
Oh man, that's a tough one. I think I'll answer the second part first. I don't feel like anyone's really nailed this. Yeah, I think there's a lot of innovation that's happened, but I think fundamentally, we're still playing with the same kind of tools that we had when eBay and Amazon first started thinking about how to do rating systems ages ago. 

(01:02:48):
And part of the reason we haven't nailed it is because there's a lot of dynamics in play that lead to what's called rating inflation, where if you look at ratings over time in the marketplace... One of my colleagues, John Horton, who was a professor at MIT and has worked very closely with Upwork, we worked together when I was at oDesk, he was the staff economist there. He's written a couple of really nice papers with this empirical phenomenon that over time, you see the median rating inflating, let's say on marketplaces like oDesk, like Uber, like any of these.

(01:03:16):
And there's a lot of reasons for this, but one of them is just that there's a reciprocity issue, which is it's effectively, from your perspective, it's kind of costless if someone says to you, "Hey, please leave me a nice rating." And if you're seeing them or you're interacting with them, most people don't want to be mean. So that happens. 

(01:03:35):
But there's another aspect of it, which is norming. As the ratings in the marketplace go up, they get normed, so that now you're in a condition, you're like, "A four star rating. I'm really screwing this person over." Whereas maybe when the marketplace started, you didn't think that. 

(01:03:47):
So definitely one thing that we worked on in our research was to think about renorming, the meaning of some of these labels. And renorming could mean something like rather than the star ratings just being poor to excellent, the top rating has actually exceeded expectations. You could go one step further and you could say, "How did this compare to this experience you had in the past that you rated really highly?" And Airbnb had something like this in place, where they would actually ask you to compare, or ask you questions about expectations.

(01:04:19):
I find that that's really valuable because it's easier for people to say, "That was good but didn't exceed my expectations. That was good, but definitely not better than this amazing stay I had two months ago," than it is to say, "Well, I'm going to ding this person and give them four stars." So that's one issue.

(01:04:36):
And I think another thing I want to point out for any marketplace founder is that something you want to be really careful about is the concept of averaging and whether are the implications of averaging. And that's because a default for many marketplaces is to just average the ratings that people get. It feels very natural, right? Lenny's got five ratings, let me average them.

(01:04:57):
And that actually has some pretty important distributional consequences for the marketplace. Distributional in the sense of who wins, who loses. And that's because if you're averaging and you're really established on a platform, think of a restaurant on Yelp with 10,000 reviews, it's irrelevant what the next review is. It doesn't matter. Nothing's moving it at that point.

(01:05:17):
If you're new and you break into that market, and your first review is negative, you might be completely screwed. In fact, there's some early work on eBay that showed that if your first rating's negative, that could actually immediately cause an 8% hit on your immediate expected revenue, say nothing of long-term consequences. Subsequent work has found that that's a significant indicator of potential exit from the platform, just because now it's very hard to find work. And some platforms do things like maybe they won't show your ratings until you've accumulated a few.

(01:05:46):
But in the end, this kind of distributional fairness aspect of averaging is pretty significant. And one of the recent papers that we've written is trying to get platforms to think a little bit about that. There's ways to address that interestingly, through the same concept of a prior. And the prior basically says hey, if someone comes into the marketplace and instead of averaging them, I average them together with a prior belief, then maybe what that prior belief does, it says, "Yeah, you got one negative rating, but maybe you got a little bit unlucky," and maybe my prior belief is something which actually pulls your rating up a little bit and allows me to still have you alongside others in the marketplace to give you a chance at getting work, getting rides, etc.

(01:06:28):
So I believe pretty strongly in this kind of distributional fairness element of designing rating systems. I think it's been understudied. And I'll say in general actually, I think rating systems are understudied, which to me is astonishing. Because the biggest change from those Agoras and Trajan's Market elements of those kinds of markets, to me the biggest change is that we get to see what happened with our matches.

(01:06:52):
So as a data scientist working on marketplaces, I feel like it's incredible that more of us don't spend our time thinking about what we're learning from the matches, and what these rating systems are telling us, and what the impact of that is on who wins and who loses in these markets, kind of thinking about the social implications of these things. So that's something I'm pretty passionate about.

Lenny (01:07:14):
I also led the review system flows for a while at Airbnb, and one of the things I'm most proud of is launching what we call double-blind reviews where you don't see the other person's review until you leave your review. The intention was to create more honesty and more accurate reviews.

(01:07:32):
It turned out the biggest impact was review rate went up, because people get this email, "Ramesh left you a review. If you want to see it, should leave a review." And that really increased review rate, which gave us more data. And it was a really fun experiment to work on. 

Ramesh Johari (01:07:44):
There's a great concept in the literature on rating systems called the sound of silence, which is this idea that there's a lot of information in ratings that are not left. So Steve Tadelis, who's a professor at Berkeley, he had a really nice paper with some folks at eBay talking about what they called effective percent positive, where rather than normalizing just by the ratings, they normalized by including ratings that weren't left. And what you found was this was much more predictive of downstream performance of a seller. So there's a lot of information in that lack of a response. So it's cool that you're able to get more of that out.

Lenny (01:08:23):
So much easier just to not leave a review than leave a bad review. Right? The downside to you is just much better. Oh man, marketplaces are so fascinating. I could see why a founder would want to be a marketplace founder, because it's just such an interesting space. And hearing your feedback of, no, you're not a marketplace founder. Let's think about the problem you're solving. And it might be a marketplace, might change people's minds. Also, I feel like there's a podcast episode in every topic we touched on. I know we just scratched the surface a lot of things.

(01:08:52):
I know you got to run. Before we get to our lightning round, is there anything else you wanted to highlight, touch on, leave people with that are maybe working on marketplaces, thinking about a marketplace?

Ramesh Johari (01:09:01):
I think one of the high level points I would make, and like you said, there's an entire podcast in this topic, is that I think people want to imagine LMs and AI driven data science automating out large parts of what it means to do data science in industry. And I think that's probably the wrong perspective. In some mundane sense, that's true. It's easier for me to code than it used to be before. It's easier for me to develop visualizations than it used to be. I can make dashboards faster. So programmatically, I think it's true in some basic sense.

(01:09:35):
But what I believe pretty strongly, and I teach data science here, and my students are asked to use LMs and generative AI on a weekly basis on all their assignments. So I've got an up close and personal beat on this, but I believe very strongly actually is what AI has done for us is it's massively expanded the frontier of things we could think about our problem, hypotheses we could have, maybe things we could test. It's just an astronomical explosion of explanations, and ideas, and principle.

(01:10:06):
And I really think actually what that does is puts more pressure on the human, not less. I think it becomes more important for humans to be in the loop in interacting with these tools to drive the funneling down process of identifying what matters, at all levels. That ranges from you're carrying out a data scientific analysis, and now because you've got these tools, you can hypothesize 10 explanations, maybe 100 explanations. Which of those are you going to focus attention on? What are you going to tell other people to focus their attention on? To you're running experiments, used to have 10 creatives you're testing for a marketing campaign, you got 1,000 creatives, you're testing for that marketing campaign. Maybe that completely changes the game of what it means to run an experiment. What are you actually looking for now? How do you evaluate that you found something that was good enough?

(01:10:52):
And I think these questions are not getting enough attention. I think people are looking for the automated tool that really cuts the human out. But what I've seen so far, and again, who knows? By 2024, I might have a totally different answer for you. I don't think so. But at the moment, what I see is that humans have actually become far more important to the productive data science loop, not far less.

Lenny (01:11:16):
Such an important point. I feel like we need to add AI corner to this podcast where we always think about, how does AI impact what we're talking about on this podcast?

Ramesh Johari (01:11:23):
Yeah, I can see that. I totally see that. 

Lenny (01:11:25):
Okay, we might start doing that. Ramesh, with that, we've reached a very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions for you. Let's try to knock through them so you can go teach your class. Are you ready?

Ramesh Johari (01:11:35):
I am ready.

Lenny (01:11:36):
All right. What are two or three books you've recommended most to other people

Ramesh Johari (01:11:40):
When it comes to books, I have one I love that I start with always, which is How to Lie with Statistics. It's a tiny book, Darrell Huff from 1954, which is just for anyone that likes data at any level, it's such a fun read. It's a great book. 

(01:11:55):
The second thing I recommend to people, and actually this is true even for people who are not expert, is David Freedman was a statistician at Berkeley who passed away in the 2000s, early 2000s. His writing was fantastic in getting us to think hard about process. He was especially fond of what he called shoe leather statistics, where you rolled your sleeves up, you got on the ground, boots on the ground, really getting in there, really trying to understand your data.

(01:12:27):
His writing is fantastic, his explanations are fantastic. He has a few different books at different levels I think people would love reading. Most importantly, what I like about it is he puts such emphasis on driving evidence and understanding of your processes that generate data. And I find often, data scientists don't even look at examples.

(01:12:44):
So at oDesk, it meant are you looking at actual jobs, and what's actually going on in your product before you're trying to do data science on it? So I think that's a Freedman insight, Freedman mantra, and so his writing is great.

(01:12:58):
The last one I was going to mention has nothing to do with data science or anything. It's called Four Thousand Weeks by Oliver Burkeman. I'm not a huge self-help type person, but I really like this book a lot. I think it's a little bit stoic in its approach, like stoic philosophy. But the basic point is you're only on earth somewhere in the neighborhood of 4,000 weeks, and my wife and I have this term we call infinite Q, which is no matter what you think you get done on a given day, more stuff's going to just keep coming in.

(01:13:26):
And he basically says that recognizing that is liberating. Because once you recognize it, it doesn't matter what you do. You're always going to have too much to do. There's no point in stressing out about having too much to do. And just that small shift of mindset than puts a lot more attention on the usual thing people worry about, which is, where do I want to prioritize my time? So he has a great way of writing about it, some concrete rules of thumb to help manage that way of thinking. And yeah, I think it's a great book.

Lenny (01:13:52):
What is a favorite recent movie or TV show?

Ramesh Johari (01:13:55):
I am a climber, and one movie that I really liked was The Alpinist. I know a lot of people have seen Free Solo, but for anyone that kind of likes that genre, I would recommend they watch The Alpinist.

(01:14:06):
I think climbing is an interesting sport because has very much a psychological aspect of it. And I think that movie is pretty good at this meta level where you reflect a little bit on, what does it mean to make a movie about people who are obviously putting themselves into such risky situations? So I really enjoyed that.

(01:14:25):
On TV, we've been watching Only Murders in the Building, but I'm enough episodes behind right now that I probably won't say anything more, because I am trying to avoid any spoilers and I'm sure there's people out there trying to do the same. So great show though on Hulu.

Lenny (01:14:39):
What's a favorite interview question that you like to ask candidates that you're hiring?

Ramesh Johari (01:14:43):
I interview people probably that are a little bit different than most of your podcast listeners. But that said, there's one question I like to ask a lot, and that's if you imagine... Often in our interviews in academia, whether it's grad students or faculty will ask people about their plans.

(01:15:00):
And what I like to ask people is, "Okay, now imagine everything works out, all the challenges you're facing work out, all your plans work out, everything hits the top end of your vision for what this could be. What do you imagine is the impact of having done that? Who's being impacted by that? Why is that a big deal that happened?"

(01:15:20):
And I find that's a really valuable question to ask, because first of all, many people haven't thought about that. We're so short-term focused, we don't even think, "Boy, if everything worked out, what would be the big deal because of what I did?" Startup founders tend to be better at this than most people obviously.

(01:15:35):
But another reason I like it is because you will find in that conversation that their vision expands a little bit of additional spheres that are touched or impacted by what they're thinking about doing. So on both sides, it's kind of a revealing question, I think. So I find that important for my line of work, but my hunch is that might be useful for some of your listeners too.

Lenny (01:15:57):
Yeah, such a unique perspective on interviewing, versus most of the guests that I interview in tech company.

Ramesh Johari (01:16:03):
Yeah, normally there's a coding question, right? I should say I would never ask a coding question post November 2022 after we got AI to help us code. I think it's a superpower.

Lenny (01:16:15):
AI corner. What is a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really like?

Ramesh Johari (01:16:22):
I also really like cycling. And I'm not ashamed to admit that I think that e-bikes are the greatest thing for cycling. Admittedly, I'm late forties, so maybe I'm the right target demographic too. But yeah, I love my e-road bike. It's great, because it's not one of those with a throttle, you have to work, but it kicks in just when you're on your sixth hill and you don't want to go up the last hill anymore on the way home. So yeah, that's amazing. I think that's just transformative for people that like cycling, but have busy lives.

(01:16:51):
And I think another one that my son who's 10 roped me into actually, is we were in Santa Cruz browsing at a kitchenware shop of all places, and he saw an outdoor pizza oven, a tiny portable one. And he just did research for two weeks and insisted we get one. 

(01:17:07):
So he got one over the summer, and after we got it, he refused to eat pizza out anymore as a 10-year-old. So maybe that's the best thing I could say about the quality of pizza you can get from a home outdoor portable pizza oven.

Lenny (01:17:20):
Oh my God, I'm hungry. I am going to go have to get some pizza now. What is a favorite life motto that you like to repeat to yourself, share with folks, find useful in your day-to-day?

Ramesh Johari (01:17:31):
A lot of my work involves talking to students of all stripes. And I guess these students go on to be data scientists, go on to be founders, and a lot of them go in the tech industry. So maybe in that sense, that advice is relevant. 

(01:17:43):
My main thing I tell people is slow down. I think what I've found has been happening, is we're so convinced that speed is the way you're going to find the right answer, that I just don't think we slow down to develop meaningful mental models of the things we're doing. That's certainly true in the research projects I work on. It's consistently true when I talk to people in business, and I ask them about their... By mental model, I just mean if you're running a marketplace, what is your model of what people care about? What makes people stay versus leave? What makes matches work versus not work? All those things shape a roadmap in your mind. And I think a lot of roadmapping, a lot of execution, paper writing in academia has all just become far more fast-paced, at the expense of deeper thinking about these kinds of structural features of the thing you're building. 

(01:18:41):
So with my students, but also I think with people I interact with in industry, I think slowing down is actually more of a virtue than it's given credit for.

Lenny (01:18:50):
Very similar to a motto that a recent guest shared, which I think was go slow to go fast, or stay smooth to go fast.

Ramesh Johari (01:18:59):
Yeah, I like that. Maybe I'll pilfer that, when I go talk to my grad students [inaudible 01:19:03].

Lenny (01:19:04):
Final question. You're a professor at Stanford University, which sounds incredibly cool. What's something about being a professor at Stanford in particular or in general that would surprise people, either good or bad?

Ramesh Johari (01:19:17):
Yeah. I mean, we've had a rough ride, as everybody probably knows. Stanford's been in the news for a lot of not so great reasons, I think over the last five years especially. 

(01:19:29):
So I don't know if this is the right kind of surprise, but I think one thing that I find really energizing at Stanford is people have never asked me for credentialing here. And what I mean by that is that I came from a bunch of other good schools, and obviously I've spent time in industry with a lot of great companies. And a kind of cultural dynamic that can often develop is, "Well, before I'm going to talk to you, I want to know something about why you're worth talking to. Give me your credentials. Where are you a grad student or where are you a professor? Tell me about yourself first."

(01:20:10):
One of the things that I found very surprising when I came here is just how that never happened at any level. Grad students tell me this all the time. Go talk to someone across campus and just launch right into a conversation about how your X meets my Y, and we have something we could do together. As a faculty member, it happens all the time. I just had a conversation a couple days ago with someone about effectively a marketplace of experiment designs for nano fabrication here, which is totally out of left field for things I do, and yet seamless. Our conversation was about the substance rather than the credentialing.

(01:20:46):
I really think part of the reason for that is that Stanford is sort of unique in that it doesn't have a weakness across the board. We have strong professional schools, law, business, medicine, strong engineering schools, strong humanities and social sciences. And then that and the weather is what I usually tell people honestly, which matters a lot. People are willing to walk anywhere. I think those things combine to create a culture and an environment where you don't credential everybody.

(01:21:09):
And I think that means a lot. I think that's something that I haven't found elsewhere. And if people wanted to know something about what's Stanford's like on the inside, I think that's one aspect of it that probably isn't discussed very much. I think that's part of what makes it really fun to be here.

Lenny (01:21:27):
It's also an incredibly dreamy campus, that is very joyful to walk around. That helps, I'm sure. Ramesh, I feel like we got people's brains tingling. I think we've created new marketplace founders, and also convinced people maybe they aren't marketplace founders. So maybe we netted out zero new marketplace founders. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Ramesh Johari (01:21:49):
I think the easiest way, if someone's interested more on the industrial side is probably LinkedIn. You send me a message or connect there. Also, because I'm an academic, I have my own Stanford webpage, and it's pretty easy to figure out how to find me there as well.

(01:22:02):
And how can listeners help me? I kind of feel the most important thing that someone listening to this could do is take forward some of the messages that came out in terms of what it means to be data literate. And I think there's a lot you can do to educate yourself there. 

(01:22:18):
Maybe one final thought I'll share is that in the same way that AI generates a lot of ideas, AI also generates a lot of prose. And in data science, that can actually be deadly because you're getting more explanations that sometimes maybe are extraneous. 

(01:22:35):
So taking that as a little vignette, I think that what the world needs is data literacy on the part of people interacting with these tools and with each other. So that's the thing I care most about. The things I teach, the things I do research on, they're all connected to that theme. And so that's where I'm pretty excited. I do work with companies regularly, and so if there's interesting opportunities that fall in the sphere of stuff we've discussed on the podcast, always happy to listen.

Lenny (01:23:00):
Awesome. I think we've made a dent in helping people become a little more data literate. Ramesh, thank you so much for being here.

Ramesh Johari (01:23:07):
All right. Thank you so much, Lenny.

Lenny (01:23:08):
Bye everyone.

(01:23:11):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Sarah Tavel (00:00:00):
I think a lot of people think about markets almost like these bodies of water, it's like it's this big body of water that we're going after. I actually think that the most interesting markets, you have to think of them like currents where you're there's something happening in the market that's creating this current where you can have a plank of wood that you've put on the river and it's going to pull you forward. Versus a market that doesn't really have that momentum to it, you're going to have to build something really big and fancy to make any progress. That's why we care less about market size because really, what you're looking for when you're looking at a market, are what are the dynamics of change, what's the current and momentum that's going to pull the company and make the job easier for the founders to actually build something that endures. 

Lenny (00:00:56):
Today, my guest is Sarah Tavel. Sarah is a partner at Benchmark, one of the most preeminent venture capital funds in the world, where she focuses on investing in consumer and marketplace startups. Prior to Benchmark, Sarah was the first product manager at Pinterest. And though I normally have a policy against VCs on the podcast, as you'll see, Sarah thinks very much like a product and growth leader. And I always learn a ton talking to Sarah about startups and marketplaces. We also learn in our conversation, she used to play rugby and was apparently one of the best tacklers in her league. 

(00:01:28):
In our conversation, we unpack two of Sarah's killer frameworks for building a startup. One, the hierarchy of engagement, which is an incredibly useful lens for trying to figure out how to grow and scale your consumer startup. And then, the hierarchy of marketplaces, which is an incredibly useful guide for helping you build your marketplace startup. If you're building a consumer startup or a marketplace, this episode is for you. We get really nerdy and really deep, just the way I like it. With that, I bring you Sarah Tavel, after a short word from our sponsor. This entire episode is brought to you by Gelt, your gateway to smarter tax solutions. Navigating the world of taxes can be complicated and stressful. Gelt is here to change that. They blend advanced technology with expert CPA knowledge to handle your taxes effortlessly. Whether you're a business owner, investor or executive, Gelt is here to optimize your tax strategy and enhance your financial success. People working at companies such as Notion, Google and Lip have already experienced the Gelt difference. They've seen significant savings and a transformation in their tax handling. And now, it's your turn.

(00:02:35):
Why choose Gelt? Because they offer year-round proactive tax planning, and clear, fast communication. With their technology, you'll stay ahead, making the most of every tax benefit. Ready to elevate your tax strategy? Visit joingelt.com/Lenny today. With Gelt, you'll save more and stress less. Again, that's joingelt.com/Lenny. Join G-E-L-T. com/Lenny. Redefine your approach to taxes with Gelt. 

(00:03:08):
Sarah, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast. 

Sarah Tavel (00:03:12):
Super excited to be here. 

Lenny (00:03:13):
So you may or may not know this, but actually, normally have a policy of no VCs on the podcast. But you're a very special VC because you're a former product manager. Many people don't know you were the first product manager at Pinterest. To me, you still think like a product manager so I'm very excited to break my rule and have you on the podcast. 

Sarah Tavel (00:03:31):
Thank you for the exception. 

Lenny (00:03:33):
What I want to do with our time together is dig into two frameworks that you've developed and use with founders that you work with to help them build successful companies. One is focused around customer businesses, and one marketplace businesses.

(00:03:49):
Let's just start with the first framework. I think you call it the Hierarchy of Engagement. Just to start, could you maybe just share a broad overview of this framework? And also, just where it emerged from, where you came up with this concept? 

Sarah Tavel (00:04:02):
Sure. I think one thing you'll notice about me is that I have an allergic reaction to vanity metrics, what people talk about as vanity metrics. When I made the transition from Pinterest, where I was leading product for the discovery team, so I was responsible for all the discovery surfaces on Pinterest. The home feed, the search, the recommendations, a couple other teams. Ultimately, what those teams were about was about engagement, increasing engagement of Pinterest. It was helping people, when they were on Pinterest, find something that they loved enough that they wanted to pin it to one of their boards.

(00:04:48):
When I started to meet with all these really talented consumer founders building consumer social products, this was during a time when everybody was getting excited about growth hacking. What you would see is that you would see all these founders coming in, and they all had these up and to the right graphs, whether it was sign-ups, or downloads, or MAUs. It felt to me like it wasn't obvious that those metrics that they were all getting very attached, and focused on, and showing in these presentations was the wrong thing to focus on. It didn't get to the heart of whether they were on the path to building enduring consumer social product. They were missing, at the core, the criticality of engagement. 

(00:05:45):
I just started to feel this and it became like a pebble in my shoe. I started just to go through that process that you've gone through many times before of writing and distilling it, and that's where I came up with this hierarchy. What you realize when you look at social products is that they're almost is this action which I call the core action of that product that forms the foundation of the product. When a user completes this action, it's clear that they both understand the utility of the product, they understand what that product is all about, and it's an action that, if they perform the action, they're very likely to come back. So for Facebook, the obvious action is friending, in the beginning days. For Pinterest, it's pinning. I don't know if you're an Evernote user. For Evernote, it's writing a note. When you perform that action, that means you're an engaged user. Of course, there's a lot of other actions that you have to do. You can follow people on Pinterest, you comment on Facebook. But the end of the day, if you're not doing that action, you're not really a user to the product. That's why the MAU thing doesn't really mean anything. It's really looking at, I think, of users completing the core action. You can look at this as a cohort, weekly, daily, whatever the right cadence is. But that's the foundation, that's level one. 

Lenny (00:07:16):
Basically, there's some definition of an active user that a consumer business basically needs to define, and essential figure out what is that action they're taking that makes them an active user versus just opening up the app, or whatever it is. For Snapchat, it might be sending a snap.

Sarah Tavel (00:07:34):
That's right.

Lenny (00:07:35):
For What's App, it might be sending a message. Okay, cool.

Sarah Tavel (00:07:36):
Yes. Yes. By the way, this action, it's very important to pick the right action. You want to make sure it's an action that scales to enough users. You want to think about, "If I think about my product roadmap and optimize for it, what do we end up doing?" 

(00:07:56):
Just to give you a more concrete example, actually in the early days of Pinterest, we weren't sure what it was. We had all these things we were measuring. We were measuring follows, we were measuring clicking through, liking something, pinning obviously, time on site. We would do these experiments and you would get all this different data where some things would go up, some things would go down. What were we optimizing for? 

(00:08:24):
There's something that's really, really important about having that clarity of this is the action that is most important for our product. All things, our NUX has to lead to this. If a user isn't doing this, then there's something missing from their experience of the product. It's super important to get real clarity and know exactly the one that you're going to be picking to go forward. 

Lenny (00:08:49):
One more question along these lines. How do you think about this milestone versus the activation milestone for a new user? Do you find they're often the same? Getting your user to that aha moment-

Sarah Tavel (00:09:00):
Yes. 

Lenny (00:09:00):
Versus ongoing? 

Sarah Tavel (00:09:01):
Right. Part of it is how do you measure the success of your NUX, of the activation? To me, it is are you taking those new users and helping them understand the mental model of your product well enough that they start completing the core action.

Lenny (00:09:18):
Awesome. 

Sarah Tavel (00:09:19):
There was a NUCs once that we played with at Pinterest where we didn't even teach people what pinning was. It was their feed magically appeared and it was a real ... That was an example of okay, we have to help people understand that they are here to discover something and save it to their board. 

Lenny (00:09:35):
Just in case people don't know what NUX is, new user experience. It's just an acronym for new user experience.

Sarah Tavel (00:09:40):
Thank you. Yes.

Lenny (00:09:42):
Okay. Maybe one more just foundational thing that I think we maybe skipped is what's the best way to think about using this framework? Is this essentially where you should focus your energy, on which elements of your product you should be driving, which metrics to focus on? Is that a simple way to think about ... Basically, we've talked about layer one and there's three layers. What's the best way to think about, as you're talking through this framework, of how to apply it and use it? 

Sarah Tavel (00:10:02):
In a way, you have to think holistically when you're building these consumer products, when you're designing it. But I think it's very important, once you get the product out and you're starting to optimize, to start thinking through each of the levels. That's just very focusing, to help a founder understand, "What are the levers that I really have to be focusing on to improve?"

Lenny (00:10:26):
Awesome. I want to come back to how to apply it, in maybe some examples, after we go through the three levels so I'll turn it back to you. 

Sarah Tavel (00:10:32):
Perfect. Let's say you're building your product and you're starting to see that you have users completing the core action. Then, the next challenge you have, and I've seen this many times before, is that then you have to figure out how to get those users to stick around. You want to retain those users. Obviously, if they do the core action once or twice, and then they run out of steam, you're going to be in a really challenged position to build something that endures. 

(00:11:03):
The test for me, of whether you're building a product that has the ingredients to create a retentive product on a micro level, just at the user level, is that the product should get better the more you use it, and you'll have more to lose by leaving it. I'll give you a couple examples there, a couple of my favorite products. 

(00:11:26):
Obviously, Pinterest. One of the features that I worked on when I was at Pinterest and we shipped was this idea of a picked for you feed. The idea was every time you pinned something to a board, we would take that information that the user gave us and use it to create recommendations in their home feed. It may have been the first algorithmic feed that was in a social product because, suddenly your home feed wasn't just things and people that you followed. The truth is, people weren't really following other people on Pinterest so we needed a way to make the experience get better the more you used it, so we started to do these recommendations in your home feed. 

(00:12:10):
It was this experience that, the more you pinned, the more personalized your home feed got for you. Then, the more you pinned, you also had more to lose by leaving Pinterest because, all of a sudden, you had all your favorite books, articles you wanted to remember, the recipes that you were planning on cooking one day, the holiday planning that you were doing. So you wouldn't abandon Pinterest because Pinterest was this repository for these different expressions of your identity, or these different bookmarks that you wanted to back to. That was this idea. It's very important that the core action is the thing that you use as the product to make the experience better over time. 

(00:12:52):
Evernote, another example. I don't know if you're an Evernote user.

Lenny (00:12:57):
No. I tried it once and it was way too complicated, and I gave up quickly.

Sarah Tavel (00:13:01):
People still laugh at me for being an Evernote user.

Lenny (00:13:05):
Oh, wow. 

Sarah Tavel (00:13:06):
I'm a lifetime user. 

Lenny (00:13:09):
Wow. 

Sarah Tavel (00:13:09):
It's one of those things that I take all my notes in Evernote. I dump documents in Evernote. What I means is that, the more I use it ... Now I know that I can do a search in my Evernote and I'm going to find the document I'm looking for. Now, I can never leave Evernote. It has everything. I have thousands and thousands of documents in Evernote. That's a product that's incredibly retentive. 

Lenny (00:13:37):
Unless someone builds a great exporter, and then there goes that piece of friction. 

Sarah Tavel (00:13:41):
People keep telling me I need to move on to Notion or something else, but not yet. I will remain a dinosaur here. 

Lenny (00:13:48):
Wow. I love that that's an example of someone can break that barrier and make it less retentive, by making it easier to get off.

Sarah Tavel (00:13:55):
Yes.

Lenny (00:13:56):
It's interesting growth strategy, basically. 

Sarah Tavel (00:13:57):
Yes. Yeah, it's very true. Let's say, now, you have a product, it's growing, more people are completing the core action. When they complete that core action, the product gets more retentive for them. It gets better the more they use it, they have more to lose by leaving it. Then, your tall task, and this is the hardest thing to overcome, is how do you make the product self-perpetuating? This is where I love to think of every time a user users your product, let's say they're clicking on the mouse or they're tapping on their phone, I love to think of it as this kinetic energy that they're putting into your product. You're taking that energy, and your job with a great product, is to take that energy and, as much as possible, convert it back to the experience that they're having with your product. 

(00:14:55):
Now, the biggest thing that you can do is a network effect. The more I pin something on Pinterest, the better the experience for every user on Pinterest. Every time I add a pin to a board, I'm creating a new edge in Pinterest Graph, that Pinterest then uses to create recommendations and enrich their understanding of all those objects on Pinterest. The network effect is the strongest thing that you can do. And obviously, if you have that, which all social products have to in some way, you have to spend time, as much as possible, just maximizing where that shows up, fine-tuning it, removing friction so that it's a flywheel that spins faster and faster. 

(00:15:42):
But, there's other loops too, that you have to identify and then maximize. These are the growth and re-engagement loops. These are classic loops, you talk about these a lot, they exist in marketplaces and social products. How do you get it so that, as your users use the product, they want to share it with other people? They create metadata that you can then use for SEO. You have collaborative experiences that pull other people in. There's all different things you can do here. And then, there's also things that you can do to re-engage a user.

(00:16:18):
As an example, in the early days of Pinterest, if you pinned something, you're pinning something that you found on Pinterest that somebody else pinned. So we would send a push notification, "Hey, Lenny, Sarah just pinned your pin to her art board." Now, if you were a dormant user at that point, it's been a couple weeks since you'd used Pinterest, that notification might pull you back into Pinterest and be like, "Hey, I wonder what other pins Sarah has on her art board." It's a great re-engagement loop where Pinterest doesn't have to do anything there intentional. The user is creating the action that drives the outcome that Pinterest wants in that example. 

(00:17:03):
Now, as much as I love Evernote, this is a place where Evernote obviously falls down. There's no loops that they can take advantage of, that when I use the product, I make it better for you. There's no loop where, when I use the product, I want to pull you into the product. They tried at some point, to do collaborative journals, it doesn't work. That's a place where, because of that, Evernote had to spend money to acquire users, they tapped out. They missed that level three. 

(00:17:38):
There's other examples I could speak to, of companies that weren't able to transcend to level three, that you wouldn't otherwise think. I think of companies like Houseparty and Clubhouse. What was interesting about both of those products is that you would think that the more users that came into Clubhouse or Houseparty, the faster the flywheel should spin. But the challenge was that they relied on push notifications. I don't know if you had this experience, but let's take Houseparty as an example. You started to follow a lot of people on Houseparty, and then all of a sudden, your push notifications just got overwhelming. Because it was a realtime product, that you had to use push noti cations to know the moment to join the product, but when you had so many push notifications because the more people you followed, the more notifications you had, you just get to this point where you start ignoring them. It becomes this thing where, even though the flywheel should be spinning faster, it starts breaking down. That's the real tricky nuance in this level three.

Lenny (00:18:52):
I think people hearing this are going to be like, "Okay, getting people to use your product more often, increase retention, make it viral basically," it's stuff they already know. But I think what's powerful about this is this is just a lens, a clarifying lens on what is most important. There's so many things you can be focusing on to increase your product's success and help it grow. What I love here is just, "Here's the three most important things, and then here's the levels." They build on each other. If you want to increase retention, get people to do the core action more often. If you want to help it grow, focus on helping it spread, self-perpetuate. 

Sarah Tavel (00:19:30):
Yeah, I know. That's absolutely right. The importance of it is I can't emphasize enough how important focus is when you're building these companies. It's so hard. There really isn't a playbook. Every company, the ones that succeed have to be fundamentally different from anything that was before it. But there are these first principles of the ingredients that they all share, and you can use those ingredients to really focus you when you're going through the inevitable growth curve and wanting to know, "Well, how do we maximize this moment? How do we really focus on the things that will set us most up for success?" That's where I think a framework like this can be really clarifying. 

Lenny (00:20:17):
There's a lot of depth behind each of these things that you're being modest about. One is, with the top of this pyramid of making it self-perpetuating, the reason that's really important is for a consumer app to work well most of the time, it has to be able to spread really cheaply. The cost of acquisition needs to be very low, unless you somehow figure out some paid ad strategy where you can make money with paid ads, which is very rare. So maybe speak to why that's so important to a consumer product.

Sarah Tavel (00:20:45):
Yeah. What are you trying to build with a consumer product? You're not trying to build something niche. You want to build something that can be a mass-market, hundreds of millions of users, billions of users. It would take considerable capital to do that with marketing. There's one example that we have so far, which is TikTok, of spending more than $1 billion, once they figured out actually the first two levels in order to grow. They didn't actually put user acquisition spend behind TikTok until they had a product that was retentive, and then they know that they really wanted to maximize that. But every other social product has grown organically. They've been able to do so because they've figured out how to maximize these loops. Even TikTok got to millions over users before they spent all the capital to acquire those remaining users. 

Lenny (00:21:52):
I didn't know that number. TikTok spent $1 billion on paid ads-

Sarah Tavel (00:21:56):
Yes.

Lenny (00:21:56):
To get to where they are today? 

Sarah Tavel (00:21:57):
Yes.

Lenny (00:21:57):
Holy moly. 

Sarah Tavel (00:21:58):
Yes.

Lenny (00:21:59):
I knew it was many millions, but I didn't realize it was $1 billion.

Sarah Tavel (00:22:04):
Yes. 

Lenny (00:22:04):
That just shows you how hard it is to break in and become a new social network, essentially, or a new social app. 

Sarah Tavel (00:22:10):
It is hard. And then, at the same time though, we do see exceptions to it where I still feel like consumers are hungry for new experiences. We've seen a couple over the last few years that have gone into tens of millions of users. Nothing that has really created the experience that's sticky enough to pull minutes away from, really TikTok and Instagram, which just are these dominant forces right now. 

Lenny (00:22:42):
Your message also reminded me of a recent guest post on my newsletter about this app Saturn, I don't know if you read it. 

Sarah Tavel (00:22:49):
Oh, I didn't. But I know of the app, and it's just an awesome founder.

Lenny (00:22:53):
Yeah. It was really interesting. They had a really interesting insight about, first of all, very few apps ever make it to the top of the app store that break through what's already there. The ones that do almost always spend a few days there and then, are gone because it's a one shot thing. What they basically talked about is many apps have this viral K-factor, where they spread like crazy, everyone starts using them, everyone's in there. But then the opposite happens very quickly, too, where if a few people miss using it a few days, you go in there and it's, "Oh, nothing's happening here anymore," and it quickly crumbles. Clubhouse essentially went through this, BeReal started go through this, where people stopped posting and then, "All right, forget this. Everyone's gone." Most apps have this destructive K-factor that kicks in, the same way it kicked in to get it to spread. 

Sarah Tavel (00:23:36):
Yes. As people say, when something grows really quickly, it also can collapse really quickly. 

Lenny (00:23:43):
Yeah. Tough. I guess along those lines, is there anything you've seen or learned ... The idea of this framework is to avoid that, essentially. But I guess, is there anything comes to mind to avoid that? 

Sarah Tavel (00:23:55):
One other thing that I've seen that runs into a challenge, and I find it runs into a challenge particularly with level two, is anonymity. Anonymity is something where ... Pseudo-anonymity and anonymity are very different concepts. With pseudo-anonymity, we have it on Twitter, you have it on Reddit. You have a persistent identity that you're creating, and that identity then can have accruing benefits, mounting loss. My pseudo-anonymous account on Twitter that just flames other VCs ... I'm just kidding.

Lenny (00:23:55):
This is breaking news.

Sarah Tavel (00:24:35):
I'm not funny enough to make something like that. But for the people who do have it, they get accruing benefits because they get people to follow them. And that's the mounting loss too, where they've grown their identity on a platform even though it's a pseudo-anonymous identity. The challenge when you have pure anonymity is that you don't have that accruing benefit or mounting loss that happens. 

(00:25:05):
I don't know if you ever played with Secret, but it's similar to TikTok or something like that. These are the types of experiences where, over time ... The network effect doesn't work because the anonymity creates the conditions for bad behavior, so that starts to pull down the community. And then, it is also the experience where you'd use a product and you can delete, and then come back three months later, and because of the anonymity aspect of it, your experience isn't any different. I find anonymity, people keep trying it, and super talented founders keep hitting their head against that wall because it has the very early fun growth, but it just continues to be a product that isn't able to persist without some persistent identity. 

Lenny (00:26:05):
I'm going to pull on this thread of just ways to increase retention. Basically, this is one of the things, maybe the main thing you're telling people to help increase retention, make it so that it's really hard to leave. Before we get there, just to make it clear, is this framework mostly for social consumer products, or do you generalize it to consumer products? 

Sarah Tavel (00:26:25):
I think it's consumer products in general.

Lenny (00:26:29):
Okay.

Sarah Tavel (00:26:29):
But it makes the most sense for consumer social. 

Lenny (00:26:34):
Okay, got it. 

Sarah Tavel (00:26:34):
It works for Evernote. Evernote isn't a consumer social product. 

Lenny (00:26:39):
Awesome. Okay, so it's most helpful for if you're the social, your friends are in it sort of product?

Sarah Tavel (00:26:45):
Right. You have the chance of level three with social.

Lenny (00:26:48):
Right, awesome. Okay. On this thread of retention, it's a thing that I speak about often, everyone always talks about. The most important thing you got to get right is get retention to a good place because if you can't retain people, nothing's going to work anyway. 

(00:27:02):
So just to spend a little more time here, is there anything else you recommend to founders to help them with increasing retention and getting to a healthy place with retention? 

Sarah Tavel (00:27:13):
Number one is actually measuring it. I can't tell you how many times I suggest to a founder to track cohorts and that's a new thing. Just being really, really clear and intellectually honest on looking at cohorts I think is number one. 

Lenny (00:27:34):
Okay, maybe just describe that briefly, and then we'll link to an article that I have about how to do that. 

Sarah Tavel (00:27:38):
Perfect. These are the moments when I should probably turn the mic over to you, to talk about-

Lenny (00:27:44):
Nope, you're in the hot seat. 

Sarah Tavel (00:27:46):
[inaudible 00:27:46]. A cohort, what I always like to look at is weekly cohorts for these products. You look at them in two ways. Which is one, for each vintage of cohorts, you're looking at a group of people who signed up in a given week, and that's one. 

Sarah Tavel (00:28:00):
... like a group of people who signed up in a given week and that's one cohort. You look at it both on an active user basis, like are those people continuing to come back to the product? And I particularly love to look at that on a weekly active user completing the core action pieces of like, are users completing the core action? How is that changing overtime for each of the cohorts? And then also, looking at activity level within those cohorts. And so, what you love to see is the kind of classic smile graph where, as the network grows and users start to use the product more and more, you start to see that, overtime, they actually become more retained in the product as opposed to kind of the classic leaky bucket where the cohort just keeps on dwindling down. And until you reach a point with your cohorts where there is a plateau, you have more work to do on figuring out the retention of your users.

(00:29:04):
The second thing is just focus. So I can't tell you how how many times also you'll meet a founder and they will... There was one example I saw, it was a kind of a dating app, friend making app, and he was growing it via TikTok, which is not geographically constrained at all. And so, he's growing the user numbers, but without focusing on a specific geography, it's gonna be really difficult to make that type of product a high retention product.

Lenny (00:29:39):
Coming back to the framework, which layer do you find most often is the one founders maybe are under-investing in/maybe the most important to focus on if you had to pick one of these, or is it super dependent on your situation?

Sarah Tavel (00:29:54):
What I often feel is that, a lot of times, product founders, consumer founders, see where they want to get to, they compare themselves to the full expression of a product that you see with other products, ROBLOX, Instagram, TikTok, whatever it may be, and they want to get there.

(00:30:19):
But what that ends up meaning when the when a new user signs up is that there's too much in the beginning to to take in and understand, and you don't then have a very focused product that gets the user to the thing that you most want them to do. And that's actually part of the importance of understanding level one, what your core action is, is that you want to make sure that when a user comes to your product, signs up for the first time, doesn't have necessarily a lot of contacts on what the product is itself, that they see the thing that they're supposed to do and you get them to do it. And a lot of times, in the beginning, there are just so many other things that a product might have that you're defusing that attention that they would otherwise have had on the on the thing that's most important. 

(00:31:19):
And so, I feel that that's the first mistake, and it's kind of natural that it would be the first mistake, but maybe the largest mistake that I see people make. 

Lenny (00:31:32):
Essentially, not getting the activation moment right, not focusing enough on getting people to that aha moment as people describe, and then again, that repeating again and again as a core action. 

Sarah Tavel (00:31:42):
Yes.

Lenny (00:31:43):
To close the loop on this sort of discussion, could you just share again a few examples of core actions/activation moments, just to make this fresh again in people's minds? And then also, just whatever you could share about helping people decide what that is. I know it's a difficult thing to do well, but any advice for how to find that activation?

Sarah Tavel (00:32:03):
I mean, I'll tell you the exercise that we did at Pinterest because as I mentioned before, it wasn't obvious to us in the beginning of Pinterest like were we a social network? Like should we optimize for the follow graph? But you have to remember, Pinterest, this was 2011, you had Twitter growing like crazy, Instagram was growing. Those were both asymmetrical follow graphs that they were creating, right? And so, it wasn't clear at the time whether Pinterest was actually just creating a new follow graph, but that was about things instead of what Twitter was or what Instagram was. And so, it wasn't obvious.

(00:32:45):
And what happened actually is that there was two efforts that I think of as like kind of bottoms-up and top-down that helped really clarify that, actually, pinning something was the core action, it was going to be our North Star. We called it weekly active pinners.

(00:33:03):
And the two things were, there's always this like bottoms-up analysis that you do, which is, we looked at every action that you could do on Pinterest, so we had liking, following, clicking through, time on site, pinning, repinning. And we looked at, first of all, what percentage of users complete those actions? And if you do that action in a week, what's your propensity to come back the following week? And we basically ranked that.

(00:33:38):
And what we saw was that if you pinned something, repinned something, which is finding something on Pinterest, I'm using those synonymously, or click through, you had an incredibly high probability that you would come back. So if someone's pinning something, they're coming back to Pinterest the next week with a super high, more than 90% probability at the time.

(00:34:02):
And then there's like the top-down way of thinking about it, which is, well, what is Pinterest for? And if a user does come to Pinterest and they never add something to a board, do they really understand what Pinterest is? And yes, clicking through makes you want to save it. The click through is valuable, you want save it, so clicking through is obviously really important. But at the end of the day, if they don't like that pin enough that they want to save it themselves to their board, then we haven't done our job. 

(00:34:36):
And so, we did this kind of top down, bottoms up analysis to make it very clear that when we launch an experiment or launch a new feature, if the probability, if the percentage of people that pin something doesn't go up, or the number of pins for that cohort doesn't go up, that experiment is not a a successful experiment.

Lenny (00:34:58):
Awesome. There's a post I'll link to in the show notes where there's actually a guide to doing this regression analysis on how to figure out your activation milestone.

Sarah Tavel (00:34:59):
Amazing.

Lenny (00:35:08):
Basically, what is most causal of retention as you're describing. And I love this example from Pinterest. Any other just examples? Again, you shared a few at the beginning of just examples of great activation milestones/core user actions.

Sarah Tavel (00:35:20):
I'll tell you one other one that I thought was super interesting, which is that when I initially published this post, I had assumed wrongly that YouTube's core action was watching a video. And then Shishir Mehrotra, who was the kind of CPO of YouTube, he reached out to me and he said, "That's what it was in the early days, but we started to realize that it wasn't actually our core action. And we did a lot of analysis on YouTube and what we realized was that subscribing was the core action on YouTube."

(00:35:59):
And it makes so much sense when he said it, right? You're a creator, you're uploading content onto YouTube, there are a lot of other places at that time that you could have uploaded that content to, but you care about YouTube because that's where you're growing your audience, right? And so, the more people that subscribe to your content on YouTube, the more you have the accruing benefits and mounting loss of using YouTube.

(00:36:26):
And so, that was super important on the creator side, which, one of the funny things that will bridge to our next conversation is that all social products are really marketplaces, right? YouTube is a marketplace. You have the creators uploading content and the viewers who are watching it, supply and demand.

(00:36:46):
And so then, the subscribe button is also very interesting because then from the demand side, the viewer, why would I come back to YouTube consistently versus, again, all the other places I could spend time on if it weren't for me having found creators for whom their content really resonates with me so much so that I subscribe to their content? 

(00:37:10):
And so, I loved that example because it showed a little bit the evolution that can happen with these companies, but then also, just the beauty of like you know you've got something really right with the core action when it's helping both sides of your network.

Lenny (00:37:26):
Awesome example. And I think it's also a good reminder people change these things. "You come up with your best bet. Okay, we tried this for six months, maybe let's try something else. We've learned something new."

Sarah Tavel (00:37:36):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:37:37):
I'm also going to link to this post I wrote around finding your North Star metric, which was like such a multimedia conversation with just links for all these topics to go deeper. Essentially, I figured out the North Star metric for, I don't know, 30 companies. And I feel like the North Star metric of a company ends up often being this core user action. So like Pinterest, it sounds like those WAPs, weekly active pinners.

Sarah Tavel (00:38:00):
Yeah. Pinners, yeah.

Lenny (00:38:01):
And YouTube is subscribers.

Sarah Tavel (00:38:04):
In the beginning we called it weekly active repinners and war because we felt like we were at war, so it was good.

Lenny (00:38:09):
And then, it became peacetime maybe.

Sarah Tavel (00:38:10):
Yes, exactly. 

Lenny (00:38:11):
Awesome.  So maybe just to close the thread on this framework, can you just briefly summarize who this is most helpful for and just how they could apply it if they're maybe not growing as fast as they want or they're just getting started as a founder building a consumer product?

Sarah Tavel (00:38:29):
Yeah, I think about consumer founders, product founders, product leaders in these companies that are thinking through the road map. What is the most important things that they need to prioritize, the big rocks, for the immediate short-term? And the framework then provides a lens on what to prioritize.

Lenny (00:38:51):
And we'll link to the whole framework for people that want to go deeper.

Sarah Tavel (00:38:54):
Awesome.

Lenny (00:38:54):
Okay, so let's move on to your second framework that you called the hierarchy of marketplaces. And first of all, I want to give a shout-out to Mike Williams, who's the founder of Everything Marketplaces, who gave me a bunch of good question suggestions to ask as we do this.

Sarah Tavel (00:39:07):
Wonderful, now I'm nervous. 

Lenny (00:39:10):
He's Mr. Marketplace.

Sarah Tavel (00:39:11):
Yes.

Lenny (00:39:12):
Okay, so let's start with the same question, just what's kind of the broad way to think about what this framework is and who it's for? And then, where did it come from?

Sarah Tavel (00:39:18):
It's a framework or hierarchy that is for marketplace founders. It could actually be B2BC or B2C, or marketplace product leaders that are like either getting started or scaling their marketplace and helping kind of prioritize and focus on the things that most matter.

(00:39:42):
And it came out of a similar reaction, a very similar parallel to what I was experiencing, meaning, all these consumer social founders. Like they would talk about MAUs and I just felt like it didn't get to the heart of whether they were building enduring value. And I actually started to realize that GMV was very similar. GMV, it's a metric that it seems like... Of course, you can't build a marketplace without growing GMV in the same way that you can't build a social product without growing MAUs. But if you focus, if the race that you think you're running is to grow MAUs or to grow GMV, you're not actually going to run the right race. It can take you... 

(00:40:32):
And actually, with marketplace, very interestingly, it can take you in the wrong direction. So what would happen is I would meet all these founders and everybody got fixated on this milestone of $1,000,000 of GMV. Right. And I think a lot of people started to feel like if you could hit $1,000,000 of annualized GMV, it means you're ready for your Series A. But it's kind of self-evident that not all GMV is created equal, right?

(00:41:02):
So imagine a food delivery company 10 years ago. You could have $1,000,000 of GMV by focusing on LA, or $1,000,000 of GMV by focusing on Boston, or you could have $1,000,000 of GMV by having $500,000 here, $200,000 here, like spreading it out. And I would meet so many founders who would say, " Oh, well, I thought we had to prove out that the value proposition resonated in these other cities and so, that's why we're diffusing our focus." But what they what I would always feel is like they were just making their job so much harder by doing that.

(00:41:46):
The other way you could think of it is like if you're trying to get to $1,000,000 of GMV as quickly as possible, you're actually motivated to go after a really big market, right? It's a lot easier to get to $1,000,000 of GMV when you're skimming the cream on this big ocean of a market, then to be very, very focused on a smaller market. And getting to $1,000,000 of GMV in a constrained market is a lot harder, takes longer, but it's actually the path to building something that endures.

(00:42:16):
And so, I was having the same conversation again and again and I just felt like I needed to crystallize it or synthesize it in a way that would be easier to communicate, and that's what led to this hierarchy.

Lenny (00:42:30):
Awesome. Okay, cool. So you've touched on a number of the important elements of this hierarchy, so let's dive in.

Sarah Tavel (00:42:35):
Okay. There's probably a couple core insights, but the first one that I think about with this hierarchy is that when you're building a marketplace, you actually have to start from the goal and work backwards from there.

(00:42:51):
Now, what's the goal? Marketplaces, I mean, you have so much incredible content on this, they're just incredibly difficult to build. You're basically building two companies at the same time, right? You have the product and go-to-market org for the demand side, the product and go-to-market org for the supply side. And somehow, you have to make these two line up so that they serve each other's needs. It's an incredibly difficult dance. And yeah, it's one of the hardest types of companies in the software world that I think you can build.

(00:43:29):
And you do it because you think about the the full expression of these models and you think about companies like Airbnb or Amazon or eBay or Google, where once you have scale and have very dominant market share, you have a product that just is the best place without question of fulfilling this need. And they end up being very profitable cash-flowing businesses. And you see that, and that's the business that you want to build, that's why you're going through all the hardship of building a marketplace, getting the marketplace off the ground to get to that place.

(00:44:10):
And there's kind of very clear analysis. I published it in the hierarchy. I have this incredible graph that I remember seeing when I board observer for this online classified company called OLX led by Fabrice Grinda. And it kind of shows that the more dominant a marketplace is relative to the number two in its space, the more profitable that business is. And so, it's just like a very clear like you don't want to be... Obviously, when you're building a marketplace, you don't want to be in the middle of the pack, but even being number one but just barely number one doesn't give you any of the benefits of a marketplace model, you're fighting for each incremental point of market share. It's not clear to the supply side or the demand side that you're like the main place to be. And so, it only becomes really clear once you have that dominant market position where you're just so much bigger than the number two

(00:45:09):
And the only way to get to that place, to get to that moment of real dominance where you have this winner take most dynamic is that you have to tip your market, and that's the only scalable way to do that, and that's what level two is.

(00:45:26):
And so, how do you maximize your chance of tipping a market? You have to focus on a really constrained opportunity, and that is level one. So that's kind of like the broad framing, which is like a really important thing of how, when you're building a marketplace, you actually are building towards that point of dominance. And so, it's part of the reason why being really, really, really focused in level one is so important.

Lenny (00:45:57):
Awesome. So you walked through this backwards. Just to summarize in case people didn't totally catch it, basically, layer one is focus, layer two, tip the market, layer three, dominate the market.

Sarah Tavel (00:46:08):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:46:09):
Awesome.  So let's maybe start with layer one of just focus-

Sarah Tavel (00:46:09):
Let's do it.

Lenny (00:46:13):
... which I think is the most counterintuitive step for people building a marketplace where, as you said, normally, it's go big as fast as possible, get as much GMV as possible, just make everyone happy as quickly as you can. And your advice is, essentially, do the opposite. Make it very...

(00:46:29):
You have this like great acronym of thimble that, I imagine, you'll talk about that I love, I always think about. So yeah.

Sarah Tavel (00:46:34):
Yeah. And part of what's so hard about this idea focus is I'm lucky to meet with just incredibly ambitious founders. And the hardest thing I think about building these marketplaces is that the ambition can often feel like this sun, like the heat of the sun that's trying to warm everything up, and you're going after this big market, warming the ocean.

(00:47:05):
And I think that, really, what the the best, ambitious founders do is they focus that ambition like a laser beam on a small market, the thimble. And what you do is like you're getting that thimble, you're getting the product market fit really, really right with this like small, constrained market. And if you heat that up really, really hot, then it expands from there. 

(00:47:29):
And part of this is that we have to accept a couple of points of scarcity. One is that, you can't raise hundreds of millions of dollars from the start, where we, especially today, live in a world where there is a constraint around capital. And so, you have to be able to take that capital in the beginning and make the most out of it. And the only way to do that is to be very, very focused.

(00:47:57):
And the second thing is that the constraint is the founder's attention. And again, these things are really, really difficult to to get off the ground, and the only way that you can do it is by having myopic focus on a segment.

(00:48:13):
And the example that I always think about was a very cool thing that we all got to see, which is when the food delivery wars happened, where you had companies like DoorDash and Postmates and Uber Eats, and then, the incumbents of Grubhub, take very different strategies. I make comparisons to Postmates and and DoorDash, both successful companies, but Postmates, from the very beginning, had very big ambition and went after all the big cities. They went after, not just restaurants, but restaurants and Apple and retail, bicycle. I remember, there were so many things that they went after all at the same time.

(00:49:06):
And when you're playing that game, you're always being compared to whatever other substitutes there are in the market, right. And you're it and that just when you have constraint of capital and attention you're you're spreading yourself thin across a lot of different vectors of kind of preference for the customer and the seller.

(00:49:28):
DoorDash on the other hand, famously and very controversially went after the suburbs in the beginning. And the beautiful thing about the suburbs is that there is very little competition because no one thought that you could do it economically. And they probably weren't wrong in the beginning, like DoorDash lost a lot of money in the beginning fulfilling delivery in the suburbs, just because the delivery times, the driving was so long, but by going after a market that other people weren't focused on, it let them get to a place where they were able to really make the customers on both sides of their marketplace happy enough that they retained.

(00:50:11):
And this word happy I use, I should expand on it a little bit because the realization I had as I reflected on this kind of feeling that GMV is really actually a vanity metric, it doesn't get at the core of whether you're building enduring value. It's like very clear and there's plenty of examples I could give where there are companies that had incredible scale and still were disrupted by a startup. And it's because actually, customers don't care how big you are, they don't care how many transactions you've accumulated. What they care about is when they have a transaction with you, how happy do you make them? How much better is the experience that you provide than any other substitute that they could use? And if you do a good job, then they're gonna keep coming back to you. And so I call it happy GMV.

(00:51:11):
And that's actually the thing that I think you as a founder or product leader have to focus on, which is, what do I think is going to be the experience of a buyer or seller that leads them to retaining and tracking that as like the happy path and therefore, the happy GMV.

Lenny (00:51:29):
Amazing. I love that concept, happy GMV. You also kind of extend this idea and I think you call it the minimum viable happiness is what you want to create when you're building this marketplace, this symbol of water that you're trying to boil into something incredible. What's the minimum version of that that creates really happy customers?

Sarah Tavel (00:51:52):
That's right.  Yes. And kind of the way to think of it is like, obviously, when you're a marketplace founder you know that in order to build something endures, you're going to have to grow. But you in the beginning, you're you're doing all these things that don't scale, you're working on your product experience, you're taking friction out of the transaction, and you want to get to a point where there's a certain percentage of people that retain after having done a transaction. And so, you're kind of doing the work, doing the work, doing the work to get to that minimum threshold. And that's when you know you get to kind of go to the next step of starting to figure out the levers to really scale what you're doing.

Lenny (00:52:36):
Awesome.  And again, it's easy to say, it's difficult to do as a founder to tell them like, "You just need to get a small version of this marketplace working, versus you go big really quickly." And so, most of the time, I think it's actually like location, basically start in a city if it's location-oriented. Or if it's all online, pick like one niche to focus on, like Etsy was like, craft fair goods, right?

Sarah Tavel (00:53:02):
Exactly. And sometimes, as we saw with Postmates, sometimes it's both, which is, geography and category. Again, you have to assume scarcity of your capital, of your attention, of your customers attention and so getting complete clarity of what is the experience that you want to really nail, what's that happy path you're optimizing for, constraining that in the beginning gives you the option, the optionality to grow beyond that, but if you don't constrain, you just won't be able to get there fast enough.

Lenny (00:53:42):
This entire episode is brought to you by Gelt, your gateway to smarter tax solutions. Navigating the world of taxes can be complicated and stressful, Gelt is here to change that. They blend advanced technology with expert CPA knowledge to handle your taxes effortlessly. Whether you're a business owner, investor, or executive, Gelt is here to optimize your tax strategy and enhance your financial success. People working at companies such as Notion, Google and Lyft have already experienced the guilt difference. They've seen significant savings and a transformation in their tax handling. And now it's your turn.

(00:54:18):
Why choose Gelt? Because they offer year-round proactive tax planning and clear, fast communication. With their technology, you'll stay ahead, making the most of every tax benefit. Ready to elevate your tax strategy? Visit joingelt.com/lenny today. With Gelt, you'll save more and stress less. Again, that's joingelt.com/lenny, join, G-E-L-T.com/lenny. Redefine your approach to taxes with Gelt.

(00:54:47):
I want to talk about what it looks like when you you've got it working and it makes sense to start expanding, but before I do, there's one kind of example I found in my research which is really interesting, which is Thumbtack where they, from the beginning, went national and across many categories. And the founders admit maybe that wasn't the right idea. It took them a long time to get to something that was really working. But on the other hand, their thinking was to create enough of a flywheel for people to keep coming back. How often do you need a plumber? How often do you need a DJ? So there's-

Sarah Tavel (00:55:22):
I was just going to say that is the trickiness with Thumbtacks model and it persists as the trickiness with their model, which is that you don't have a high repeat use case there and so you have to... One of the really important things with building a marketplace is cornering the buy side, like having a relationship with the buy side where they don't even think about where they're gonna go, they come to you. And if it's a plumber, you use that so infrequently that every time you are going to look for a plumber, you're gonna start at Google, right? You're not gonna assume, "I'm gonna go to Thumbtack to find that because-

Sarah Tavel (00:56:00):
I'm not going to assume I'm going to go to Thumbtack to find that because you've already forgotten by that point. And so you need to have enough touch points with the consumer so that they'll have a relationship with you and start to think of you as a place to go to. And that's probably, that was the trickiness with Thumbtack. And by the way, when we talk through level two, that also level two will articulate some more of that trickiness.

Lenny (00:56:27):
Awesome. By the way, I do use Thumbtack. It's implanted in my head of that's where to go to find plumbers and stuff.

Sarah Tavel (00:56:32):
That's great. I mean those founders, I adore Marco. He is an incredible, incredible founder.

Lenny (00:56:38):
As a segue to layer two, what are signs that you've done a good job at focusing and things are working? You have this term that I love of creating a white hot center, so maybe speak to that, or just what tells you, it's like, "Cool, I think we've got this very focused thimble. How do we know it's time to go?"

Sarah Tavel (00:56:57):
Yeah, I think it's very much that you see people retaining. You just feel that where people are texting you or emailing or whatever it is, that they've had a great experience and you see them coming back. And you're not going to make everybody happy. Let's all accept that. But there's a core of users, a persona that you are able to make really happy. That's when you know that you're on the right track.

Lenny (00:57:29):
Awesome. It's essentially the very fuzzy product market fit question.

Sarah Tavel (00:57:33):
Yes, yeah.

Lenny (00:57:33):
And I'll link to a few posts I've written that help people get there. I guess is there anything you want to add there like this?

Sarah Tavel (00:57:39):
The only thing I'll add, those two things related I'll add. I don't like NPS for this, and I have a whole blog post on this. I like Sean Ellis's question of how disappointed would you be if this product disappeared? And I think it's if you have at least 40% of people respond that they'd be very disappointed, then you're on the right track. That's kind of the feeling that should tell you you're on the right track.

Lenny (00:58:06):
Awesome. Okay, let's talk about layer two around tipping the marketplace.

Sarah Tavel (00:58:10):
So layer two, I think, will actually illuminate again the importance of that constrained focus for layer one. You're doing all these things that don't scale, that you've written so much about, Lenny, about kick-starting, the marketplace, all those things that you can't just keep on doing forever.

(00:58:29):
Now, layer two, level two is about figuring out how to do things that do scale. And really, you're doing it in service of this kind of mythical moment of a tipping point. And the tipping point is this idea that you often reach some kind of saturation point in a market. You've reached an experience, you've kept on working on the product experience, you've taken a lot of friction out, and you keep on growing, growing, growing. And you're doing that in service of increasing happiness.

(00:59:06):
And this is a really important thing. The growth that you're doing, you should have a lot of clarity on your flywheel at this point, and know that you're growing in service of accelerating your flywheel. And people talk about the flywheel as liquidity. You could think of it as happiness, which is that the more the flywheel spins, the more you're able to make both sides of your marketplace happy.

(00:59:33):
And what you're doing is you're growing into a greater percentage of your market. And as you're doing all these things again that don't scale, then you reach this moment where things start to get a lot easier. You've kind of pushed the boulder up the hill and it starts to slide down. And what you notice first, I think, is you start to see it on a micro level where you might have suppliers that start to tip to you or buyers that tip. You might see your cohorts get a little bit better. You start to see some organic growth.

(01:00:06):
And let me give a story or an example of a company that I got to see where the marketplace started to tip. So we're investors in a company called REKKI. And REKKI is a marketplace for restaurants and their suppliers. And it's, imagine in the beginning, this kind of app that you could use. It almost looked like WhatsApp, that a chef could use instead of doing a voicemail at midnight when they're leaving the restaurant or typing something into WhatsApp and texting it to their supplier, an email, whatever it is. They could use this REKKI app and it would make it a lot easier for them to do that. And then of course the marketplace elements is that then they'll be able to discover other suppliers on REKKI if they need them.

(01:00:57):
Now in the beginning, REKKI had to have their own sales force and they were going to London, knocking on the doors of these restaurants, finding and cornering probably the chef in the kitchen to show them the app, to get them to change to this new app called REKKI. And it's a very high cost of sales effort to have, as you might imagine. But then what started to happen is that every time they got a new chef onto REKKI, that order would then go to the supplier that that restaurant normally ordered from. And so instead of getting the voicemail, the supplier would start to see a nice order form that was from the restaurant and provided by REKKI, powered by REKKI.

(01:01:43):
And what would happen is that as REKKI grew more and more in London, these suppliers started to get more and more of their restaurants ordering via REKKI. And then some of the early suppliers started to be like, "Well, this is so much easier for me. I would much rather get this order form from REKKI than have to listen to an hour of voicemails from chefs with different accents and different ways of ordering their food in the morning when I come in.

(01:02:12):
And so then the suppliers would reach out to REKKI and be like, "Hey, here's a CSV of all of our customers. Can you reach out to them and onboard them to REKKI because I'd much rather have my orders come via REKKI than the way I'm getting them." And so you go from this moment of the hard high cost of sales, pounding the pavement, to getting a list on a silver platter of restaurants to onboard. And that's that feeling of tipping, where all of a sudden something goes from being really freaking hard to so much easier.

Lenny (01:02:52):
It feels a lot like how people describe finding product market fit. Things start to feel like you're not pushing anymore and it's just coming to you.

Sarah Tavel (01:03:00):
Yes.

Lenny (01:03:01):
In your experience, is this tipping often just happens as you become more successful in this thimble of a marketplace? Or is it things you have to do actively to tip to get to this place? It sounds like in REKKI it was like this feature they built of just recommending, "Hey, you should check out REKKI, and maybe other suppliers would help you have an easier time if they're joining." So is it usually like it just happens with scale, or is there usually something you have to change to create this tipping point?

Sarah Tavel (01:03:32):
I don't think Ronan predicted that that was what was going to happen. And you're constant, that kind of customer obsession, having the relationships with the suppliers, having the relationship with the buyers, so that you have your ear to the ground. And when they start to lean in a little bit, you're there to receive them. And so I think this is very much part of what great marketplace founders are able to do, is they're able to start to feel that there's something tipping in their direction and then create momentum behind it.

(01:04:10):
And that's a lot of what this level two is all about, which is that, I think, every marketplace has to figure out what I call tipping loops. And there's two types of tipping loops that work together symbiotically to help a marketplace scale.

(01:04:28):
The first are the growth loops. And so we just talked about an example with REKKI. There are many examples of this Hipcamp, another marketplace I'm lucky to work with. If you and I went camping on Hipcamp and I booked a tree house on Hipcamp, and you are going to join me on it, I could then as part of my checkout flow, essentially invite you to my reservation so that you could see the maps, the more information about the tree house and any of the sites around it. And so I'm the person that Hipcamp acquired, but then I pull you into my experience and that's a great buyer to buyer growth loop.

(01:05:12):
There's classic seller to seller loops or buyer to seller, all these directions. And then the great marketplaces see those loops and they figure out ways to accelerate them. So classic seller to seller referrals. Uber drivers would tell their friend, "Oh, you should start driving for Uber, it's great." But then Uber incentivize it with a referral bonus, and you started to see Uber drivers literally writing blog posts about how much they loved driving for Uber because some of them were making more money getting the referral bonus then actually driving. And so you're trying to find these growth loops and you maximize them.

Lenny (01:05:56):
Awesome. I'll link to a post that has a lot of these insights from this work that I've done on marketplaces, but a few others that are just interesting. Basically you're trying to figure out how do you create a engine that continues to drive supply and also drives demand. So a fun example is when Etsy was getting started, as you know, they went to craft fairs and pitched sellers, "Hey, sign up for Etsy. You could sell your stuff online." And then all their sellers started telling all their buyers, "Hey, buy my stuff on Etsy."

Sarah Tavel (01:06:24):
Etsy literally gave them business cards. So Etsy gave their sellers business cards that made them feel like, "Oh, I'm a real..." Made them feel professional. And the link on it was to their Etsy store.

Lenny (01:06:39):
I love that. One of the most magical growth engines of marketplaces is when your supply brings on the demand. So that's a really good example. Another one is DoorDash, where basically a restaurant signed up for DoorDash and then they tell all the customers, "You want to order our food? Go to DoorDash and order it." And so all the restaurants are telling everyone about DoorDash and then they become DoorDash users and they order from other restaurants.

Sarah Tavel (01:07:01):
Yes, and it shows how creative DoorDash was to both sides of the market in that example.

Lenny (01:07:08):
And then Faire is an awesome example too. It sounds similar to REKKI as you described, where Faire is basically a B2B artisanal items marketplace where boutique shops buy nice candles and blankets for their store to sell. And essentially they did what you described, where they signed on a store and they basically told them, "All your vendors can join for free and not have to pay any fees if they sign up for Faire, and it makes it easy for you to buy their stuff." And then on the other side, a candlemaker tells all the places they sell to, "Hey, you should use Faire. It's so easy to buy our stuff, and we can communicate through there." And they can sign up without any fees. So basically everyone just invites all their existing partners on Faire, and then everyone's on Faire. So yeah, there's a lot of ways to do it.

Sarah Tavel (01:07:53):
I love it. And so the second type of loop, and again this loop works symbiotically with the growth loop, is what I call happiness loops. And I think of them almost as the kidneys for your marketplace as you grow. The happiness loop, the idea is you have a lot of new sellers coming in, and of course you have new buyers, but you want to make sure that you are matching your buyers with the sellers that are going to give them the best experience.

(01:08:23):
And so, normally in a consumer social product, churn is heartbreaking. Once a user churns, they're almost never going to come back. And with a consumer social product, you're trying to get to massive scale. But when you're building a marketplace, actually, there's a healthy amount of churn that you want on the supplier side because there are just going to be suppliers who aren't going to create a great experience for the buyer, and you can't do anything about that.

(01:08:53):
And so we've all had the Uber driver who you give one star to. That person you don't want on your marketplace getting matched with buyers. And so you're trying to then make sure that, as you grow, you have a natural mechanism in your marketplace to reward the suppliers that you want to reward and to churn out the ones that you don't. Of course your job is to do your best to set all the sellers up for success, but it's an inevitability.

(01:09:24):
And so there's two great examples I think of in these happiness loops, which is around search ranking, and then reputation. Search ranking is just a very obvious one, which is, you're trying to understand what creates a happy experience for the buy side, and then reward the sellers that provide that experience.

(01:09:47):
So I think an interesting example that ended up actually changing but still is illustrative, is that UberEats in the very beginning of their journey, thought that their advantage in the market was going to be about having really fast delivery, right? Because they already had this network of drivers and so they thought that that's where they were going to really lean in and have an edge over any competition. And so in the search ranking, they rewarded restaurants that prepared the food quickly, and so answered the Uber Eats request, and then actually got the food out as fast as possible so that Uber Eats became synonymous with the quickness by which you got the delivery. And so that restaurant that takes 40 minutes to prepare the food, they would get ranked low in the experience for Uber Eats, even if the food was really, really great.

Lenny (01:10:45):
Okay, so we've been talking about tipping of the marketplace. Is there anything else there that you want to share before we move on to the third layer?

Sarah Tavel (01:10:53):
Yeah, there's two other things that come to mind. One, just as a reminder, and then one as a caution. So the reminder is in order to tip a market, you have to reach a saturation point in that market. You can't tip a market before you've penetrated it to some saturation level. And it goes back to level one of why you want to focus on a constrained market.

(01:11:23):
Let's take growing a food delivery product in Des Moines, Iowa versus LA or New York. When you're growing in a small city and you're focused on restaurants, you're going to be able to get to this tipping point a lot faster and more efficiently than if you're going after a very big market. And so there's a real advantage to being able to prove out the playbook as quickly as possible and as efficiently as possible before you move on to bigger challenges. And so I think it underscores, again, why it's so valuable in the beginning to focus on something that is constrained.

(01:12:09):
And again, Postmates focusing on San Francisco, the city. DoorDash focusing initially on the suburbs, much smaller opportunity, but one that they could really knock the cover off the ball on. They had no competition. They had a customer that was desperate for attention, and so they could make them happy. And that just sets you up for real success to go from strength to the adjacent market.

(01:12:38):
The second thing that I'd say is, and this is so important is that not all markets are susceptible to tipping, right? We've all experienced this, I'm sure Lenny, with the companies that you work with, the companies I work with, where there are conditions of a market that make it vulnerable to tipping. I have six in my post just to name a couple classic ones.

(01:13:11):
The first obvious one is just concentration on the supply side. In order to be able to tip a market, you need suppliers to want to lean in on your marketplace. My partner, Bill Gurley talks about how great marketplaces create the new incumbents. So you basically have suppliers who aren't the incumbents. The incumbents aren't going to lean in on your marketplace, they're already fat and happy, but you want to have these hungry suppliers who lean in. But if there's already concentration in your marketplace, in the ecosystem, the market that you're playing in, then you're not going to have sellers lean in, and you're not going to be able to create a flywheel that spins where the more sellers you bring on, the better the pricing or experiences on the demand side because the sellers are happy and there's nobody that's hungry or fighting. And so that's just a critical, critical point.

Lenny (01:14:14):
Bill Gurley and I actually had a little Twitter debate once about supply versus demand and which one's more important. And basically his pitch was like, "All that really matters in the end, to build a successful marketplace, is can you find the demand? Can you bring the demand to your marketplace?" It makes all the sense in the world. Everything in the end is, "Can you find customers?"

(01:14:34):
In the work I've done looking into marketplaces, what I find is the hardest thing to do, to bring people to your marketplace, is to find the supply and bring it to people, basically aggregate it. And your point here is exactly right, is that basically the value of your marketplace is to find this non-concentrated demand that's all over the place and bring it together and make it easy to transact with. So I think that is really important, just to double down on this point, that what makes the marketplace valuable is supply that is hard to find that you make easy to find and transact with. And I feel like that's almost the core of what makes marketplace work.

Sarah Tavel (01:15:13):
I think you're both right.

Lenny (01:15:14):
Yeah, I think we're both right. Right, right.

Sarah Tavel (01:15:15):
Because in the beginning, the only way you get started with the marketplace, obviously, is you're bringing the supply online, and that's what opens up the opportunity. And the only way then for you to have a chance at tipping the market is if there's enough fragmentation on the supply side to create a differentiated experience for the demand side to care about your marketplace. But the only way to build long-term enduring value with a marketplace is to corner the demand side. And so it's kind of a little bit that evolution of a marketplace that ends up changing who you focus on.

(01:15:55):
And I don't know if you've experienced this in my experience with the marketplaces that I work with, it's a constant like, "I have to focus more on the demand side right now. Okay, now we got to focus more on the supply side." And it's just back to how difficult these businesses are to build, especially when you have limited resources, that it's like the forever battle of building a marketplace.

Lenny (01:16:15):
Yeah, especially if it's a geographically oriented marketplace like a DoorDash. Sometimes you have more customers than restaurants.

Sarah Tavel (01:16:15):
Right.

Lenny (01:16:22):
Sometimes you have too many restaurants, not enough customers.

Sarah Tavel (01:16:23):
Yes.

Lenny (01:16:24):
So, it's very city dependent. At Airbnb we had basically many attempts at a dashboard of which market is supply constrained, which is demand constrained. Along the same lines, I think it's also something I think about with B2B marketplaces, the reason they're challenging, in my experience, to work, there's so few of them, is the supply is rarely fragmented. Usually there are very few suppliers, so it's pretty easy. "I'm just going to pick one of these 10 and I don't need you." Is that true? Is that how you think about the challenges of B2B marketplaces?

Sarah Tavel (01:16:53):
There's definitely that, but I think actually the bigger challenge with B2B marketplaces is on the homogeneity of the supply. When you think about a lot of labor marketplaces, and let's take a classic example of Mechanical Turk, right? What you need in a marketplace for that flywheel... I have a graph in my slides where you show that the more you penetrate the market, the happier you're able to make your customer. You should have an exponential experience where the flywheel doesn't slow down. Now you take Airbnb as an example, there isn't a limit to how valuable it is to have more supply on Airbnb because everybody has their own special preferences. And there probably is a theoretical limit, but you just feel like there is always going to be the, there's such heterogeneity in the supply for Airbnb, that that's what has let Airbnb really close and escape competition.

(01:18:04):
With B2B marketplaces what sometimes happens, like a labor marketplace, is that you have this homogeneity in the supply, where it's not clear that adding the next incremental unit of supply actually changes the experience for the demand side. And so at Mechanical Turk, whether Mechanical Turk has a hundred thousand Turkers or 5 million Turkers, it probably doesn't really change the experience for somebody who is using Mechanical Turk. And that's why in the early days, a Mechanical Turk, you saw a lot of other copycats or clones of Mechanical Turk doing something similar because it didn't take that much supply for them to be able to create an experience for a segment of the market that was as good as the already scaled Mechanical Turk.

Lenny (01:18:55):
Awesome. I'm glad we got into that. We're getting real dirty about marketplaces. Exactly what I was hoping for. You said that you had something else you wanted to share along these lines.

Sarah Tavel (01:19:04):
And there's so many other examples of reasons why a marketplace won't tip competition. Again, you're a food delivery company and you go after the suburbs where there's no competition. That makes your job really easy to tip the market. You go to New York City where you have an entrenched competitor of Grubhub plus Seamless Web, a different culture around delivery where the restaurants mostly have their own delivery fleets, and it's just going to be so much harder for you to tip that market. And so, I think you have to be really context aware when you're building a marketplace of what your competition's going to be so that you see if there is a path for you to actually tip the market.

Lenny (01:19:52):
And even if you've tipped the market, it may get untipped, like Uber comes in and starts to eat your lunch, no pun intended. It doesn't last forever. You have to keep fighting for it.

Sarah Tavel (01:20:01):
Well, and it's such an important point, which is that you can never rest on your laurels when you're building a marketplace. The history of places is one in which you have a marketplace that feels dominant and then gets disrupted by a competitor. HomeAway, VRBO being disrupted by the likes of you at Airbnb.

Lenny (01:20:23):
I wish I could take credit for all that. Yeah, so one way I think about it is you're talking about this idea of tipping is, a simple way to think about if tipping is happening, if you're tipping it successfully, is percentage of your growth that's starting to come from organic word of mouth, people just becoming like, "This is the default way I'm going to order food, travel, book a ride."

Sarah Tavel (01:20:43):
I think you see two things. You see one, the cohorts getting better. So people start using you more. As the supply side gets more diverse, you have more and more use cases that you start to be able to serve. And so you get the demand side leaning in more, the cohorts get better. And then to your point, you have the organic growth that happens where you don't have to fight to get each new participant on both sides of your market. There's something that starts to happen where the value proposition is just so strong relative to any other substitute that the market starts coming to you.

Lenny (01:21:27):
Awesome. So essentially, cohort retention starts going up because more and more valuable, and more people are coming to you, just word of mouth or through some loops that you built.

Sarah Tavel (01:21:36):
Exactly.

Lenny (01:21:37):
Awesome. Anything else on this layer/level of the [inaudible 01:21:41] before?

Sarah Tavel (01:21:41):
No.

Lenny (01:21:42):
Okay, cool. Let's talk about dominating the marketplace and what that looks like, and how you do that. How do you dominate a marketplace and win, Sarah Tavel?

Sarah Tavel (01:21:51):
So yes, level three, and this is the one I feel like every founder who starts a marketplace, they're chomping at the bit to be able to really focus now on growth. Because all along, I feel like we've been holding you back of just, "Focus, focus, focus." And what you're doing through level one and level two as you're honing what you're building, is that you're basically building a playbook. You don't yet know whether this playbook is repeatable. It's not always the case that the dynamics of one market is the same elsewhere. I'll take REKKI as an example. In the London food scene, there's significant fragmentation of suppliers. In the Berlin food scene, that's not the case. And so it's not always the case that whatever you did in one market works in another market, but usually there's something that rhymes. There's a hint of what is going to work.

(01:22:56):
So what happens now is you have a market that's tipping, and the question then is, are you ready to take your eye off the ball and start to diffuse your focus into other markets? So there's kind of three vectors then that any marketplace can grow at this point.

(01:23:17):
The first vector is within the existing market where you already are tipping that market. You as a founder then have to make a very personal decision, that what you're looking at is the context of your competitive situation. So if you're tipping a market and you have no other competitor going after that market, you're the first one to see this opportunity, then I think you have two things that you want to do at the same time to grow.

(01:23:49):
The first thing is that you want to take the existing market that you're in and you just keep doing what you're doing, and you may even find ways to stretch beyond that initial market that you're going after-

Sarah Tavel (01:24:00):
... Beyond that initial market that you're going after, within the same market. And so, what I mean by that is Uber went from black cars to UberX to UberPool. They kept on finding ways in the geographies where they were already dominant to keep on getting stronger by expanding the use cases that they serve. So you have continuing to grow and penetrate the market, find ways to answer more use cases in that market that you can do, especially if you don't have a lot of competition. And then, the third vector of growth is you want to then try to get as many plates spinning in as many markets that you can handle as quickly as possible. And this is like the blitz scale, right? This is the land grab. And again, your equity value that you're going to create is going to come from dominating the market.

(01:24:59):
And so you don't want to plant a thousand flags in a thousand markets at the same time, spread yourself too thin, and not decidedly win any one market. You always want to put more wood behind fewer arrows. The more scale that you have, the more cities or categories where you have the flywheel starting to spin and you're starting to see the tipping point happen, the stronger your company will be. Each market that you get, you have scale in, where you'll have contribution profit. You take that contribution profit, you invest it in new markets. The more markets and contribution profit you have, the more venture capital you'll be able to raise, which you then reinvest in growing. And so, this is really the place where you are, as aggressively as possible, while, at the same time, not losing sight of the fact that your goal is, in each market individually, to dominate that market, you're trying to grow into as much possible market opportunity as you possibly can.

Lenny (01:26:10):
And again, the reason this is so important is most founders that are ambitious start with this. They're just like, "Go big immediately, blitz scale. We need to win fast before anyone catches up." And so, again, it's a reminder that's the final step, once you've done these other two steps.

Sarah Tavel (01:26:27):
Yes, and it's such an important point, because don't forget, you're always going to be vulnerable to competition. And so, let's say you have a million dollars, and you spread that million dollars of go-to-market costs across 10 cities, spreading yourself really thin. You have a competitor come in, and guess what? They put a million dollars into one city, they're going to win that city, and that's going to set them up for greater success down the road, to keep on being able to get more capital and more expense that they can put to work to grow those cities. And of course, we never have one competitor. Always have a lot of competitors. And so, focus on these steps is just, it really is such an important thing to have discipline around.

Lenny (01:27:17):
And this is the reason that Uber went big and raised so much money, invested so much to scale so fast, versus Lyft. Same with DoorDash versus Uber. Basically, they're both trying to dominate. Neither one, I guess, Uber, I don't know if it's safe to say, seems to have won in the market. DoorDash versus Uber Eats still very one and two-ish. So I think a lot of people look at these companies, they're like, "They raise so much money, they're losing so much money, they're never going to work." But they do this, because to build a durable business and to get the benefits of the idea of what the marketplace they built, they need to dominate, they need to be number one by far. And it doesn't mean it always works. DoorDash, even though they're bigger than Uber Eats, from what I understand, they're not like... I don't know, would you consider they're dominant? Or is it still a big challenge?

Sarah Tavel (01:28:06):
I don't know. I don't know. What is clear is that they've built an incredible company. It's just an incredible... They've done an incredible job of doing what they do, and it is a crowded market still.

Lenny (01:28:21):
So you can still build a great business, even if you don't dominate, dominate. It's just you won't make as much money, nearly as much profit, basically, your cash flow.

Sarah Tavel (01:28:28):
That's right.

Lenny (01:28:29):
Something that you all at Benchmark are really big on, which I think would be interesting to talk about, is the TAM not being as big a deal as people think. So a lot of times, there's a lot of marketplaces that start very small, and there's a fear that the market is just not going to be big enough for them to build a massive business long-term. And you all don't worry about that as much as a lot of other investors, where the market itself isn't a huge killer of investing.

Sarah Tavel (01:28:57):
I would underline it even, which is that we get excited about the markets, the opportunities, that might seem small from the outside.

Lenny (01:29:05):
I love it. Can you speak to that and help people understand [inaudible 01:29:10]?

Sarah Tavel (01:29:09):
You remember the early days of Airbnb like, "How big could this get?"

Lenny (01:29:14):
Yeah, I wasn't there that early.

Sarah Tavel (01:29:16):
Yeah, but you knew of it, and Etsy also underestimated for years and years and years. Hipcamp, that was part of what excited us is that it was this market that was actually much bigger than people would have thought from the outside. And the wonderful thing about going after these underestimated markets is that they don't have competition in the beginning. And so, you have more of the elements of being able to operate into a market and tip the market towards you, when you don't have competition. And so, we love these types of markets, and we always say, to the founders out there, if other people are telling you the market's too small, we would love to get to know you.

Lenny (01:30:00):
I think a lot of founders will love hearing this. I think it's also important to add something you've shared with me is it's important for there to be adjacent markets that are big, for you to have the potential to expand it to [inaudible 01:30:11].

Sarah Tavel (01:30:10):
Right. And yeah, it's such an important point. The market itself, it can't be a cul-de-sac. You need to start somewhere that has the potential to grow beyond that, but in the beginning, it's going to look small. Let me give you the example of Hipcamp. Hipcamp, when we invested, was literally land. It was land where people... I don't know, Lenny, if you're a camper. I unfortunately am...

Lenny (01:30:38):
Yeah, I love Hipcamp by the way.

Sarah Tavel (01:30:39):
Okay, well, amazing. Well, if you have a tent and a sleeping bag and you're not afraid to put your thermos in a running river and clean the water, then that was the early days of Hipcamp. It was for the hardcore camper, which itself, feels like a very small market. It's not actually that small, but it is a smaller market than other people might themselves get comfortable with. But then, what would happen is that hosts on Hipcamp, and I stayed at one of these Hipcamps, and it's just such an incredible experience, the host started to make a little bit of money from Hipcamp. And they took that money, and they started to invest in structures on their land. So in the beginning, maybe it was a fire pit or a bathroom or shower, and then, it became a tree house or a yurt.

(01:31:34):
And so, what happened with Hipcamp is that, in the beginning, it was going after this very different market segment, but as they became successful, made their landowners money, those landowners invested that money back into their land and started to open up the market opportunity for Hipcamp, into people more like me, that are glampers, that want that experience in nature, but maybe don't want to pitch a tent to have it. And so, that's kind of one of those examples of an underestimated market that ends up growing beyond that. There's warning stories here too. I always think of Etsy. So Etsy, I remember, actually, when I was at Pinterest, being driven crazy by Etsy, because Etsy was all about handmade goods. But as they were running up to going public, they started to chase GMV. And what that looked like is that they started to have a lot of mass produced goods on Etsy.

(01:32:38):
It drove me crazy at Pinterest, because there was this one seller of these scarves, that was clearly a mass produced scarves, and they were spamming Pinterest constantly with pins of those scarves. And it was just very clear that Etsy had kind of lost its way in that moment. They would start to chase GMV growth. They were going beyond what they actually stood for, and they ended up having a real reaction from the sellers that were making handmade goods and the buyers. It was this big erosion of trust, and they ended up, I don't know if it was related, but it ended up precipitating, I think, a CEO change, to the CEO that is there now and who has obviously done an incredible job building Etsy from there.

Lenny (01:33:26):
Yeah, we had the VP of product from Etsy on the podcast. And we talked about that actually, what that transition was like, because it was pretty dramatic. They went from very warm, fuzzy, cozy vibes to, "We need to build a business that lasts. Let's change the way we operate." While we're on this topic of what gets you excited about marketplaces, this is something Mike suggested I ask you, so I love that you get excited when it's a small market, very contrarian, what else, when founders are pitching you, let's say with a marketplace, what else do you look for? Whatever you can share off the top of your head that you look for that gets you excited about marketplace.

Sarah Tavel (01:33:59):
It's a couple things. One is, and I'm thinking actually of one founder I met recently, where there's that earned secret, where they see a market opportunity that other people are overlooking, that hasn't been addressed. Maybe there's a reason why it hasn't been addressed in the past, but now is the moment, there's something changing that's creating a current in the market. We could talk about currents later, if we want to, but that there's something that's creating momentum in the market, that's opening up an opportunity for this marketplace to exist. And for whatever reason, that founder is the person who sees it. And it's kind of one of those things that, once you see it, you're like, "How does it still work this way?" And it makes so much sense for somebody to come in and do something about it. And then, the second thing that always just deeply resonates, and it's obvious at this point why this would be true, is a founder then that really has focus.

(01:35:01):
And it's kind of back to focusing their ambition, like a laser beam, as opposed to this broad sun trying to do everything. And so, you really feel like they're focused on the right things, and that actually leads to the third thing, which is you really feel, when a founder is either trying to fool you or fool themselves with vanity metrics, versus the true intellectual honesty and the intellectual rigor of, "What's really working in my business? What's not working? Where are we focused to make that the best it can be?" And man, that is always, that's how you build long-term, enduring value, and it's something that I think it's consistent across all the founders I'm lucky enough to work with.

Lenny (01:35:52):
What I love about this answer is something I often say about marketplaces is that most of your problems are not marketplace problems or questions. It's just what every startup has to deal with. So what you shared is basically an earned secret, which will apply to any business, which maybe emerges a current in a wave that you can ride, having great focus and also focusing on the right metrics. I 100% agree. And it's also interesting, it could be a marketplace, it cannot be, and I think people often overweight how much... "I'm building a marketplace and I need to think of everything," from this marketplace perspective versus 95% of your challenges, questions, hurdles are going to be just whatever startup has to deal with. And then, there's a bit of specific to marketplace.

Sarah Tavel (01:36:36):
And I want to just double click on the current thing, because it's very related, which is a lot of people, and this is back to maybe our contrarian take on markets, I think a lot of people think about markets almost like these bodies of water. And it's like, "Oh, it's this big body of water that we're going after." And I actually think that the most interesting markets, you have to think of them like currents, where there's something happening in the market that's creating this current, where you can have a plank of wood that you've put on the river and it's going to pull you forward, versus a market that doesn't really have that momentum to it, you're going to have to build something really big and fancy to make any progress. And that's why we care less about market size, because really, what you're looking for when you're looking at a market are what are the dynamics of change, what's the current and momentum that's going to pull the company and make the job easier for the founders to actually build something that endures?

Lenny (01:37:40):
Essentially, "Why now?" is how a lot of people think about this, right?

Sarah Tavel (01:37:44):
Yes, yes.

Lenny (01:37:45):
I love just the visual of a current. There's a startup I invested in, as an example of the opposite, that's a crypto marketplace sort of thing. And they started it when crypto was really great, and they continued building it as crypto winter emerged. And they just realized, "Our timing, this is not the time to build a crypto company, that's new, that's trying to compete with who's out there." And so, it's an example of the... You got to recognize when the wave is going the opposite direction and everything is pulling you away from success. The opposite of what you're describing.

Sarah Tavel (01:38:16):
Yes. I might have a nuance there, because I think crypto is too broad of a way to describe it. If you said it was a DeFi crypto company, then yes, definitely, with treasuries where they are, the opportunity in DeFi isn't as material as it once was, which stablecoins, I'm a huge believer in stablecoins, and I think that's a market where we have a real current. With inflation and so many local currencies, there's real demand for stablecoins, the US dollar stablecoin, that comes in many different shapes and forms, that is something that I believe has a very strong current right now, that I'm actually quite excited about.

Lenny (01:39:01):
Oh, interesting. Yeah, I should have been clear. It's like a very specific part of crypto that's just not happening too much, versus what it was. Okay, we've gone totally off track. So let me come back to our track and see what else you wanted to share around the hierarchy of marketplaces either on the top...

Sarah Tavel (01:39:02):
That's it.

Lenny (01:39:18):
Okay. We did it. Amazing.

Sarah Tavel (01:39:20):
Yes.

Lenny (01:39:20):
I have a couple more questions sort of related, but I guess, is there anything else that you wanted to say about the hierarchy of marketplaces?

Sarah Tavel (01:39:27):
Maybe just this kind of the coda, which is like you can never rest on your laurels, and we talked about this already, but the history of marketplaces is one of disruption. And the idea with happiness is that, and Amazon and Bezos talk about this, which is expectations, consumer expectations, are constantly going up. And so, if you ever stagnate in the experience that you give to the consumer, guess what? You're going to get disrupted. And the examples of we talked about with Airbnb and HomeAway, DoorDash, and Grubhub, Grubhub wasn't able to, for different reasons, they were a public company, and so, they couldn't access capital in the same way that the private markets could. But they were too slow to change the atomic unit of their supply to have delivery that they fulfilled. And so, they got disrupted by the DoorDash, Uber Eats of the world. And so, you just can't rest on your laurels. Expectations constantly go up. And it's part of what's so exciting about this market that we play in.

Lenny (01:40:40):
I think Grubhub is a great example of that, where they were the first really successful food delivery company, and then, even with network effects, by far, the best way to order. And then, DoorDash comes around and wins, because they go bigger and spend a lot of money that Grubhub wasn't willing to spend. Awesome. So I guess the advice there is just don't take for granted your success, even if you have amazing network effects.

Sarah Tavel (01:41:02):
That's right.

Lenny (01:41:03):
Okay. So as we were chatting about this conversation, something you mentioned is that, even if you're not building a marketplace, these lessons are actually still useful. So say you're building an open source product or a social network or even a SaaS startup, a lot of these sort of lessons can still apply. What advice would you have for people that have heard what you just shared, but aren't necessarily building a marketplace? What are some of the takeaways as well?

Sarah Tavel (01:41:26):
At Benchmark, I'm lucky that I have partners who look at very different types of companies that I look at, and we meet such a incredible breadth of founders. And what you just realize, again and again, is that these same lessons hold. With open source, it's about solving a specific developer's need in the beginning and solving it really freaking well, and then, expanding from there. With SaaS, I think maybe the fascinating exception, kind of similar to your Thumbtack exception, I think what Parker Conrad's doing with Rippling and this idea of a compound startup is very different. And actually, he has a level of ambition that is both the sun and a laser at the same time. And so, that's kind of, in a rare founder, you can have that level of execution, but again and again, what you see, and I think a lot of this, for new companies leveraging large language models to build products, is that focus on a constrained market to start is the way to win.

Lenny (01:42:34):
I like that. Basically, it's happy developer in the case of DevTools or happy enterprise user, just get happy people using your product and coming back to it. So I love that as a reminder. One other question is you wrote this post on finding white space in building marketplace, basically someone that wants to build a marketplace, trying to figure out, where is there an opportunity for new marketplace? Do you have any advice for people, say, founders, potential founders, that are looking for ideas and opportunities to build a marketplace for how to find one? Where do you think there's opportunity?

Sarah Tavel (01:43:05):
It's kind of fun to ask the question whether LLMs change the game or open up new surface area. So in my post, I write about three ways that you can look for a new opportunity. I think it was like, number one, you always find a horizontal marketplace and you find the kind of low NPS part of that segment and you create a marketplace around that. eBay, being a horizontal marketplace, the sneakers being a low NPS part of that, and you get GOAT. The second is finding a niche that no one else is paying attention to. And the Etsy examples we gave, the Hipcamp stories, and bringing that online, taking friction away, and showing that it's actually a bigger market than you think. And then, the third is changing the atomic unit of the supply. So that kind of like Grubhub, the atomic unit there was a restaurant that has its own delivery fleet, and then, Postmates, DoorDash, Uber Eats came in and said, "Actually, it's any restaurant, we'll provide the delivery fleet."

(01:44:15):
And so, they opened up the available supply. Now, when I think about LLMs, I think there's a real opportunity for the third one. LLMs may make it possible to bring on a supply type that maybe the long tail, that was just, it was too much effort to reach out to them, onboard them, but maybe if you automate that work, you actually create an opportunity to expand the supply in a way that none of us can anticipate right now. And then, who knows whether there's an opportunity with LLMs to create a better experience in one of these kind of low NPS segments of a market or a niche market itself, that makes it possible to bring it online. So I haven't seen anything yet, but I am definitely on the hunt.

Lenny (01:45:05):
Very cool. Turned into AI corner, which I love. Okay, well, with that, we reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Sarah Tavel (01:45:14):
Okay, I'm ready.

Lenny (01:45:16):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Sarah Tavel (01:45:22):
Pachinko is one of the best fictional books I've read in a while. I just loved it, and so, I highly recommend that. And then, to founders, I am a sucker for The Five Temptations of a CEO and The Five Dysfunctions of a Team. It's kind of like you imagine those books in the grocery store aisle, but they're fast reads that are incredibly insightful and I highly recommend.

Lenny (01:45:47):
Is there a favorite recent movie or TV show that you really enjoy?

Sarah Tavel (01:45:51):
I don't watch stuff, so I'm not a good candidate there.

Lenny (01:45:55):
I highly respect that. Is there a favorite interview question that you like to ask candidates, which usually, we can transform into when you're talking to founders and trying to decide if you want to invest?

Sarah Tavel (01:46:06):
I always love hearing the journey people take and specifically how they've made decisions along the way, what drives them from each step. I think that's always very illuminating.

Lenny (01:46:20):
Do you have a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love, whether it's an app or physical product that you've used often? Anything real cool or fun?

Sarah Tavel (01:46:31):
I'll say we are late joiners to Tesla, my family. And man, it is one of those products that you use it for the first time, and you're just like, "I could see why I'd want to own equity in this company," not financial advice obviously, but it's just an awesome experience.

Lenny (01:46:53):
I completely agree. I've gotten so used to, we have a regular car and a Tesla, and the fact that you don't need a key anymore, you just walk up and open it, because it has your phone... My wife, she left the key in our Subaru, just because she's like, "Oh, shit, I need to take the key out." It's just sitting there running. Yeah, you're so used to just the casual just walk up, open, you're good to go. Awesome. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often repeat to yourself, share with people, either in work or life, that you find useful?

Sarah Tavel (01:47:25):
My partner at Greylock, Reid Hoffman, has this line of every strength has a corresponding weakness, and vice versa, and there's so much wisdom there. We see our own strengths and we see our weaknesses, but not realize that they actually go together. You can't have one without the other. Similarly, strengths in organizations, like a decentralized organization can move really quickly, and the corresponding weakness of that is that it can feel chaotic and disorganized. On the other side, a centralized organization can feel really slow, but it is very intentional in the decision-making and the control of the experience. And so, everything has trade-offs, and realizing that, more often than not, they come together, it's just so useful to be aware of that.

Lenny (01:48:20):
Awesome. Final question. I believe you played rugby at some point, is that right?

Sarah Tavel (01:48:24):
Yes.

Lenny (01:48:25):
Okay. Is there a rugby story that would be fun to share from your time playing rugby? And if not, what should people know? What would surprise people about rugby, that they may not be aware of?

Sarah Tavel (01:48:36):
Well, what people might be surprised of, especially if they meet me, is that I was actually a really good tackler, and I think I broke my nose a couple times and have more injuries than I would care to remember, but I definitely inflicted more injuries on other people than I received. And I think rugby is, there's a camaraderie that comes with rugby, and the one thing I'll confess is that we always joke that the rugby team is, it's not a rugby team, it's a drinking team, that has a rugby problem.

Lenny (01:49:18):
Amazing.

Sarah Tavel (01:49:19):
Those times are behind me.

Lenny (01:49:20):
Oh, man. It sounds like an awesome person to have in your court when you're a founder, the best tackler in town.

Sarah Tavel (01:49:27):
Heck yes.

Lenny (01:49:28):
Amazing. Sarah, I'm not surprised this went as long as it did. Thank you so much for being here. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and maybe ask follow-up questions? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Sarah Tavel (01:49:41):
I appreciate that. I'm Sarah at Benchmark. I'm on Twitter, Sarah Tavel, and I have a Substack, SarahTavel.com. If you're a founder, you're working on something, don't be shy. We're in the business of meeting with people like you, and so, I always love to get stimulated by new ideas and people.

Lenny (01:50:03):
Just to focus people even more there, is there stage you like, is there markets, anything people should know of what's right for you?

Sarah Tavel (01:50:09):
We, at Benchmark, we're early stage. We're an early stage firm. We aspire to be first board member. Usually, it looks like the series A, and that's really where our sweet spot is.

Lenny (01:50:23):
Awesome. Sarah, thank you so much for being here.

Sarah Tavel (01:50:26):
Thank you for having me.

Lenny (01:50:27):
Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Tim Holley (00:00:00):
When the CDC mandated face masks in early April 2020, that's when essentially we went to sleep one day with our typical April traffic, typical April sales, and then it was Black Friday overnight. And in part, because nobody knew where to find face masks. Our sellers are incredibly astute business people. And if you had been making wedding dresses, and you know how to sew, and you've got material, and you've got a bit of time, making a mask is quite a simple task. And so we just saw this huge surge of demand, and then supply rising to meet it. 
(00:00:37):
And we did something that as far as I know, we've never done in Etsy's past, which is we put out a call to our sellers to say, "Now's the time. Now's the time to make face masks if you can." And so it felt like this is our time to shine, to really help sellers continue to make sales, to help buyers find this critical item that they were looking for. 
(00:00:57):
And then from there, things kept going, and we really worked hard to make sure that the story was not just about face masks for our buyers, that they understood that Etsy's a place for so many different categories and so many different items.
Lenny (00:01:12):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast, where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard win experiences, building and growing today's most successful products. 
(00:01:20):
Today my guest is Tim Holley. Tim is VP of product at Etsy, where he's been for over 10 years, and has helped grow Etsy from around 500 million in GMV to over 13 billion in GMV. This episode is for anyone working on marketplace, or looking for ideas to increase growth, or looking for advice on how to change your internal culture. We get into the big cultural transition that Etsy went through that took them to the next level. Lots of examples of product changes that helped them with conversion, acquisition, and retention. Plus how Etsy organizes their teams, thinks about supply versus demand dynamics, how Etsy got started with growing their initial supply, and also their initial demand. Plus a bunch of frameworks and hiring advice, and so much more. Enjoy this episode with Tim Holley after a short word from our sponsors.
(00:02:07):
This episode is brought to you by productroadmap.ai and Ignition. Productroadmap.ai is the first AI roadmapping suite. It helps ensure roadmaps drive revenue, by instantly aligning product with your sales and marketing teams to capture upsell opportunities.
(00:02:23):
Built by early leaders from [inaudible 00:02:26] and Craft, it automatically identifies feature gaps from your CRM data and your customer conversations, adds them to shareable roadmaps, easily prioritized by revenue impact, and then seamlessly closes the loop with sales reps via targeted notifications when feature gaps are closed.
(00:02:41):
As part of Ignition's broader go-to-market operating system, productroadmap.ai can also help create better handoffs and collaboration with product marketing teams, by giving both teams the tools to research, plan, orchestrate, and measure the process of building products and going to market. Packed with integrations, AI automation, and communication tools, it's truly a one-stop shop for product and marketing to bring things from concept to launch. To sign up, go to productroadmap.ai, and use promo code Lenny to get 75% off your first year.
(00:03:14):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like DraftKings, Zapier, ClickUp, Twitch, and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments.
(00:03:28):
Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern growth team stack. This leads to wasted time building internal tools, or trying to run your own experiments through a clunky marketing tool.
(00:03:41):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most about working there was our experimentation platform, where I was able to slice and dice data by device types, country, user stage. Eppo does all that and more, delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytic cycles, and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic click through metrics, and instead use your north star metrics like activation, retention, subscription, and payments. Eppo supports tests on the front end, on the backend, email marketing, even machine learning claims. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com. That's geteppo.com, and 10X your experiment velocity.
(00:04:24):
Tim, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.
Tim Holley (00:04:28):
Thank you for having me on, Lenny, really appreciate it. Looking forward to it.
Lenny (00:04:30):
I'm looking forward to it even more. So you've been at Etsy for I think over 10 years, although I did notice that you left for a year and ended up leading product at SoulCycle. So first of all, what is that about? What happened there?
Tim Holley (00:04:43):
Yeah, at the time, I'd been at Etsy for over six years, and I just had the itch. I wanted to go work on a different product, build different things, experience different industry. Along, had a theory that working on the proactive side of healthcare, meaning fitness and wellness, is how you achieve better outcomes. And it felt like SoulCycle was a really interesting way to do that. Pretty well-known brand, high street presence in many cities. Could you affect change through that? 
(00:05:12):
Ultimately realized it wasn't a place that I wanted to spend a ton of time and energy. And so through a lot of soul-searching, grown, I know I found my way back to Etsy, really anchoring on three things. One, working on a product that you care about that adds value to other people's lives. And so what we do every day at Etsy is we help our sellers make sales, and that's really meaningful for the vast majority of them. It's reaching an audience that they wouldn't be able to reach. And so that feels like a really great thing to get up every morning and work on. 
(00:05:46):
And so that's maybe the business and the product side, and the other side is people. It might sound a little twee, but just working with people who you can learn from and who you respect, and ultimately can have fun working with, it matters a ton. We spend a lot of time of our days and our lives at work, and so doing it with people who you really value, it's awesome. 
(00:06:05):
I have one memory that we used to have an engineer who used to be a standup comedian, and so that really pushed the boundaries of what a standup meant every day. And it was always a little fun, a little exciting. You never quite knew what you were going to get. And so just little things like that, they make the work life really, really great.
Lenny (00:06:25):
That's hilarious. I never thought it that way. I feel like every standup needs a standup comedian in their standup. Sounds like that should be part of agile. We should need to change the manifesto. 
(00:06:35):
So I've always seen the Etsy journey from the outside, and so there's a few things that I've always wanted to dig into. One is I just remember this New York Times story back in the day when your current CEO Josh Silverman joined, and it felt like a huge moment in the history of Etsy, where it feels like it just kind of transitioned from this touchy feely, everyone loves each other moment to just like, "Hey guys, we got to build a real business here that's sustainable." And it feels like many startups have to go through that transition where it's like, "Nothing's ever going to change. It's going to be so we're all family here," to just, "Things have to change. This isn't working." I'm curious what that was like living through that. 
Tim Holley (00:07:15):
Yeah, I mean the first thing I'll say is it was a hard transition, and I was personally fortunate in the sense that the transition you're speaking of in 2017 also happened to coincide with rounds of layoffs. And I was super fortunate that I didn't lose my job, so I don't want to presuppose that my version of hard is the same as another person's version of hard.
(00:07:38):
But I think a lot of us, and myself included, we had a lot of our identity tied up in Etsy and what we're doing, a really deep passion for the mission of the business and what we're trying to achieve. I just mentioned helping small independent sellers. And just to be clear, that hasn't gone away. I think that that's something we've been really successful at pulling through as a line that was true 10 years ago and is still true today. But it was a time when we were really forced to rethink a lot of how we worked and what we worked on. 
(00:08:12):
Just to use a small example, we had had a pretty entrenched consensus-based culture, where we would really debate a lot of decisions and a lot of features. And on the one hand, I think that that does lead to good outcomes, right? Thoughtful products that have a lot of viewpoints really baked into the core of the thinking. 
(00:08:33):
On the other hand, not fast. When you have your identity tied up in the company and what you do, and then you're kind of being asked or you realize that you need to change how you're working, it can feel pretty existential. It's really cutting to the core of who you are and things that you hold really true. 
(00:08:53):
The reality is it's a business, and we needed to get faster at launching features, improving the experience, and ultimately, having a predictable way to drive GMS, gross merchandise sales, which is our north star KPI. And so it definitely took some time to work through that, but we got to a good place, and the results over the last few years to some degree speak for themselves. But it was a testing and trying time for sure.
Lenny (00:09:20):
I'm always curious how these changes play out and what works in making change. Is there something that you remember that Josh did well or that leaders did well to help that transition? 
Tim Holley (00:09:29):
One thing that is just such a standout is having... And I mentioned GMS as our north star KPI, just having that, being absolutely front and center, being the drumbeat that we talk about in every meeting, the measuring stick that we measure the success of launches against. And maybe it's a bit surprising, but we didn't have that type of clarity in the past.
(00:09:51):
And so rallying everyone around that. And you might not pay into it directly. You might pay into it through one or two levels of abstraction, but you're still clearly aligned with what the company's trying to achieve. And that was something that was a really stark difference, and I think that helped.
(00:10:09):
It helped the prioritization discussion a lot. If you can't really articulate why this thing matters to driving GMS and the type of timeframe that we're talking about, be it a quarter or 12 months out, and different projects will contribute in different ways. But that was just one huge standout, and that's been a drumbeat over the years that let's continue to stay focused on that as a metric. 
(00:10:32):
The other thing to me is bringing an outside in perspective, really benchmarking against your competitors and your competitive set. Don't get me wrong, I think Etsy is a unique marketplace. Our sellers are independent sellers. They sell unique items. The reality though is that our buyers are shopping all over the internet. They're shopping on High Street, they're shopping in different places. And so we have to be aware of the broader context of where they're spending their dollars helps us make better decisions over time.
(00:11:04):
And so on the one hand, there is no one-to-one direct competitor to Etsy. But there are other businesses and other brands that are competing for eyeballs or wallets that we need to be aware of. And bringing that into the discussion was a really helpful one that helped ground us in the overall dynamics of what buyers are doing,, where they're spending their money, and how they think about us.
Lenny (00:11:28):
Is there anything else you took away as a leader from watching that shift, that you bring to making change, transitioning people to working in a different way?
Tim Holley (00:11:36):
Definitely focus on a clear KPI that the teams can rally around. That's one. The other is... And I respect Josh immensely on his ability to tell a really clear narrative and use that consistently over time. The old adage of you need to say something three times before people understand it. I would wager you need to say it another three times before they internalize it.
[NEW_PARAGRAPH]And having that be part of the day-to-day conversation, it seems like such a small thing, but it adds up to having clarity on goal, the KPI point, and then clarity on why, the narrative point. If you can marry those two things, I think that's an incredibly powerful combination.
Lenny (00:12:15):
While we're on this topic, I'm curious what Etsy's values are. I imagine you've codified a few, we call them core values at are Airbnbs or something like that at Etsy. And if so, I'm curious what they are.
Tim Holley (00:12:26):
We call them guiding principles at Etsy. We have a few of them, and I won't go through all of them, but just to give you a flavor, one of them is around digging deeper, and that really speaks to aiming to really understand the why behind a change, to really push on the insights that we're learning through qual or quant research, or other inputs that we might be looking at in order to make the best decision possible with the information we have at the time. 
(00:12:52):
Another example of a principle is minimizing waste. It aligns with how we think about product development, which is, we want to know, is the work we're doing adding value to the customer and the business? And so something that isn't working out a lot of times in product development we're wrong. And so being able to say, "No, this is no longer valuable, we need to move on to the next thing," has been something that's served us really well.
(00:13:17):
Ultimately, we are quite a small team. There's just over 2,000 people in the business, and if you then scale back to engineering and product, we're not big. And so we have to be really diligent about how we're investing our time and our resources in order to be successful.
Lenny (00:13:31):
Awesome. Okay, so another big moment as an outsider that it feels like Etsy went through is during Covid. There's this huge transition to e-commerce, and I think Etsy was a big beneficiary of that. People wanting to buy more stuff online, go to stores less. And it feels like it was a huge accelerant for the business. I'm curious just what that experience was like leading the product team through that.
Tim Holley (00:13:51):
It was quite wild, I'll say that. And to be more specific, as many or all of us did in probably the world of tech at least, we went home not knowing what the next weeks or weeks as we thought would bring, turns out years. But when the CDC mandated face masks in, I think it was early April 2020, that's when essentially we went to sleep one day with our typical April traffic, typical April sales, and then it was Black Friday overnight.
(00:14:26):
And in part because nobody knew where to find face masks. Our sellers are incredibly astute business people. And if you had been making wedding dresses, and you know how to sew, and you've got material, and you've got a bit of time, making a mask is quite a simple task. And so we just saw this huge surge of demand, and then supply rising to meet it.
(00:14:47):
And we did something that far as I know we've never done an Etsy's past, which is we put out a call to our sellers to say, "Now's the time. Now's the time to make face masks if you can." And so it felt like this is our time to shine, to really help sellers continue to make sales, to help buyers find this critical item that they were looking for.
(00:15:08):
So it was a very, very exciting couple of weeks while we were kind of adapting to that change. And we were just really... Every day there would be standups. "What's happening? What do we need to change?"
(00:15:20):
I remember distinctly, we were worried about certain sellers not being able to meet the demand that they were seeing. And so we did the old-fashioned thing, of not personally, but we called them and we said, "How are you guys doing? What can we do to help?" And some people said, "We've got this, don't worry. This is squarely in our wheelhouse. We can absolutely meet the supply." And others said, "Actually, we need a little bit of help. We need to take a pause for a moment while we catch up with all these orders, and then we can come back to taking more."
[NEW_PARAGRAPH]And so just getting back to good old-fashioned know your customer, what do they need from you at that moment was just a really kind of powerful thing that took away from that time. 
(00:16:03):
And then from there, things kept going, and we really worked hard to make sure that the story was not just about face masks for our buyers, that they understood that Etsy's a place for so many different categories and so many different items. And that was then the next phase of the challenge. We got a huge influx of new or reactivated buyers. How do we keep them around? How do we make sure that the product does a little bit more work to retain them, and can really have hooks that bring them back time and again? And so that was kind of the journey that we then went on mid-2020, to probably the subsequent 18 months or so.
Lenny (00:16:39):
Is there anything you learned as a leader working in leading teams through that time? It must've been a pretty surreal experience, a lot of stress, people worrying about their own health.
Tim Holley (00:16:46):
I was one of the fortunate ones back then. No kids, worked in an industry that was clearly critical at the time. So I am in awe of how parents worked through that time. So stressful yes, but not to the extent that other people experienced the stress of Covid. 
(00:17:05):
We just tried a lot of stuff. I remember early on, I think we had maybe even daily, but at least three times a week coffee chats with the team, just like, "How are you guys doing? What's going on?" And at a certain point we realized all we're talking about is exactly the same things. Nobody wants to be on more calls and more video video chats. And so we just continued to evolve, and really try to keep a pulse on what the team needs.
(00:17:29):
And that, like I said, given context of being parents or whatever, differed pretty dramatically person to person. So definitely wasn't a one size fits all solution. That's more on the people side.
(00:17:40):
I think on the product side, as I mentioned, we were really starting to get focused on driving retention, or maybe said slightly differently, driving frequency. And that was a newer topic for us. We've long at Etsy been a really, and maybe rose-tinted glasses speaking a little bit, but a really great experiment, A/B testing driven culture. And so when you think about things like retention, you can absolutely test, course I'm not saying you can't, but you're looking at a different time horizon. Instead of someone making a purchase in that visit or in a week, you're looking at do they come back in 30 days, in 60 days, in 90 days?
(00:18:19):
And so that forced us out of our comfort zone to some degree in terms of how we understand, how we measure change, how long we're willing to wait to see it show up. Back to the incrementality point on minimizing waste, is this actually adding value to the business? And so those were great challenges to tackle, of course on a pretty heightened degree of intensity and focus from the business. But that was an exciting time.
Lenny (00:18:46):
Okay. So speaking of that, I want to chat about the marketplace and the marketplace you've built and things you've learned from building. I think it's one of the, I don't know, maybe top 10 marketplace businesses in the world, somewhere in there. And first of all, I'm curious just broadly, what have you learned is really important to just building a really successful thriving marketplace? And then I'll dig into more details. But just broadly, is there anything that comes to mind?
Tim Holley (00:19:09):
This narrative is still there, but I think we really focused heavily on the seller side, so the supply side of the business early on. And we really immersed ourselves in who sellers are, what they need, and how what they need maybe differs from what the solutions that they can find elsewhere.
(00:19:30):
Back in the day, we were doing studio visits with sellers. We were going to their workshops, we were going to their homes. We were seeing how they make items, we were seeing how they package and ship them out. We were bringing them into the office when we were running hack weeks to say, "Hey, we've got this crazy idea. Is this interesting?" So trying to involve them in the product development process to the extent that it was reasonable or feasible. 
(00:19:57):
And so I think that served us really well. We have a very deep and rich understanding of our sellers. And then the next phase and the more recent phase has been, how do we create a world-class buyer experience that ultimately drives sales for our sellers? Because when you have over 100 million items, all of which are unique, you've got a different challenge than when you have 10,000 SKUs that you could kind of find anywhere or on many retailers.
(00:20:22):
And so topics like structured data, topics like how do we help you gain confidence? Buyer this thing will meet your needs from a seller who you may never have heard of. They don't have a brand that you you've ever encountered before. And so we have some kind of somewhat unique challenges on that front where we need to lean into themes that other marketplaces absolutely touch on. 
(00:20:45):
For example, customer reviews play a big role in our experience, but they play a heightened role given the things I mentioned, right? Unique inventory from a seller that is maybe an independent person who is a single entrepreneur, it's one person. 
Lenny (00:21:04):
So you mentioned that initially, the focus was on sellers, which is really interesting because a lot of marketplaces, first of all need to figure out which side do we focus on? Who do we cater to most? And the way you described it is initially it was how do we make sure the sellers that are joining at Etsy are most well-served? And then later on it became more of a focus on the buyer side?
Tim Holley (00:21:22):
Yeah, I guess I'm painting it as a linear approach. It certainly was not. Because if you've got supply without demand, then you don't really have a marketplace. If you've got demand and no supply to meet it, then you also don't have a marketplace. So there's this flip-flop between, do you have enough supply to satiate the demand you have? And playing that out is certainly, I feel like art, not necessarily strictly science.
Lenny (00:21:48):
Yeah. So I'm curious how you all think about that actually. So at Airbnb, there's always this thinking of, who do we prioritize if we have to make a decision? is it host or guest? And it's shifted over the years at Airbnb. How do you all think about that as a, "Here's who we're going to prioritize if we really have to make a decision"?
Tim Holley (00:22:06):
And maybe to your point, that's also evolved at Etsy. And the place we're in at the moment is the job of a marketplace, even pre the technology definition of a marketplace is a seller will go there to make sales. And if they're not making sales, they probably won't go to that marketplace. And so we really see it as paramount that we have a qualified set of buyers who are looking for the items, the type of items our sellers are selling, and that we can help them make a purchase decision, and therefore a seller maker sale. 
(00:22:41):
That doesn't mean that every single team is working on building features for buyers because it doesn't work. Not least because you have a limited piece of real estate marketplace. And if you have too many teams working on it at one time, you'll end up getting in each other's way, and you won't be that productive. And so of course, we have a team that's laser focused on improving the seller experience. How do they list their inventory? How do they manage their sales? How do they fulfill their items? As one example.
(00:23:08):
But really back to the GMS is the north star, GMS represents a buyer buying from a seller. So it doesn't necessarily say build only for one of your audiences or one of your customers, but it says that that's really the job to be done here is helping facilitate that transaction.
Lenny (00:23:24):
That's exactly the same transition Airbnb went through. Initially it was focus on hosts, make sure hosts are the happiest people, and do everything we need to make them happy. And then eventually the business is the customers buying the product, and you have to make sure that they're the happy people. And sometimes you have to push hosts to do things they're not as excited to do for the good of the guest side.
Tim Holley (00:23:47):
And I think it's also the fact that we as the marketplace, and I'm curious if this was true at Airbnb as well, but we have the insight into information, into data, that an individual seller won't. And so we can help them make hopefully better decisions that lead to sales, leveraging the insights that we have. 
(00:24:06):
If you put an item on sale during this time period, chances are it's going to resonate with buyers, and you might get an incremental sale. And so trying to be really data-driven in how we help and guide sellers to take actions that we really believe will be valuable for them and their business, because simply, they're either a small business owner and so they don't have time to do that level of digging. Or it's simply not accessible to them because they have the worldview of their business, and we're looking at the entirety of the marketplace.
Lenny (00:24:37):
Maybe on this thread going a little nerdier, how do you think about supply constraint versus demand constraint? Is that something that comes up? I imagine maybe it's per category.
Tim Holley (00:24:45):
At the high level, we have 100 million items. So if you take that number at face value, you would think we do not have a supply constraint. We want to drive buyers to that supply. When you dig in maybe a more category, subcategory, sub subcategory level, that's where we do start to see pockets where, maybe we want to increase the type and the amount of inventory we have in wall decor. Seeing something behind you, that might not be the right example. But that's where we then start to focus and say, are there areas where we want to lean in?
(00:25:21):
Ultimately, really thinking about, how do we help buyers choose? Because that's when you have 100 million items and even in a sub subcategory or for a specific search query, you still generally have a lot of results to choose from. How do you distinguish one item or one seller from another, based on the needs that you have? When is it going to arrive? How much does it cost? Is it this size or that size? So really trying to lean into those types of things. And again, to some degree that's econ 101. But given the scale we're at, it is a pretty unique challenge.
Lenny (00:25:55):
What are ways you encourage your sellers to offer the things that you think you're lacking?
Tim Holley (00:26:01):
Back to that data-driven point, right? If we can clearly articulate that if you show more photos, you will help buyers understand your item in new ways, in deeper ways, then you're more likely to make a sale. That's maybe a somewhat reductive example, but those are the types of things where we generally know either through the data that we observe based on activity on the marketplace, and/or through the research we're doing, that this will be valuable. The challenge is often, we have so many things that we want our sellers to do. What's the most important thing for them to do right now? 
(00:26:37):
And that maybe changes somewhat seasonally. We're slowly starting to get towards the holiday season. And that just has a heightened purchase. It's a heightened time of purchasing. And contrast that with when it's around Mother's Day, maybe different type of inventory works really well. And so we need different inputs from our sellers. Because ultimately, they're business people. They have limited time in the day, and they want to spend time making. So how can we make sure that the time they spend on Etsy, managing their inventory, offering customer support is as valuable as possible?
Lenny (00:27:09):
So essentially in product messaging and recommendations that you're showing to the sellers is the way you communicate to them?
Tim Holley (00:27:16):
Yeah. And to some degree, we use the buyer experience to kind of signal what matters, right? When we're clearly highlighting photos, then that's obviously a very overly simple example.
Lenny (00:27:29):
Sellers [inaudible 00:27:30] here's what the search experience is highlighting.
Tim Holley (00:27:33):
As an example, yeah. And then really thinking about some of the signals or the snippets of information that we highlight. What goes into that? We know that great customer service a seller, they'll be responding to... We call them convos, but messages on our platform. They'll be responding really quickly. And that's something that we then highlight in the experience, and that if you're meeting that criteria, then we can start to signal to a buyer that, yes, this person offers really excellent customer service, and we can set your expectations accordingly.
Lenny (00:28:06):
Awesome. Yeah, we saw the same thing at Airbnb. One of the things that I worked on, that was one of the bigger shifts in the marketplace was shifting Airbnb to an instant buying experience. And many hosts didn't want that, because they really wanted to vet the guest and make sure they are happy with them. But it ended up being so important to conversion that we just encouraged them to turn it on. 
(00:28:25):
And one of the ways that worked best is exactly what you shared, where in the search experience, when someone came and searched, we just defaulted the search results to only show you instantly bookable listings. And hosts started to realize, "Oh shit, this is where things are going. I think I got to really take this seriously." And that worked really well.
Tim Holley (00:28:42):
Yeah, interesting. 
Lenny (00:28:43):
Pulling that thread a little bit more, I'm curious what you've seen as some of the bigger conversion wins on the buyer's side in terms of experiments you've run that have had some of the bigger impact.
Tim Holley (00:28:53):
I won't say we're consistently, because that suggests that we don't know what we're doing we do. We're often surprised by what works in an outsized way and what we think is going to be a knock it out of the park success, ends up being of minimal value. But coming back to maybe some of the themes alluded to earlier, reviews have long been really important. 
(00:29:13):
And when you're reviewing an item like I said, that's unique, that's from an independent seller, the type of information that another buyer is looking for is maybe a little different than other marketplaces, or even platforms that they might be shopping on.
(00:29:27):
And so really trying to lean into, well, what does it look like in a buyer's hand, in a buyer's home? Maybe that gives the next purchaser a bit more confidence that it's the right size, it's the right color, whatever it might be. And so that's long been a track that has been very fruitful for us, and continues to be something that we iterate on, that we focus on.
Lenny (00:29:47):
Just I understand, that essentially it's recommending to sellers, "Here's the photos you should have on your list."
Tim Holley (00:29:52):
Rather, collecting from buyers. So a seller will give us the photos that they're going to take, and then we can augment those with the, we call them buyer review photos. But ultimately, the experience the purchaser is having either through photo or video is super, super valuable.
Lenny (00:30:12):
Great. Okay, cool. So adding specific photos that you find help buyers convert. Keep going.
Tim Holley (00:30:18):
And then the other side is really leaning into maybe more the behavioral economic tactics of just helping buyers make decisions. Signals and nudges is how you'll see it referred to in literature. And we've seen great success in elevating little snippets of information that really help a buyer understand, "There is actually only one of these. Well, that's good information to know." It's something that then fits into their decision-making process that might've otherwise been buried.
(00:30:48):
And so really leaning into the quick summaries, the easy glanceable information that enables a buyer to gain enough confidence to say, "Yep, out of these 100 million items or the results for this search query, this is the one that I feel best about buying." We've seen lots of success on that track as well. 
Lenny (00:31:10):
That was a track at Airbnb as well. One of the ways they did this is they called it a rare gem, which is something that's available right now, that's very popular, and they created this kind of iconography for it. And engineers on the team ended up for Halloween dressing up as a rare gem. It became a whole thing at the company. And what's funny about Airbnb is every home is a one of a kind. There's only one left always, and there's always jokes about, "We should always be one left, you better book now."
Tim Holley (00:31:36):
I believe it was introduced... I don't believe. I know it was introduced as issue or a bug. But we ended up showing four stars and the fifth star when it was a half star, got rendered as a horse emoji. And so for a second there on Etsy, we had four stars and a horse showing up for some of our review ratings. And that spawned a huge amount of internal fun. And then back to your point around Halloween, we had a few teams being four stars and a horse. It was pretty interesting. 
Lenny (00:32:15):
Was it like five people were four people were a star and there's a horse person?
Tim Holley (00:32:18):
Yeah, exactly.
Lenny (00:32:21):
Today's episode is brought to you by OneSchema, the embeddable CSV importer for SaaS. Customers always seem to want to give you their data in the messiest possible CSV file, and building a spreadsheet importer becomes a never ending sync for your engineering and support resources. You keep adding features to your spreadsheet importer, the customers keep running into issues. Six months later, you're fixing yet another date conversion edge case bug. 
(00:32:43):
Most tools aren't built for handling messy data, but OneSchema is. Companies like Scale AI and Pave are using OneSchema to make it fast and easy to launch delightful spreadsheet import experiences from embeddable CSV import to importing CSVs from an SFTP folder on a recurring basis. 
(00:33:01):
Spreadsheet import is such an awful experience in so many products. Customers get frustrated by useless messages like error on line 53, and never end up getting started with your product. OneSchema intelligently corrects messy data so that your customers don't have to spend hours in Excel just to get started with your product. For listeners of this podcast, OneSchema is offering a $1,000 discount. Learn more at oneschema.co/lenny.
(00:33:27):
So going down this track a little bit more, one of the biggest wins for Airbnb's search experience was this very small idea of just, what if you open each listing in the search results in a new tab, and ended up converting 1%, like increasing conversion by 1%? Is there anything like that that you remember that you've done of just like, "Holy moly, that was so simple, but such a big win"?
Tim Holley (00:33:47):
Yeah, we have similar learnings around that exact example. Oftentimes I think about effort and reward. So it might be a smallish GMS win or conversion rate win, but it was a one line text change. And we've seen those where we add a small snippet of, maybe we feel like it's almost marketing copy, and it ends up having an outsized impact. 
(00:34:13):
We had one example where we added some text to the cart experience, and we just saw huge uplift that we really, really didn't expect. It was more us communicating our values as a business, and it was something that really seemed to resonate with our buyers. And so that drove conversion. We've got examples where it's a one line copy change, and it's quite shocking the impact that that can have.
Lenny (00:34:37):
I'm curious what that change actually was, the text change that had that much impact, if you can recall.
Tim Holley (00:34:42):
We've long and continued to invest in sustainability, and the text change was in our cart where we call out Etsy offsets carbon emissions from every delivery. And just adding that simple line of text was something that, like I said, really resonated with our buyers and the type of customer that comes to Etsy, and really drove conversion.
Lenny (00:35:03):
I had Ronny Kohavi on the podcast who's one of the lead experts on experimentation, and he had the stat that 80% of experiments fail at each company on average. Does that sound about right in terms of how you guys find experiments working out? 
Tim Holley (00:35:18):
Yeah.
Lenny (00:35:18):
Awesome. Okay. What is your just general philosophy and experimentation? Does everything run as an experiment? Do things sometimes not run an experiment? How do you think about that at Etsy?
Tim Holley (00:35:28):
Right now, the vast majority of our changes do. And to be perfectly candid, I think that's one of our growth edges as a product org, and maybe even as a company, is bringing in different ways to validate changes. Because to some degree, or maybe the way I think about experimentation, that's the highest bar. That proves with near absolute certainty that there's a causal relationship between the change you made and the KPI that you want to move.
[NEW_PARAGRAPH]But I think that it maybe misses the point in some changes or some areas where you are working towards a bigger net new thing or this specific change won't really be indicative of the greater whole you're building towards.
(00:36:14):
So like I said, I mentioned earlier, we've long been a very A/B testing driven organization, not least because Etsy's background and history has deep, deep roots in an incredible engineering culture. And so that's really tried and true. So the vast majority of things are tested in that way. 
(00:36:33):
We're expanding how we think about looking at cohorts over time. I mentioned retention earlier, that to some degree, it necessitates a different type of test. When we look at our SEO work, you can't think about it in exactly the same ways.
(00:36:46):
But the through line is, is the change that we're making adding value? And that's what we want to try to understand. A/B testing is a great way to do that. There are others, some of which we're starting to employ, others that we we'll continue to investigate and think about how we can leverage.
Lenny (00:37:02):
Is there an example of anything? And if there's not, that's totally cool, of something that you shipped that was maybe negative on an experiment results, or you just didn't want to write as an experiment.
Tim Holley (00:37:12):
When we're collecting inputs from sellers, we just simply don't feel it's appropriate to not either show or honor. We talk about a tried and true practice of sales and discounting. If a seller offers something on sale, then we need to show that. We are really curious about how that actually drives buyer behavior. And there's ways that we can kind of construct pre-post analysis and things like that to try to understand the impact. But ultimately, those are the kind of areas where we err on the side looking at our data in different ways. And so we have maybe a slightly different degree of confidence in the value, but we're still confident that it does help the marketplace as a whole.
Lenny (00:37:55):
That's a great example. Yeah, I'm not sure what I do there. That is tricky. So we've been talking about conversion. I'm curious in terms of acquisition, what you've seen work. And just generally, how do people find Etsy? How do you drive top of funnel for Etsy?
Tim Holley (00:38:06):
Yes. There's two sides to Etsy, right? There's the seller and the buyer. Getting in the Wayback Machine, on the seller side, we would be at craft fairs like Renegade and other places where our sellers were selling in person and really letting them know that Etsy exists. And so that was very boots on the ground, let's get out and try to acquire sellers into the marketplace. Some of that predates me to some degree. We were probably doing it on the tail end when I joined.
(00:38:37):
And then we have a lot of great word of mouth through our sellers. A seller probably knows other people who are similarly inclined to be incredible craftspeople, who want to sell their items. And so we've seen some success with our... We have a Teams platform where sellers can come together, ask each other questions, and the word of mouth type of growth through that.
(00:38:56):
On the buyer side, we really leveraged the fact that we have a ton of inventory. And to some degree, it ends up being quite a long tail of inventory where we can meet really niche and specific needs. And so that lends itself really well to thinking about SEO, lends itself really well to thinking about Google Shopping, where someone is not on Etsy, but is often looking for something either somewhat or very specific. And we can really meet their needs in a really meaningful way by showing them not only just a single item, but maybe that and then other options that they might find that are of a similar vein, in a similar, sub categories in some cases. And so those have been long tried and true areas that we've invested in, and we've seen really great success in driving new buyers to Etsy.
Lenny (00:39:44):
I've researched and written about that story of how Etsy started with sellers and craft fairs. And so that's a really classic story. And I think there's also an element of the early sellers drove the early buyers, because they're just advertising their listing page, "Here's where you could go buying," which is a really unfair rare, opportunity to grow the marketplace by just focusing on sellers.
Tim Holley (00:40:04):
I mean, yes, and a seller is a buyer. And so if they're making something that they've poured their heart into, chances are they will value that exact same behavior in someone else. And so if they're selling an item, they're looking for other things in maybe not their exact category, but in adjacent categories, and they become buyers. So it is a nice dynamic when that starts to work.
Lenny (00:40:29):
Yeah. So many natural advantages to getting this marketplace off the ground. How cool is that? You mentioned word of mouth as a big part of how Etsy started spreading. I imagine even today there's a lot of just, "Hey, you should check out Etsy." Is there anything you've done that accelerates word of mouth or build on word of mouth, referrals comes to mind? Is there anything along those lines?
Tim Holley (00:40:46):
Yeah, we dabbled with referral programs a while ago, probably eight some years ago. What we saw, it was a different time. And so I think we maybe didn't value a new buyer, for example, in the way we do today. Because to some degree, you're unlocking future value. They make a single purchase, and then the bet is over time they'll go on to make subsequent purchases. We didn't necessarily have that as deep an understanding then as we do now. So our buyer referral program ultimately wasn't a huge success.
(00:41:15):
But on the seller side, this was back in the days of Dropbox referral program being a huge, huge driver of their growth, and the whole get concept that was really prevalent back then. And on the seller side, one of the things that we really leaned into was, on Etsy, for those who aren't familiar, it costs 20 cents to list an item.
(00:41:36):
And that may seem like a very small financial outlay to get started, but it's a little bit of a barrier. And the more we can do to remove those, the higher chance that someone will either become a seller or list more items.
(00:41:51):
So we really leaned into that as the currency for the seller referral program. And coming back to what I said around Teams, that was a really great way to supercharge some of that activity that was either happening, but more of it could happen, or really helping a seller understand, "Oh yeah, there is a hook here. If I offer this person, I refer them, they'll get some listing credits. It'll be easier for them to open their shop. And then when I need to list more items, I also have credits that I can apply." So that was one small area. I wouldn't say it was a huge driver of growth. But in certain markets, in certain pockets, we saw it work pretty well.
Lenny (00:42:27):
Awesome. That also helps with fraud, which is a huge problem with referral programs where the credit is just, you can list on Etsy. It's not like you can steal a lot of money away from the business. So that's clever.
Tim Holley (00:42:39):
Yeah.
Lenny (00:42:40):
Okay. I want to talk about one other part of the funnel, retention. Is there anything you've learned that has been really effective to help with the retention?
Tim Holley (00:42:46):
We have long had features that are retentive in their nature. Things like, on Etsy, we call them favorites. That might be liking or a similar action on other places. But how do we think about the habit loop of if you take an action, what's the trigger and then what's the reward? 
[NEW_PARAGRAPH]And so using a favorite as an example, you favorite an item. That's a pretty strong ish... Of course, adding it to your cart or maybe purchasing it, that's the strongest of signals, but you've shown intent. 
(00:43:21):
So what can we do with that information? We can then say, "The seller put it on sale. You should come back and check it out. This is selling out. There's only one of this item left. You showed some intent, you might want to come back and get it." And that's just one example of trying to close those loops.
(00:43:35):
And that's where we've worked on things like, we call it the updates feed, essentially a feed of activity that you've taken, that we're demonstrating how it's changed, what's new, and then pulling in the tried and true tactic of push notifications to make you aware of that, such that you're using your phone all the time. You see that show up. That's a pretty great notification to get right. "The thing that I really liked is now on sale. I want to check that out."
(00:44:00):
And so those are examples where really leaning into that habit loop framework has helped us understand, we've got a lot of this activity. How do we close the loop? How do we make it really valuable for our buyers?
Lenny (00:44:11):
Zooming out a little bit, it's kind of wild that Etsy can exist in a world of eBay and Amazon. And I'm just curious what it is that you think the founders and the team did early on to carve out this space of, I know you could buy things from people, you can buy things on Amazon really quickly, to create a world where Etsy builds this massive business that continues to thrive. What do you think was done so well to carve out the space?
Tim Holley (00:44:36):
I think that to some degree, resolves down to... And maybe that's a little too extreme, but a key component is the brand. The brand stands for something in people's minds. And that helps understand you're not going to get the same inventory on Etsy. You shouldn't expect the same inventory on Etsy as you might be looking for on eBay. It doesn't make sense to our buyers. The items that our sellers sell are unique. 
(00:45:07):
And so I think that as the core nugget, combined with how we think about policies, and our way to some degree, maintain the integrity of the marketplace, those two things combined do set us apart. And I think if you ask many people, certainly here in the US, what they think of Etsy, a very specific image will be conjured up. That may be one that we want to evolve and build on, but it feels quite distinct. 
(00:45:37):
And it's not the same as eBay and it's not the same as Amazon. And I think there's real deep value in that. And I wasn't here at the very beginning, but it's certainly something that was there at the very beginning of Etsy, that is still a through line to where we are today.
Lenny (00:45:53):
That makes absolute sense to me. On the other hand, I also don't know how that happens. Is there anything that you think about, of how the team did that and how they built that brand? What are some of the important elements? Is that a specific aesthetic? Is it a certain type of supply that you stuck to? What do you think was so important to building that brand?
Tim Holley (00:46:12):
I think it is the supply. If you think about the marketplace, the vast majority of content is maybe what we might consider UGC. It's either the item is from the seller. Or as was mentioning before, the buyer review is from the buyer. And so just being really clear about what's okay to sell and what's not okay, I think does really differentiate us. 
(00:46:38):
I also think over the years, our brand, and our aesthetic, and how we position ourselves has evolved, will continue to evolve as it should. But to the point where we are now, the statement we have is keep commerce human. And that feels really simple, super pithy, easy to remember, but has lineage when you go all the way back to where we started in terms of really valuing the unique, valuing the handmade. And so that does permeate decision making, how we show up, the type of features we work on, the things we would prioritize. Maybe never say never, but an item getting dropped off by a drone and a person never touches it, that doesn't feel very Etsy. That's not something that we might lean into.
Lenny (00:47:22):
It's interesting how many parallels Etsy has to Airbnb, because Airbnb is the same general idea. People's homes, people making things. And then also, I think the tagline for Airbnb early on was travel like a human. So it was actually a really similar concept.
Tim Holley (00:47:35):
Yeah.
Lenny (00:47:36):
Which touches on a question I wanted to talk about, which is many marketplaces as they grow, become supply constrained. And then there's this pressure to add different types of supply. In Airbnb's case, it was, "We should add hotels, we should add property management, vacation rental companies on here. We should have everything people want to book, because we're losing business. They could book anything here, they should be able to." But the tension is, then we become like everyone else. And then what is Airbnb in that case? 
(00:48:04):
And I think you went through that experience where there was a lot of cheap products from overseas, and it was kind of being flooded. Is that true, I guess? And then just how do you think about that limit, and where you draw that line?
Tim Holley (00:48:17):
Yeah, I think it does come back to some degree to the brand and the policy point from just before. And we take enforcing our policies really seriously. It's not an easy job at our scale, and that means we need to continue to invest and continue to make sure that only the best items, the most relevant items are on Etsy. That job is never done. The team that that works super, super hard, and is always looking for new signals to understand what maybe doesn't meet our criteria.
(00:48:49):
Generally speaking, supply is something that we have in spades for the most part. Back to the point we talked about earlier, one of the things that we grappled with was around, how can we help sellers scale? They sell great inventory, but maybe they just don't have enough of it, or they can't meet the demand, because they're making everything by hand.
(00:49:10):
So one of the things that there was an evolution, was leaning into what today we call production assistance. And the way I think about that is you still need to understand the provenance of your item. If you are saying, "I have this design, I'm just going to throw it over the fence to a manufacturer that I've never met, that I don't know. I don't understand their processes, I may not agree with them," that doesn't meet our criteria. You need to understand how it's being made, who is making it, have a relationship with the person who's helping you scale your business. But that's something that we saw from people who maybe gravitate more towards being designers than being able to actually make the thing. They have this excellent idea, they just can't see it come to life.
[NEW_PARAGRAPH]And so they need some help. And that was something we leaned into to be able to, like I said, help sellers that maybe weren't able to make a thing and sell it on Etsy. Or for sellers who were reaching the limits of what they could supply, really take it to the next level, and make more items such that they could make more sales.
Lenny (00:50:10):
So it sounds like essentially, this is just evolving definition of what a supplies allowed on Etsy, a team that stays on top of that. Imagine there was just a hard decision at one point of just, "We will limit supply, and here's the supply that we want on the platform. Everything else we're going to take off."
Tim Holley (00:50:25):
We would limit the type of items, the number of those items, that as we talked about, there's a lot of them. But really having that clear definition. In some cases, it's easy. Some things, they violate legal definitions. And those things, that's the easy stuff to think about. It's where it's a little more gray, that it gets a little trickier.
Lenny (00:50:47):
That reminds me, so my wife is actually a designer, and she produces these hilarious charts about life stuff. And people take her designs and just sell them on every platform on Zazzle, and probably Etsy, but everywhere. And she's always trying to hunt them down and get them to take them off. But it's such a pain for a small designer. It's not an Etsy problem, it's just a general internet problem.
Tim Holley (00:51:08):
Yeah. And back to the, we have teams hard at work thinking about IP, and how to police it, how to enforce it. 
Lenny (00:51:16):
It's tough.
Tim Holley (00:51:17):
Not a domain I will suggest I'm an expert in, really, really tricky stuff, but we've got to be beyond that.
Lenny (00:51:23):
Yeah. Another I think problem that's sort of unique to Etsy, something that I think people call the graduation problem. Which is where you join Etsy, things start to grow, you become really successful. And then you're like, "Why am I paying Etsy all these fees? Why don't I just make my own website and just sell it directly, and not pay any fees?" And I think you guys went through that. And so if that's true, is there anything you've learned about just how to avoid getting people to want to leave?
Tim Holley (00:51:48):
I think the core thought there is, our fees are generally low and highly competitive. So from that perspective, there's a reason to stay on Etsy. What we've seen and what we know, our sellers are really smart business people. And so if they can distribute their products through another channel, that might be their own website, another marketplace in person. Probably going to try to do that. They want to make more sales. Not all, but many of them are wired to want to grow their business.
(00:52:21):
And so really understanding the role that we play in that construct of distribution channels to make it a little reductive is really helpful to understand. And to some degree, we want to be the place that not only they make sales on, but they love to sell on, because our tools are really catered to the needs that they have.
(00:52:42):
So there is some degree of stickiness. I mentioned Teams earlier. There are places where sellers go to congregate, share ideas, share grievances in some cases, but ultimately support each other. And so there are reasons to stick around. I'm sure there certainly sellers who scale out of Etsy who realize, "I want to build my own website," to the example you cited. The reality is that's neither cheap nor fast. It's hard work. It's hard work to build, hard work to maintain, expensive to drive traffic to. And so that may be a part of the way they want to take their business, but oftentimes, Etsy still does play a role in how they're thinking, about where they make sales, and ultimately where they're going to see growth from.
Lenny (00:53:24):
The cool thing that I saw online about you, is that you built a marketplace essentially within Etsy called Etsy Studio. And I'm not sure if that's around anymore, but I'm curious what the story there was, and what you learned from that experience, and current status.
Tim Holley (00:53:40):
Yeah, well researched. Because no, it is no longer around. The white space we saw with studio was essentially saying, on the one hand you've got Pinterest fails, right? You've got all these great inspiring items or projects on Pinterest, and then you have people who've no idea how to make them, and they get so frustrated.
(00:54:01):
And then on the other hand, you've got a marketplace like Michael's, or these other places where you might go for craft supplies. They have stuff, but they don't necessarily have inspiration. And how can we play in that intersection of the idea and the items and the tutorials to see that idea come to life?
(00:54:21):
So the genesis of the idea, felt from a brand perspective, super aligned. We stand for creativity, we stand for makers. And so we saw it as a big opportunity. The launch happened to coincide with the pivot in 2017, to really focusing on the core marketplace or refocusing on the core marketplace, maybe I should say. 
(00:54:41):
And so it became clear that when we laid out what we're optimizing for, which is driving sales in the short term, marketing dollars being as ROI positive as possible, having teams focused on the core marketplace, it didn't check any of those boxes. And so really, really tough decision and hard to manage through, but that was ultimately the right call for the business to say, "This no longer makes sense given the new constraints that we're operating in, given the new goals that we have."
Lenny (00:55:10):
Makes sense. Also something that happened to Airbnb a lot, trying new things that they didn't work out, had to move on. 
Tim Holley (00:55:15):
Yep.
Lenny (00:55:16):
That's how it goes. 
Tim Holley (00:55:17):
Yep.
Lenny (00:55:18):
Shifting a little bit to just product leadership and writing the product team, and just a few more questions, what's something that you've found to be really important to having a productive, well run, well executing product team?
Tim Holley (00:55:31):
Yeah. One of the things that's certainly not completely novel but I think we have a pretty unique interpretation of is how we collaborate between functions. You'll often hear the three legs of the stool where you've got product and engine design,, and we've evolved that to five legs of the stool. And I fully recognize that a five legged stool probably is not a very stable thing, but go with the analogy for a second-
Lenny (00:55:56):
I think it's even more stable. Is that the most stable stool or is it less stable with five legs?
Tim Holley (00:56:00):
You probably need a really flat surface. 
Lenny (00:56:02):
That makes sense.
Tim Holley (00:56:03):
Regardless, of course we've got product eng design and we've got our insights partners. So research and analytics, and we've got our marketing partners really working in a tight team to build the best products possible. And so I think that we can continue to get better absolutely, at how we make decisions and how we bring the various viewpoints together. So to some degree it's not the easiest path, but it's the best path I think, where you're really incorporating different viewpoints, different constraints, different considerations into the features and the products that we're building. And treating that as the core leadership team I think is really valuable.
(00:56:45):
And maybe that's partly because generally, we don't subscribe to this idea of PM as the mini CEO. You're up there directing from on high that we're going to build that feature and we're going to do that. And that's just not the type of culture that we have, and generally speaking from what I've seen, doesn't lead to good decisions or the best features or product being built. And so collaboration is something we really value and that we try to live through how we structure our teams, how we make our decisions. Is it perfect? Like I said, absolutely not. I think it's the way that we've found being really successful building product.
Lenny (00:57:21):
Do you give the PM just a little more say in decision making and ask? Because with five people in the leadership team, you talked about how back in the day, it was like too consensus driven maybe, and I wonder how you navigate that with five decision makers.
Tim Holley (00:57:35):
Yeah, we're always looking to clarify, or re-clarify, or restate who ultimately is accountable. And in many cases it is the PM, right? You are the one who Nick, our CPO like to say you don't have to have the best ideas, but you have to choose the best ideas. And so really figuring out how you're selecting what you're going to build and then living with the consequences.
(00:58:00):
Of course ideally, successful. In many cases, back to your 80% stat that 80% of experiments don't work, owning what's next, right? Okay, did we learn from that? If we did, what are we going to do about it? That definitely does fall to the PM. It doesn't give you the permission to ignore other viewpoints or make decisions in a vacuum. It's certainly not that. But ultimately, when we need to move forward, it is the PM that is on the hook for those things.
Lenny (00:58:26):
Awesome. So essentially, the PM can make the call if there's an unclear consensus?
Tim Holley (00:58:33):
And given so many places are, but we're so heavily led by the insights either qual or quant. The decision in many instances is clear. When it's not, that's when we need the product person to step forward and say, "We're going in this direction." Don't know if it's going to work out, but we'll certainly learn and we'll move forward.
Lenny (00:58:50):
Awesome. And then just to go on this topic a little bit more, your teams are cross-functional dedicated teams. I imagine it sounds like there's these five leads for each team. Is that roughly how you organize?
Tim Holley (00:59:01):
Yeah. And the fifth leg, if you will, of marketing, that might be product marketing in some cases, that might be brand marketing in others. And so there's kind of different flavors of marketing that we pull in, based on the specific needs of the project. But that's generally speaking how we try to structure our teams from kind of the group level all the way down to the individual squad. We can't always have a dedicated research, and a dedicated analyst, and a dedicated product marketer to every single team. So it's certainly not perfect, but that's where we aspire to having at least coverage on those roles.
Lenny (00:59:37):
Got it. So most teams have dedicated marketing person or a product marketing person. That's crazy. That's really rare, but interesting.
Tim Holley (00:59:43):
Some teams-
Lenny (00:59:43):
Some teams that I imagine are most in need of marketing support. Got it. Are you able to just paint a rough picture of the way the teams are laid out at Etsy? I imagine there's a buyer side and a seller side. How does that look for people to make sense-
Tim Holley (00:59:57):
Yeah. The way that we think about the structure right now, and the org design should ideally follow strategy. And if your strategy is always evolving, then your org design is always evolving. We call it the product stack. And so we've got our core customer teams, who are unsurprisingly thinking about buyers and sellers. And so they're the ones on the front lines with the customers.
(01:00:26):
Then we have, we call them our partner teams, and so they are working directly with the end customer. So think an organization like payments where they have clearly a way to capture payment from a buyer to remit funds to a seller, so they're really on the front lines with the customer. They also have other constraints working with the payment networks, and card providers, and things like that, so they just have a slightly different model. So core customer, partner teams, enablement teams that are really in service of helping deliver the best possible experience. That might be through our recommender systems or through our design system, in order to make developing that little bit easier, a little bit faster, a little bit more standardized in some cases. And then the foundation of it all sits with infrastructure, and the teams that you might expect that are much more technical in nature, that really, without that, we wouldn't have a website.
Lenny (01:01:20):
When you're hiring a product manager, is there anything that you found to be really important or interesting, or maybe a unique insight into hiring teams?
Tim Holley (01:01:28):
The three things that I come back to time and again, is one, the collaboration piece that we talked about earlier. Not only a willingness, but a real excitement to do that. It's not everyone's bag. I get that. Some people just want to be in a make fast decisions and move forward place. We aim to make fast decisions, but you need to consult. That's one.
(01:01:49):
Two is being decisive. We have tons of data, but it's not always clear exactly what to do with that, or we're using a new input. Maybe back to the point mentioned earlier of looking at competitive insights, let's make a decision, let's move forward. Let's ideally learn. Even if we're not making progress against our goals, we're at a minimum learning. 
(01:02:10):
And then the third point is just curiosity. Because we're a relatively small organization with... Everyone says, "If only we had more people," but we are quite small. 
(01:02:20):
So there is a lot of change. There's a lot of new priorities that crop up, and that means there's a lot of opportunity for the right folks, right? If I want to be in this space, and only this space, and this is my specific domain, and I just want to be in it forever more, that might be a little more challenging, because you might be asked to work on something net new. And so just having that curiosity mindset of saying, or maybe said differently growth mindset of, "Okay, there's something to learn from the thing I'm being asked to do, let me really lean into that."
(01:02:47):
And to some degree, I'm not describing anything that's atypical of great product people overall. But I think we have either a slightly different flavor or we need it in a slightly different way here at Etsy.
Lenny (01:02:59):
Awesome. Last question, before we get to our very exciting lightning round. Is there a framework or a process that you find really useful, that you find yourself coming back to, that you think listeners would potentially find really valuable?
Tim Holley (01:03:11):
I won't pretend to know whether listeners find it valuable. But the thing that I do a lot, that we do as my team, that others do to some degree is a simple exercise of weekly focus. What are you focused on this week? And then reflecting on, did you get done the things you were focused on last week? Seems super simple, but just the exercise of thinking about what matters, writing it down, and having a little bit of social proof or articulating it out to others creates some degree of accountability, is something that is very, very easy and simple to do.
[NEW_PARAGRAPH]And if you do it consistently, you start to see some really great patterns of, "Those types of focus areas take me longer than I think. I should budget more time." Or, "These are the type of things that crop up. At this time of year, I might need to start thinking about making some space for them." So I've just found that to be really, really, really helpful in the day-to-day.
Lenny (01:04:06):
I love that. How do you operationalize that? Is it like a Slack channel people post these in, is it a Docs?
Tim Holley (01:04:11):
Yeah. In our buyer experience product channel, on Mondays, everyone's kind of sharing what they're focused on. How last week panned out, was it done? Is it still in progress? Things like that. It's very, very lo-fi, but it worked pretty well.
Lenny (01:04:25):
So it's kind of like a standup that happens once a week, and it's higher level essentially is what it sounds like?
Tim Holley (01:04:30):
Exactly, exactly. Trying to think about the priorities and not tasks. And that is a blurry line. I fully recognize that. But anchoring in those I think is certainly for me, personally more helpful.
Lenny (01:04:41):
And is the comedian person in these and sharing funny things in the standup-
Tim Holley (01:04:46):
No, unfortunately, or fortunately, he's now actually a comedian.
Lenny (01:05:52):
Are you serious he became a full time comedian? That’s amazing. And with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?
Tim Holley (01:04:58):
Hit me.
Lenny (01:04:59):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?
Tim Holley (01:05:03):
Couple that come to mind Team of Teams by Stanley McChrystal has been, I think is just A, really fascinating read, and B, helped me think a lot about how you trust teams and how you think about disseminating decision-making to the right folks, tech language, push decisions to the edges. But thinking about it in the context that he describes there is really fascinating, and it just shows that it can work even in the most egregious world of military, which you think is top-down command and control, shows that there's a different way to approach problems.
Lenny (01:05:42):
I was actually a fan favorite at Airbnb also.
Tim Holley (01:05:45):
Oh, cool. Other is back all the way to the top to what I love to do. Surfing and being outdoors. Let My People Go Surfing by Yvon Chouinard, the Patagonia founder. Incredibly fascinating read of someone who just had a deep, deep passion, turned it into a business, struggled, iterated, came out the other side really successful. So the business side, but also just how they think about treating their employees and the culture that they've built I think is to me personally, really inspiring. There's a theme here around trust and how you engage with people to make their day-to-day work lives, is really fulfilling. So that's another favorite.
And then in a super different direction, Power Broker by Robert Caro. That is an absolute tone. It is huge. It took me probably an entire year to read because I'm an extremely slow reader and/or I fell asleep a lot. But it is so fascinating, especially living in New York, of how one human had such an incredibly outsized and probably terrible impact on the city. Access to waterfronts, really thinking about communities and tearing them apart. Just such a fascinating read.
Lenny (01:06:56):
I have that book, and I've never read it. It's very long and intimidating. I think it might be back there, maybe in a different-
Tim Holley (01:07:01):
I would chunk it out. Do a couple of chapters at a time, otherwise it feels insurmountable.
Lenny (01:07:07):
It's like infinite Infinite Jest where you're intimidated. Amazing. Okay, next question. Favorite recent movie or TV show?
Tim Holley (01:07:15)
So my wife and I talk about this a lot. I think we're Western Files, if that's a thing. I'm from Europe and so it's a whole new world, different world for me. We've loved Yellowstone and all of the, I guess they're prequels. They've been just really, really fun to watch for people who are curious about that culture and that world.
Lenny (01:07:35):
Awesome. It's also been hard to find where to even watch it. It's on the weirdest channels.
Tim Holley (01:07:39):
It is one of those where the old world of, we cut all our cords and we only needed Netflix. Suddenly you need all these really random providers of content that you're like, "I have to subscribe to that now to watch this show?"
Lenny (01:07:51):
Don't understand where this even is. Just take my money. Favorite interview question you like to ask candidates?
Tim Holley (01:07:58)
I'm a big fan of case studies, live case studies. I think you learn a whole boatload about how someone thinks on the fly, how they react to constraints. So we use those. I've used those a ton. We use them pretty heavily in product interviews. So I love those modulated for the type of business you're in, what you're actually trying to understand.
[NEW_PARAGRAPH]The other one I like to ask is around something that people have taught themselves, tried to get at a growth mindset. I think Julia, who was on the podcast a while ago, said something similar. But you get a ton of insight into someone. Ideally, you get a bit of passion and you often get something to go research. She's like, "I don't know anything about that topic. I want to learn a little more."
Lenny (01:08:40)
What is a favorite product that you've recently discovered that you love?
Tim Holley (01:08:44):
You as a new parent maybe resonates when... So it's not new, because our kids too. But when I was looking, being in product, of course you want to track data. And so I was looking for apps that would be good at doing that, and they nearly all look like hideous medical charts where I just don't want to engage with that. 
I found this one app, I think it's called Nara Baby or Nara something. Super simple, allows both parents to enter information. Probably grandparents too. We only tested it with two people. Seamlessly syncs. Really easy to use. So at 4:00 AM when you can't see and you just want to say, "I fed the baby," you can do that really easily. Just really, really simple, fit for purpose product. So that resonated with me.
Lenny (01:09:31):
I'm going to be downloading that right now. I've been using Huckleberry, which is both awesome and not awesome, and so awesome tip. Great. What is a favorite life motto that you like to repeat often or share with other people, either in work or in life?
Tim Holley (01:09:44):
One of the things I talk about maybe internally more than anything else, but all or nothing. Go all in. Go do the thing. In German [German 01:10:08]. I grew up in Germany, so that's something I say to myself a lot is if you're going to do it, do it properly. I think those are often helpful words to live by.
Lenny (01:10:04):
I love that. Final question, what's a favorite item you recently discovered on Etsy?
Tim Holley (01:10:10):
I recently bought an engraved whiskey decanter for my wife and myself, or for the home. Super beautiful, so cool. Got it personalized with our names. Just such a cool, cool item, that I wasn't expecting to find that kind of thing. I'm not even sure exactly how you engrave a whiskey decanter, but it was really cool. And the other thing, I'm always on the lookout for greeting cards. If anyone has great greeting card seller recommendations, I'm all ears. I love giving out physical greetings cards to folks, so that's another always on Etsy favorite of mine.
Lenny (01:10:51):
Tim, we've talked about growth, culture, surfing, cabins, leadership. Thank you so much for being here. I'm downloading the Nara app right now as we speak. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and maybe learn more, and how can listeners be useful to you?
Tim Holley (01:11:06):
Yeah, yeah, find me on LinkedIn. That's probably... Well, not probably, is my most professional platform. Instagram, like I said, is a farce. And being useful. Yeah, send me things that you're excited about in the Etsy product. Send me feedback. We're always really keen to learn how folks are experiencing the things that we build.
Lenny (01:11:26)
Amazing. Tim, thank you so much for being here.
Tim Holley (01:11:28)
Thank you for having me, Lenny. Appreciate it.
Lenny (01:11:30)
Bye everyone. 
(01:11:34)
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.
